8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 1/520
Township of Lancaster, PA
Friday, August 14, 2020
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-1]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class Township Code, the codification
of a complete body of legislation for the Township of Lancaster, County of Lancaster, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General
Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 280, together with an Appendix, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Lancaster,
which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Lancaster,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of ordinances and
resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of
such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or resolution. All such
provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption
by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster, and it is the intention of said Board of
Supervisors that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as
it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only new or changed
provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this
Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by
this ordinance are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of
such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Township of Lancaster which is not in conflict with
the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 2/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal;
provided, however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from repeal of
ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously
repealed, superseded or no longer of any effect:
Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 8-13-2001.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the
Township prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any
legislative provision of the Township or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
Township.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the
Township or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Township or other
instruments or evidence of the Township's indebtedness.
Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax rate.
Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special taxes, assessments or
charges.
Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or acquiring property
by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise of eminent domain.
Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or reconstruction or opening of
sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place
or property or designating various streets as public highways.
Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose districts and designating the
boundaries thereof; providing for a system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a system of sewers
or water supply lines.
Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 3/520
O.
P.
Q.
R.
A.
[1]
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the
Township or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning Map.
Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for municipal employees.
Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit
or service obtained from the Township.
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A
and/or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and
shall, upon being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation;
new provisions.
Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances and resolutions
of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical
and style changes were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the intention
of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and revisions described above,
changes and revisions of a substantive nature, as set forth in Schedule A[1] attached hereto and
made a part hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included in the Code.
These changes are enacted to bring provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the
Board of Supervisors, and it is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had previously formally amended to
read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective
date of the Code specified in § 1-15.
Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters and sections which were amended or
adopted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments or
adoption will be replaced with the following history: "Amended (adopted) 2-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-1." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
Nomenclature. Throughout the Code:
All references to "Justice of the Peace" or "District Magistrate" are revised to read "District
Justice."
All references to "Department of Environmental Resources" are revised to read "Department
of Environmental Protection" or "Department of Conservation and Natural Resources," as
appropriate.
All references to "Department of Community Affairs" are revised to read "Department of
Community and Economic Development."
Numbering of legislation. Throughout the Code, the format of all ordinance numbers and
resolution numbers is made consistent to cite the four-digit year, then the ordinance/resolution
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 4/520
A.
B.
number (e.g., 1991-4).
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
Where the provisions of the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall control. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation impose greater restrictions or
requirements, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other divisions in the Code or in
supplements made to the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to
the Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or referring to the statutes or
to other parts of the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the
Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the Ordinance Book in the office of
the Township Secretary and shall remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption,
such copies shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such certified
copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary, available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be
deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in
the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and directed by him or her to
keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of
the Township Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all legislation adopted
by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective date of this codification which the Board of
Supervisors shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein
by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as supplements to said Code books, at
which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 5/520
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner required a notice
of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public and the filing of an attested copy of this
ordinance with the county, as required by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and
legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, or to alter or
tamper with the Code or any part or portion thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the
law of the Township to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a violation of
this section of this ordinance, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by
the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the
determination of the violation by the District Justice and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are severable, and if any clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation and application
to the clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance
and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect on and after February 16,
2002.
Chapter 11. Fire Companies
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Reimbursement for Costs
[Adopted 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-4]
§ 11-1. Authority to recover costs.
Lancaster Township, by and through its authority and relationship with the fire companies, hereby
recognizes the authority of the fire companies which respond to incidents within the township to
recover reasonable costs associated with fire fighting, equipment use, personnel hours, and hazardous
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 6/520
[1]
abatement material involving any hazardous material incident, environmental incident, or safety and
rescue incident or operation, including vehicular accidents.
§ 11-2. Type of response.
Such fire company responses are either directly, via 911 response, or in coordination with an
emergency management agency, and may on occasion involve the use of hazardous material
abatement equipment and/or hazardous abatement material.
§ 11-3. Legislative intent.
It is the intention of Lancaster Township to recognize the authority of fire companies to seek collection
and reimbursement from the entity or person who caused the incident, or their insurance carrier, for the
reasonable costs of responding to such incidents, either directly or in coordination with an emergency
management agency.
§ 11-4. Collection.
Reasonable response costs may be recovered by the fire companies or by a fire company agreement
with other authorized agents for collection of reasonable costs. The utilization of a collection agency
shall be for those situations deemed by a collection agency as appropriate for collection through the
agency, principally those incidents involving hazardous abatement material and/or incidents directly
involving an agency.
§ 11-5. Interest and additional fees.
In addition to the aforementioned reasonable response costs, the fire companies, Lancaster Township,
or an agency shall be authorized to collect interest up to the legal rate of interest, as well as
reasonable administrative and legal fees for collecting same, and any and all additional fees as may be
authorized by the Hazardous Material Emergency Planning and Response Act[1] or authorized by any
other statute, case law, or common law.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6022.101 et seq.
§ 11-6. Fee schedules.
Fees and fee schedules shall be reasonable and suggested by the fire companies with approval by the
Lancaster Township Board of Supervisors.
Chapter 16. Historical Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 9-8-1997 by Res. No.
1997-12. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 16-1. Commission established.
The Lancaster Township Historical Commission shall be established.
Chapter 20. Intergovernmental Cooperation
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 7/520
[1]
[1]
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Local Government Investment Trust — See Ch. 29.
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 236.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
Article I. Lancaster Intermunicipal Committee
[Adopted 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-8]
§ 20-1. Reorganization of Committee.
The Lancaster Intermunicipal Committee is being reorganized under the Intergovernmental
Cooperation Law[1] by the agreement dated September 13, 1995.
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 20-2. Participating municipalities.
The participating municipalities as of the date in § 20-1 are the Boroughs of East Petersburg,
Millersville, and Mountville, and the Townships of East Hempfield, East Lampeter, Lancaster, Manheim,
Manor, Pequea, West Hempfield, and West Lampeter.
§ 20-3. Purpose of Committee.
The purpose of the agreement is to provide a forum for the discussion of intermunicipal challenges or
anticipated concerns among the member municipalities and amicable pursuit of solutions.
§ 20-4. Representation on Committee.
Each member municipality shall be officially represented by its legislative body, its elected executive (if
any), and/or any other persons designated by its elected officials. The appropriate officials of each
member municipality shall be authorized to sign the agreement on behalf of the municipality.
§ 20-5. Agreement incorporated.
The agreement is attached to this article and is made a part hereof.[1]
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
Article II. Regional 537 Planning Joint Agreement
[Adopted 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-3]
§ 20-6. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Regional 537 Planning Joint Agreement Ordinance" authorizing
regional 537 planning.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 8/520
A.
B.
[1]
§ 20-7. Legislative intent.
Lancaster Township, recognizing the need to undertake 537 planning and being a member
municipality of the Lancaster Area Sewer Authority ("LASA") and recognizing the benefits of
having LASA and its member municipalities undertake regional 537 planning for the benefit of all
member municipalities of LASA, has determined that it is in the best interest of this municipality to
enter into a joint agreement with LASA and the other member municipalities of LASA for the
purposes of undertaking regional 537 planning.
In adopting this article, it is the intent of this municipality to comply with the provisions of Chapter
23 of the General Local Government Code dealing with intergovernmental cooperation, 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 20-8. Joint agreement.
The agreement to be entered into by this municipality is known as the "Joint Agreement Regarding
Regional 537 Planning" (hereinafter referred to as the "joint agreement").
§ 20-9. Participating parties.
The names of the participating municipalities in the joint agreement are East Hempfield Township,
West Hempfield Township, Manor Township, Lancaster Township, Manheim Township, East
Petersburg Borough and Mountville Borough. In addition, Lancaster Area Sewer Authority is a party to
the Joint Agreement Regarding Regional 537 Planning. The participating municipalities and LASA are
collectively referred to herein as the "participating parties."
§ 20-10. Purpose.
The purpose of the joint agreement is to enter into a written commitment with the other participating
parties to participate in a regional 537 planning project, to authorize appointment of a consultant for the
regional 537 planning project, to set forth an agreement as to the sharing of costs for the regional 537
planning project among the participating municipalities and LASA to set forth the duties and obligations
of the participating parties with respect to the regional 537 planning project.
§ 20-11. Authorization to sign agreement.
The following officers or any two of them are hereby authorized and directed to sign the Joint
Agreement Regarding Regional 537 Planning on behalf of this municipality: Chair, Vice Chair,
Treasurer, Secretary.
§ 20-12. Agreement incorporated.
The Joint Agreement Regarding Regional 537 Planning is attached hereto and is made a part of this
article. The appointment of the consultant named in the joint agreement to serve as consultant for the
regional 537 planning project is hereby approved.[1]
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
Article III. County Participation in LASA Regional 537
Planning Project
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 9/520
A.
B.
[1]
[Adopted 12-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-6]
§ 20-13. Title.
This article shall be known as the "County Participation in the LASA Regional 537 Planning Project
Ordinance."
§ 20-14. Legislative intent.
Lancaster Township has determined that it is in the best interest of this municipality to enter into
this supplement to the joint agreement with LASA dated the 26th day of April 2001 and the other
member municipalities of LASA in order to coordinate the regional 537 plan with the county's
Comprehensive Plan and the Growth Management Component thereof, to receive the
participation of a representative of the county in the planning process, and to accept certain
funding from the county as a part of the local share of the cost of the regional 537 plan.
In adopting this article, it is the intent of this municipality to comply with the provisions of Chapter
23 of the General Local Government Code dealing with intergovernmental cooperation, 53
Pa.C.S.A. 2301 et seq., known as the "Intergovernmental Cooperation Act."
§ 20-15. Agreement.
The agreement to be entered into by this municipality, a copy of which is appended hereto as Exhibit
A,[1] is intended to be a supplement to the joint agreement among LASA and the member
municipalities dated the 26th day of April 2001 (the "joint agreement"). The duration of this agreement
shall be coterminous with the joint agreement.
Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 20-16. Participating parties.
The names of the participating municipalities in this agreement are the County of Lancaster, East
Hempfield Township, West Hempfield Township, Manor Township, Lancaster Township, Manheim
Township, East Petersburg Borough, and Mountville Borough. In addition, Lancaster Area Sewer
Authority is a party.
§ 20-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this agreement is to provide for participation by the county and its duly constituting
Planning Agency, the Lancaster County Planning Commission, in the LASA regional 537 planning
project, to provide a county grant to defray a portion of the local cost of the planning project, and to
provide for consistency between the regional 537 planning project and the county's Comprehensive
Plan, including, but not limited to, the Growth Management Plan Component thereof.
§ 20-18. Financing.
There is no additional financial obligation imposed upon LASA or the member municipalities by the
execution of this agreement as a supplement to the joint agreement. To the contrary, additional
financing to defray a portion of the local share of the cost of the regional 537 planning project will be
borne by the County grant as referenced in the agreement appended hereto as Exhibit A.[1] The
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 10/520
[1]
[1]
[2]
A.
county's financing of its obligations under this agreement shall be undertaken as part of the general
obligations of the county, with said funds being derived from the general find of the county.
Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 20-19. Organizational structure.
No additional organizational structure is necessary to implement this agreement, as it incorporates by
reference the organizational structure of the joint agreement.
§ 20-20. Real or personal property.
There should be no acquisition, management, licensing or disposal of real property or tangible
personal property.
Article IV. Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Risk
Management Association
[Adopted 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-5]
§ 20-21. Membership; adoption of agreement.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act[1] by becoming a member of the Association and entering into the
intergovernmental contract which was adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been set
out verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which
this article was adopted.[2]
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 20-22. Authorization to enter intergovernmental contract.
This municipality is authorized to enter into the intergovernmental contract for the purposes contained
therein, as well as any amendments or modifications thereto as the same may be required from time to
time. These actions are to be taken by the member(s) or employee(s) of this municipality designated
for this purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting this article.
§ 20-23. Custody of funds.
The Association is designated as having official custody of this municipality's funds which are invested
by the Association pursuant to the terms of the intergovernmental contract.
§ 20-24. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the intergovernmental contract referred to in § 20-
21;
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 11/520
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[1]
This municipality's participation in the Association shall be terminable at any time by ordinance;
The purposes and objectives of the agreement are set forth hereinabove and the
intergovernmental contract and actions contemplated thereby and purposes and objectives
contained therein are otherwise legal as part of a pooled arrangement with other governmental
units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages of intergovernmental cooperation;
It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from municipal funds except
through the contribution of this municipality's basis rate (as such term is defined in the
intergovernmental contract) to the Association;
The association shall be managed by a Board of Commissioners or Executive Committee as set
forth in the bylaws of said Association, a copy of which has been provided for review in connection
with the adoption of this article;
All property, real or personal, shall be acquired, managed or disposed of by the Association in
accordance with the terms of the intergovernmental contract.
The Association is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee benefits, including social security, for its employees.
Article V. LIMC Area Intergovernmental Cooperation
Planning Agreement
[Adopted 11-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-6]
§ 20-25. Development of regional comprehensive plan.
The 12 municipalities that are members of the Lancaster Intermunicipal Committee (hereinafter
"LIMC") (East Hempfield Township, East Lampeter Township, East Petersburg Borough, Lancaster
City, Lancaster Township, Manheim Township, Manor Township, Millersville Borough, Mountville
Borough, Pequea Township, West Hempfield Township, and West Lampeter Township, collectively the
"LIMC municipalities") have expressed interest in the development of a regional comprehensive plan,
and the Lancaster County Planning Commission has encouraged such regional cooperation. Article XI
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC) authorizes municipalities to enter into an
intergovernmental cooperation planning agreement, as provided by and utilizing the procedures set
forth in the Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, codified at 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 2301 et seq., including the
enactment of an ordinance as prescribed by § 2305, incorporating the contents prescribed by § 2307
thereof.
§ 20-26. Agreement.
The LIMC has developed the LIMC Area Intergovernmental Cooperation Planning Agreement which is
attached hereto as Exhibit A (the "agreement").[1] The LIMC has submitted the agreement to each
LIMC municipality for its review and approval.
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 20-27. Term of agreement.
The term of the agreement is indefinite, but is subject to the right of any participating municipality to
terminate its participation in this agreement at any time subject to the provisions thereof.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 12/520
[1]
§ 20-28. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are to implement the provisions of Article XI of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code with respect to intergovernmental cooperation planning
agreements.
§ 20-29. Consultants to prepare plan; funding.
It is contemplated that Lancaster County, with input from the LIMC municipalities, will engage a
consultant or team of consultants to research, develop, and prepare the LIMC Area Comprehensive
Plan. As provided in the agreement, the work to be completed under the agreement by such consultant
or team of consultants shall be fully funded by Lancaster County, by and through the Lancaster County
Planning Commission, at its sole expense.
§ 20-30. Steering Committee.
The agreement provides for the formation of a steering committee, with representation from all LIMC
municipalities and the Lancaster County Planning Commission (Steering Committee). Each LIMC
municipality and the Lancaster County Planning Commission may appoint two individuals and two
alternates to serve on the Steering Committee. The LIMC municipalities must make their appointments
by official action of the governing bodies; the Lancaster County Planning Commission must make its
appointments at a public meeting of the Commission.
§ 20-31. Real or personal property.
It is not anticipated that any real or personal property will be acquired by the Steering Committee
pursuant to the agreement.
§ 20-32. Steering Committee employees.
Although it is not anticipated that the Steering Committee will hire employees, the Steering Committee
shall be empowered under the agreement, but not required, to enter into contracts for policies for
group insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for its employees, as applicable.
§ 20-33. Approval and execution of agreement.
The agreement, a copy of which is appended hereto as Exhibit A,[1] is hereby approved by the Board
of Supervisors, and they shall, on behalf of Lancaster Township, execute the agreement.
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 20-34. Obligation to enter agreement.
The Township's obligations to enter into the agreement and its obligations under the agreement are
expressly conditioned upon all other LIMC municipalities, as referenced in said agreement, enacting
and authorizing the entry into the agreement on the same terms and conditions as are applicable to
Lancaster Township.
Article VI. Joint Administration of Portions of Building Code
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 13/520
[1]
[1]
[2]
A.
B.
C.
D.
[Adopted 1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
§ 20-35. Incorporation of caption and recitals.
The caption of and recitals to this article as set forth above are incorporated herein by reference.[1]
Editor's Note: The preamble is on file in the Township offices, which preamble contained clauses
defining the reasons for implementation of the joint cooperation agreement, statutory provisions
regulating such agreement, and provided that such agreement shall provide for implementation and
administration of the municipalities' respective building codes, and, when applicable, the Uniform
Construction Code.
§ 20-36. Adoption of agreement.
This municipality agrees that West Lampeter Township and Lancaster Township shall join with each
other in accordance with the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act[1] by entering into the
intermunicipal agreement which is adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been set out
verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this
article was enacted.[2]
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 20-37. Authorization to enter intermunicipal agreement.
This municipality is authorized to enter into the intermunicipal agreement for the purposes contained
therein. This action is to be taken by the officials or employees of the municipality designated for this
purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions issued by the governing body.
§ 20-38. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the intermunicipal agreement referred to in § 20-
36.
The intermunicipal agreement shall commence on January 1, 2003, and shall continue for a period
of two years. Thereafter, the intermunicipal agreement shall be terminable by either party at any
time upon written notification to all other parties of the party's election to terminate the
intermunicipal agreement. Such termination shall become effective 90 days after the date of such
written notice by the party electing to terminate the intermunicipal agreement.
The purposes and objectives of the intermunicipal agreement are to provide for the Township of
West Lampeter to provide Construction Code administration services to other municipalities and to
set forth procedures under which the Township of West Lampeter shall provide such services. The
purposes and objectives of the intermunicipal agreement are further to provide for participation in
a regional board of appeals. The municipalities' desire to join together to lessen their individual
costs of administration of their respective building codes, and, when applicable, the Uniform
Construction Code.
Each municipality shall bear the costs related to the administration and enforcement of its building
code, and, when applicable, the Uniform Construction Code within that municipality. Each
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 14/520
E.
F.
G.
[1]
municipality will establish a fee structure so that applicants for permits or inspections, or persons
filing appeals, shall pay the costs associated with such administration and enforcement.
No new organizational structure is initially proposed by the intermunicipal agreement. Should the
municipalities, either jointly or in conjunction with additional Lancaster County political
subdivisions, form a regional appeals board, it is the intention of the municipalities to become part
of the regional appeals board.
The intermunicipal agreement does not contemplate the purchase of any real or personal property.
Each municipality shall acquire, manage or dispose of such personal property as it desires and
deems necessary to administer its building code, and, when applicable, the Uniform Construction
Code.
Each municipality has the power to enter into contracts for policies of insurance or other employee
benefits.
Article VII. Growing Together
[Adopted 6-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-01]
§ 20-39. Development of Growing Together Regional
Comprehensive Plan.
Eleven municipalities that are members of the Lancaster Inter-Municipal Committee (hereinafter,
LIMC), East Hempfield Township, East Lampeter Township, East Petersburg Borough, Lancaster City,
Lancaster Township, Manheim Township, Manor Township, Millersville Borough, Mountville Borough,
West Hempfield Township, and West Lampeter Township, collectively the "participating municipalities,"
have developed a regional comprehensive plan called "Growing Together," with the assistance of the
Lancaster County Planning Commission and the LIMC and pursuant to [REMOVED SEQ FIELD]the
Lancaster Inter-Municipal Committee Area Intergovernmental Cooperation Planning Agreement dated
January 8, 2003 (Planning Agreement).
§ 20-40. Legislative authority.
Article XI of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC) authorizes municipalities to enter
into an intergovernmental implementation agreement, as provided by and utilizing the procedures set
forth in the Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, codified at 53 PA.C.S.A. § 2301, et seq., including the
enactment of an ordinance as prescribed by § 2305, incorporating the contents prescribed by § 2307
thereof.
§ 20-41. Agreement for implementation of Growing Together
Plan.
The Steering Committee established under the Planning Agreement, with the assistance of the LIMC,
has developed the Intergovernmental Cooperation Agreement for Implementing Growing Together: A
Comprehensive Plan For Central Lancaster County, Pennsylvania which is attached hereto as Exhibit
A (agreement).[1] The LIMC has submitted the agreement to each participating municipality for its
review and approval.
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 20-42. Term of agreement.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 15/520
A.
B.
[1]
The term of the agreement is indefinite, but is subject to the right of any participating municipality to
terminate its participation in this agreement, at any time subject to the provisions thereof.
§ 20-43. Purpose.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are to implement Growing Together, and the goals
identified therein and the provisions of Article XI of the Pennsylvania MPC with respect to
intergovernmental implementation agreements.
§ 20-44. Funding.
As provided in the agreement, the work to be completed under the agreement shall be funded by
municipal contributions to the LIMC or other sources to the extent available.
§ 20-45. Land Use Advisory Board.
The agreement provides for the formation of a Land Use Advisory Board (LUAB), with representation
from all participating municipalities and the Lancaster County Planning Commission (LCPC). Each
participating municipality and the LCPC may appoint one (1) individual with an alternate to serve on
the LUAB. The agreement further provides for nonvoting members to be part of LUAB, including, but
not limited to, school districts and utility providers within the Growing Together region.
§ 20-46. Acquisition of property; expenditure of funds.
It is not anticipated that any real or personal property will be acquired by LUAB pursuant to the
agreement.
Any expenditure of funds by LUAB must be approved by LIMC.
§ 20-47. Employees.
The LUAB shall not be empowered to have employees, and therefore shall not be empowered to enter
into contracts for policies for group insurance and employee benefits, including social security.
§ 20-48. Approval and execution of agreement.
The agreement, a copy of which is appended hereto as Exhibit A,[1] is hereby approved by the Board
of Supervisors of Lancaster Township, and those supervisors shall, on behalf of Lancaster Township,
execute said agreement as appended hereto as Exhibit A.
Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 20-49. Conditions of obligation to enter agreement; obligations
under agreement.
Lancaster Township's obligations to enter into the agreement and its obligations under the agreement
are expressly conditioned upon all other participating municipalities, as referenced in said agreement,
enacting and authorizing the entry into the agreement on the same terms and conditions as are
applicable to Lancaster Township.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 16/520
A.
B.
Article VIII. Police Services
[Adopted 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-02]
§ 20-50. Title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Lancaster Township Police Ordinance."
§ 20-51. Approval of contract.
The contract dated October 14, 2009, by and between the Township of Lancaster and the Township of
Manheim, titled the Police Services Agreement, is hereby approved, and the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster is hereby authorized to sign the contract.
§ 20-52. Authorization of police personnel.
The police personnel of the Township of Manheim are hereby authorized to provide all police services
within the Township of Lancaster, including the enforcement of all laws and ordinances of the Township
of Lancaster, and to perform all acts which are normally performed by police and those which are
contemplated by the Police Services Agreement. Pursuant to 53 P.S. § 2303, the following are all
stated in the Police Services Agreement which is approved hereby: the conditions of agreement in the
case of cooperation with or delegation to other local governments, the Commonwealth, other states or
the Federal Government; the duration of the term of the agreement; the manner and extent of financing
the agreement, the organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement, and the manner in
which real or personal property shall be acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of. Any property
required for the police services shall be acquired by the Township of Manheim. No separate entity is
created by the Police Services Agreement or this article.
§ 20-53. Authorization of aides and support personnel.
Some services contemplated by the Police Services Agreement may be performed by other than
persons specifically designated as police officers. All persons who may not be officially designated
as police officers of the Township of Manheim, but who are retained, hired, deputized or otherwise
engaged and authorized by the Township of Manheim to provide services to the Township of
Lancaster and its residents under the Police Services Agreement, including (but not limited to) the
enforcement of laws and ordinances, parking ordinances and regulations, traffic control, crowd
control, investigations, information collection, crime control programs, responses to emergencies
including public emergencies whether fire, crime, medical, weather, natural disaster or other
emergencies, and to provide support and support services for police officers of the Township of
Manheim, are hereby authorized to do so within the Township of Lancaster.
Such actions are authorized whether such persons are providing services which are referred to as
specialist services, support services, services of police aides, or by any other name or
designation.
Article IX. Pennsylvania Townships Health Insurance
Cooperative Trust
[Adopted 1-5-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01]
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 17/520
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
§ 20-54. Authorization to adopt restated trust agreement.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the Township are hereby authorized
to adopt the restated trust agreement and any other agreements necessary for the Township's
participation in the trust.
The restated trust agreement is on file for inspection and review at the Township's offices at 1240
Maple Avenue, Lancaster, PA. The restated trust agreement may be subsequently modified or
amended in accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such modifications or amendments
divert any of the trust funds from the purposes of the trust. The Township may withdraw from the
trust in accordance with the restated trust agreement, including if the Board of Supervisors
determines the modifications or amendments are not in the best interests of the Township.
§ 20-55. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the trust is authorized for the purpose of obtaining high quality,
cost-effective medical, prescription, dental, life, disability and/or other employee welfare benefit
insurance at a reasonable cost to the Township and its employees.
§ 20-56. Conditions applicable to participation.
That, as set forth in greater detail in the restated trust agreement and as otherwise stated herein, the
following conditions apply to the participation of the Township in the trust:
Each participating employer must meet the admission and eligibility requirements set forth therein;
Each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when due as provided in the restated
trust agreement or as otherwise established by the Board of Trustees; and
Each participating employer complies with all other conditions of the restated trust agreement.
§ 20-57. Agreement to participate; withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the trust and may withdraw for any reason and in accordance
with the restated trust agreement, provided that it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the trust
upon withdrawal.
§ 20-58. Effective date.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the restated trust agreement and the
participation of the Township in the trust pursuant to the terms of the restated trust agreement will be
Monday, January 5, 2015.
§ 20-59. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers enumerated in the restated
trust agreement.
§ 20-60. Organization.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 18/520
A.
B.
The organizational structure of the trust shall consist of a Board of Trustees. Under the restated trust
agreement, the Board of Trustees is authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third
parties to perform various services necessary for the administration of the trust.
§ 20-61. Funding.
The funds required for the operation of the trust shall be provided by the participating employers
through scheduled appropriations as determined by the Board of Trustees.
§ 20-62. Contracts.
The trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits,
including social security, for employees of the trust, if any.
§ 20-63. Compliance with terms and conditions.
As a condition of participating in the trust, the Township agrees to comply with all of the terms and
conditions in the restated trust agreement.
§ 20-64. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article upon its enactment to the
Board of Trustees of the trust.
§ 20-65. Authorization to act.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized to take any and all such other actions
as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article and comply with the
requirements of the restated trust agreement and any duly adopted amendments thereto.
§ 20-66. Term of participation.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the trust and obligations under the restated
trust agreement shall continue until withdrawal from the trust by the Township in accordance with the
terms of the restated trust agreement.
§ 20-67. Findings and determinations.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as follows:
The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set forth in the restated trust
agreement incorporated by reference herein.
The Township shall participate in the trust in accordance with the restated trust agreement until it
withdraws by giving notice to the Board of Trustees at least 90 days in advance to become
effective on either June 30 or December 31 of a given plan year or in the case of an initial year of
participation in the trust shall participate for a minimum of one year.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 19/520
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
A.
The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative arrangement, including powers
and scope of authority delegated to the Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated
restated trust agreement.
The manner and extent of financing of the restated trust agreement are that:
Funds to implement the Township's obligations under the restated trust agreement shall come
from the normal and usual budgeted amounts for Township employee compensation and
employee benefits; and
No borrowing is anticipated to be required.
The trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
All assets and property, real or personal, of the trust shall be titled to, acquired, managed, licensed
or disposed of by the trust, and its Board of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the restated
trust agreement.
The trust, in accordance with the restated trust agreement, shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee welfare benefits to be offered to
participating employers for their eligible employees and dependents.
Article X. PSATS Unemployment Compensation Group
Trust
[Adopted 1-5-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
§ 20-68. Authorization to adopt restated trust agreement.
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the Township are hereby authorized
to adopt the restated trust agreement and any other agreements necessary for the Township's
participation in the trust.
The restated trust agreement is on file for inspection and review at the Township's offices at 1240
Maple Avenue, Lancaster, PA. The restated trust agreement may be subsequently modified or
amended in accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such modifications or amendments
divert any of the trust funds from the purposes of the trust. The Township may withdraw from the
trust in accordance with the restated trust agreement, including if the Board of Supervisors
determines the modifications or amendments are not in the best interests of the Township.
§ 20-69. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the trust is authorized for the purpose of pooling resources for the
purpose of providing unemployment compensation insurance for participating employers at reasonable
cost.
§ 20-70. Conditions applicable to participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the restated trust agreement and as otherwise stated herein, the
following conditions apply to the participation of the Township in the trust:
Each participating employer must meet the admission and eligibility requirements set forth therein;
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 20/520
B.
C.
Each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when due as provided in the restated
trust agreement or as otherwise established by the Board of Trustees; and
Each participating employer complies with all other conditions of the restated trust agreement.
§ 20-71. Agreement to participate; withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the trust and may withdraw for any reason and in accordance
with the restated trust agreement, provided that it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the trust
upon withdrawal.
§ 20-72. Effective date.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the restated trust agreement and the
participation of the Township in the trust pursuant to the terms of the restated trust agreement will be
Monday, January 5, 2015.
§ 20-73. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers enumerated in the restated
trust agreement.
§ 20-74. Organization.
The organizational structure of the trust shall consist of a Board of Trustees. Under the restated trust
agreement, the Board of Trustees is authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third
parties to perform various services necessary for the administration of the trust.
§ 20-75. Funding.
The funds required for the operation of the trust shall be provided by the participating employers
through scheduled appropriations as determined by the Board of Trustees.
§ 20-76. Contracts.
The trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits,
including social security, for employees of the trust, if any.
§ 20-77. Compliance with terms and conditions.
As a condition of participating in the trust, the Township agrees to comply with all of the terms and
conditions in the restated trust agreement.
§ 20-78. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article upon its enactment to the
Board of Trustees of the trust.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 21/520
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
G.
§ 20-79. Authorization to act.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized to take any and all such other actions
as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article and comply with the
requirements of the attached restated trust agreement and any duly adopted amendments thereto.
§ 20-80. Term of participation.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the trust and obligations under the restated
trust agreement shall continue until withdrawal from the trust by the Township in accordance with the
terms of the restated trust agreement.
§ 20-81. Findings and determinations.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as follows:
The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set forth in the restated trust
agreement incorporated by reference herein.
The Township shall participate in the trust in accordance with the restated trust agreement until it
withdraws by giving notice to the Board of Trustees in accordance with the terms of the restated
trust agreement.
The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative arrangement, including powers
and scope of authority delegated to the Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated
restated trust agreement.
The manner and extent of financing of the agreement are that:
Funds to implement the Township's obligations under the agreement shall come from the
normal and usual budgeted amounts for Township employee compensation and employee
benefits; and
No borrowing is anticipated to be required.
The trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
All assets and property, real or personal, of the trust shall be titled to, acquired, managed, licensed
or disposed of by the trust, and its Board of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the restated
trust agreement.
The trust, in accordance with the restated trust agreement, shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee welfare benefits to be offered to
participating employers for their eligible employees and dependents.
Article XI. Intergovernmental Insurance Cooperative
§ 20-82. Incorporation by reference.
The caption and preamble of this ordinance No. 2015-03 set forth above are incorporated herein by
reference.[1]
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 22/520
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
[2]
C.
D.
Editor's Note: For definitions that reference "the most recent version of the Lancaster Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance (Article II)," see Ch. 229, Stormwater Management, Art. II,
Definitions. For definitions that reference "the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended (Art. II)," see Ch. 280, Zoning, Art. II, Definitions and Terms.
§ 20-83. Approval of agreement.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the agreement, a copy of which is attached
hereto and incorporated herein by reference (and which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting
at which this article was enacted), with the intent and effect that this political subdivision shall be bound
by the agreement.
§ 20-84. Authorization to execute and deliver agreement.
The Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of the governing body, acting alone or together with the
Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are hereby authorized and directed on behalf of the political
subdivision:
To execute and deliver the agreement, and
To execute and deliver such additional instruments, and to take such further actions, as may be
necessary or appropriate to carry forth the agreement and the transactions to be effected under
the agreement, including payment to the IIC of such amounts as are due by the political
subdivision pursuant to the agreement.
§ 20-85. Ratification and approval of actions.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of this political subdivision heretofore taken in
the pursuit of the establishment of the IIC and/or the political subdivision's participation therein are
hereby ratified and approved in all respects.
§ 20-86. Authorization to act.
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take such other action as may
be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article and of the agreement.
§ 20-87. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,[1] the following matters are
specifically found and determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement;
The political subdivision shall participate in the IIC for an initial term of three years. All renewal
terms shall be as further set forth therein;
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are as set forth in the preamble of this Ordinance
No. 2015-03 and in the agreement;[2]
Editor's Note: A complete copy of this ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
The manner and extent of financing the agreement are that:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 23/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
G.
[1]
[1]
No borrowing will be required by the political subdivision;
Funds to implement the political subdivision's obligations under the agreement same shall
come from normal and usual budgeted amounts for such matters; and
Other provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing of the IIC shall be as set
forth in the agreement;
The IIC shall be managed by its Board of Directors pursuant to the terms of the agreement;
All property, real or personal, of the IIC shall be acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the
IIC in accordance with the terms of the agreement; and
The IIC created by the agreement shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits pursuant to the terms of the agreement.
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
Chapter 25. Library
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 1-12-1998 by Res. No.
1998-3. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 25-1. Appointment to provide library services.
Lancaster Township hereby appoints the Lancaster County Library as its agent to provide library
services to its residents.
Chapter 29. Local Government Investment Trust
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Participation in Trust
[Adopted 11-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-9]
§ 29-1. Entering into Declaration of Trust.
This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in accordance with the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act[1] by becoming a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government
Investment Trust (the Trust) and entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference
with the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed
with the minutes of the meeting at which this article was adopted.
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 29-2. Authority to purchase shares.
This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from time to time with available
funds, and to redeem some or all of those shares from time to time as funds are needed for other
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 24/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
purposes. These actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant to
general or specific instructions by the governing body of this governmental unit.
§ 29-3. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this governmental unit's funds
which are invested by the purchase of shares in the Trust.
§ 29-4. Findings and conditions.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 29-1;
This governmental unit's participation in the Trust shall be terminable at any time by ordinance;
The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the purpose of investing this
governmental unit's funds in obligations which are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled
arrangement with other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other
advantages of pooled investments;
It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from funds of this governmental
unit except through the purchase of shares in the Trust;
The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the Declaration of Trust and the
bylaws provided for therein; and
Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as this governmental unit may
determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its cash investment requirements.
Article II. Participation in Trusts A, B and C
[Adopted 11-7-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-6]
§ 29-5. Entering into Declarations of Trust.
This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in accordance with the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act[1] by becoming a settlor of the Trusts and entering into the
Declarations of Trust for the Trusts, which are adopted by reference with the same effect as if such
Declarations of Trust had been set out verbatim in this section and copies of which shall be filed with
the minutes of the meeting at which this article was adopted.
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 29-6. Authority to purchase shares.
This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the Trusts from time to time with available
funds, and to redeem some or all of those shares from time to time as funds are needed for other
purposes, subject to the terms and restrictions of the Declarations of Trust referred to in § 29-5. These
actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant to general or specific
instructions by the governing body of this governmental unit.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 25/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
§ 29-7. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of each Trust are designated as having official custody of this governmental unit's funds
which are invested by the purchase of shares in such Trust.
§ 29-8. Findings and conditions.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
The conditions of the agreement with respect to each Trust are set forth in the respective
Declaration of Trust referred to in § 29-5;
This governmental unit's participation in each Trust shall be terminable at any time by
ordinance/resolution subject to the terms and restrictions of the respective Declaration of Trust
referred to in § 29-5;
With respect to each Trust, the Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this governmental unit's funds in obligations which are otherwise legal
investments, as part of a pooled arrangement with other local governmental units, thereby
achieving economic and other advantages of pooled investments, and the powers and scope of
authority delegated are set forth in the Declaration of Trust referred to in § 29-5;
It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from funds of this governmental
unit except through the purchase of shares in the Trusts;
Each Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the respective Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 29-5 and the respective bylaws provided for therein;
Shares of each Trust may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as this governmental
unit may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its cash investment requirements and
in accordance with the terms and restrictions of the respective Declarations of Trust referred to in
§ 29-5; and
Each Trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee benefits, including social security, for its employees.
Chapter 36. Officers and Employees
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 42.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 72.
Article I. Manager
[Adopted 5-10-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-2]
§ 36-1. Office established.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 26/520
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Pursuant to the Act of May 20, 1949, P.L. 1562, Article V (53 P.S. § 65599.1),[1] the office of Township
Manager of Lancaster Township is hereby created.
Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 65599.1 was repealed 11-9-1995 by P.L. 350, No. 60, § 1. See now 53
P.S. § 66301.
§ 36-2. Election of Manager.
The office of Township Manager shall be filled by one person elected to said office by a majority vote of
the Supervisors.
§ 36-3. Removal.
The person elected to the office of Township Manager shall be subject to removal by the Supervisors
by majority vote and the Manager shall receive 30 days' written notice.
§ 36-4. Service; conflicts of interest.
The person elected to the office of Township Manager shall, unless removed in accordance with § 36-3
above, or unless said person resigns, serve until his successor is elected and qualified. The Township
Manager shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in contracts with the township.
§ 36-5. Powers and duties.
The Township Manager shall act as Chief Administrative Officer of the township subject to instructions
issued by the Board of Supervisors. Subject to recall by ordinance, the powers and functions of the
Township Manager shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
S/He shall supervise and be responsible for all the activities of all municipal departments, except
the Police Department.
S/He shall issue such administrative and personnel rules and regulations not in conflict with
existing statutes or ordinances to properly carry out the functions contained in this article. Such
rules and regulations are to be subject to revocation, revision and/or modification by the Board of
Supervisors, by majority vote of its members at any regular public meeting.
In accordance with all rules and regulations as are or may hereafter be established, s/he shall hire
and, when necessary, shall suspend or otherwise discipline any employees under his supervision,
provided that s/he shall inform the Board of Supervisors prior to any hirings and disciplinary
actions.
S/He shall prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors a recommended budget for the
ensuing fiscal year in sufficient time so that said Board may review, amend, and/or adopt the
budget prior to the close of the current fiscal year. Said budget is to be accompanied by an
explanatory message setting forth a summary of projected revenues and proposed expenditures,
together with any supporting data as may be required to enable the Board of Supervisors to
decide upon and adopt the necessary taxation and appropriate legislation. S/He shall, upon
adoption of the budget by the Board of Supervisors, be responsible for the efficient administration
thereof so that the various appropriations are not exceeded, except as may be authorized by the
Board according to law.
S/He shall execute and enforce the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and such
ordinances and resolutions of the township as the Board of Supervisors may prescribe.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 27/520
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
[1]
K.
L.
S/He shall attend all meetings of the Township Board of Supervisors, with the right to take part in
the discussion, and shall receive notice of all regular and special meetings of the Board of
Supervisors and its committees or commissions.
S/He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of Supervisors and supply facts
pertinent thereto.
S/He shall keep the Board of Supervisors informed as to the conduct of the township affairs;
submit periodic reports on the condition of the township finances and such other reports as the
Board of Supervisors shall request; and shall make such recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors as s/he deems necessary and advisable for the welfare of the township.
S/He shall ensure that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits, and privileges granted by
the township are observed.
S/He shall ensure that all money owed to the township is promptly paid and that proper
proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all claims of the township.
S/He shall be the Purchasing Officer of the township and s/he shall supervise and coordinate, in
accordance with the provisions of the Second Class Township Code,[1] the letting of contracts,
purchase of all supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards, departments, and other
offices of the township as authorized by the Board of Supervisors in its annual operating budget.
S/He shall keep an account of all purchases and shall periodically, or when directed by the Board
of Supervisors, make a full written report thereof.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
S/He shall perform such other functions and fill such other offices as may be required by the
Board of Supervisors not inconsistent with the Second Class Township Code or other statutes or
ordinances of the township.
§ 36-6. Designation of Acting Manager.
In case of illness or absence of the Manager from the township, the Board of Supervisors shall
designate a qualified individual to perform the functions of the Manager during his absence or
disability.
§ 36-7. Posting of bond.
The Township Manager shall post bond with corporate surety to the township in an amount as shall be
determined by the Board of Supervisors conditioned upon the faithful performance of his functions.
§ 36-8. Compensation.
The compensation of the Township Manager shall be set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
Article II. Superintendent of Public Works
[Adopted 9-14-1998 by Res. No. 1998-15]
§ 36-9. Position established.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 28/520
[1]
[1]
[1]
The Board of Supervisors authorizes the establishment of the position of Superintendent of Public
Works, which present position description is incorporated by reference and made a part hereof.[1]
Editor's Note: Said description is on file in the township offices.
Article III. Director of Planning and Zoning
[Adopted 9-14-1998 by Res. No. 1998-16]
§ 36-10. Position established.
The Board of Supervisors authorizes the establishment of the position of Director of Planning and
Zoning, which present position description is incorporated by reference and made a part hereof.[1]
Editor's Note: Said description is on file in the township offices.
Chapter 42. Pensions
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 12-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-07.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 42, Pensions, adopted 3-8-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-01.
§ 42-1. Amendment of pension plan.
Lancaster Township (the Township), being a member municipality of the Pennsylvania Municipal
Retirement System (the system), hereby elects to amend its municipal pension plan administered by
the system in accordance with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, 53 P.S.
§ 881.101 et seq. (Retirement Law) and does hereby agree to be bound by all the requirements and
provisions of the Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act,
53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed upon member
municipalities.
§ 42-2. Administration.
As part of this chapter, the Township agrees that the system shall administer and provide the benefits
set forth in the amended municipal pension plan contract entered into between the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Board and the Township effective October 1, 2014 (the contract).
§ 42-3. Acceptance of contract.
The passage and adoption of this chapter by the Township is an official acceptance of the contract and
the financial obligations resulting from the administration of the contract.
§ 42-4. Payment for obligations.
Payment for obligations established by the adoption of this chapter and the contract shall be made by
the Township in accordance with the Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding
Standard and Recovery Act. The Township hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness created
due to the benefit structure set forth in the contract.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 29/520
[1]
[1]
§ 42-5. Authorization of plan; repealer.
The Township intends this chapter to be the complete authorization of the contract, and it shall become
effective and specifically repeal Ordinance No. 2010-01 either immediately or on October 1, 2014,
which is the effective date of the contract, whichever is later.
§ 42-6. Filing of chapter.
A duly certified copy of this chapter and an executed contract shall be filed with the system.
Chapter 48. Planning Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 4-11-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 236.
§ 48-1. Increase in membership.
The number of members of the Lancaster Township Planning Commission is hereby increased from
five to seven members pursuant to the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, Article II, § 201, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 10201.[1]
Editor's Note: The Planning Commission was originally established 5-1-1961.
§ 48-2. Appointment and terms.
Each member of the Planning Commission shall be appointed for a term of office of four years or until
his successor is appointed and qualified, except that the terms of the members first appointed after the
adoption of this chapter shall be fixed as follows: one member shall be appointed for a term of one
year, two members shall be appointed for a term of two years, two members shall be appointed for a
term of three years and two members shall be appointed for a term of four years, to be established on
a series of overlapping terms, with no more than two terms expiring each year.
§ 48-3. Vacation of prior terms.
The terms of members of the existing Planning Commission which were established under the
preceding ordinance of May 1, 1961, are hereby vacated, to the extent that they are not in compliance
with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code[1] or the provisions of § 48-2 of this chapter, and
said members shall be reappointed to terms which conform with the provisions of this chapter.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 48-4. Powers and duties.
The enlarged Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties conferred and imposed upon
it as set forth in an Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Chapter 52. Property, Township
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 30/520
[1]
[1]
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Disposition of Excess Property
[Adopted 12-14-1998 by Res. No. 1998-30]
§ 52-1. Advertisement and bids.
A listing of items shall be prepared and be advertised for sale in accordance with the Township Code,
[1] and upon advertisement the township shall accept bids for the items listed from any and all
interested parties.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 66504.
§ 52-2. Sale of items.
After examination of the bids and a determination that the offered price meets or exceeds the
estimated fair market value, the township staff person(s) shall arrange for the sale of the items to the
qualified bidder; and consummation of the sale shall take place within 30 days of receipt of the bids
and the identification of the successful bidder.
Chapter 59. Records
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Retention and Disposition
[Adopted 2-9-1987 by Res. No. 1987-6]
§ 59-1. Proper procedures to be followed.
The Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, shall follow the
proper procedures as outlined heretofore for establishing a master file and archives for Lancaster
Township and for proper disposal of all outdated records.
Article II. Public Access
[Adopted 6-22-1987 by Res. No. 1987-16]
§ 59-2. Availability of records.
All "public records," as that term is defined by the "Right-To-Know Statute,"[1] except for confidential
communications between the township and its attorney relative to litigation or potential litigation, are
considered open and available for inspection during reasonable hours at this office. The Supervisors
and their employees recognize your right as citizens to examine and copy these books, files and
records.
Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 66.1 et seq.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 31/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
§ 59-3. Record reproduction and handling.
We ask, as a matter of courtesy, that you recognize that we have a duty to prevent these records from
being mishandled, misplaced or destroyed. You are entitled to copies of records upon payment of
reasonable fees designed to offset the cost of reproduction. However, we also ask you to recognize
that records on certain issues which have generated substantial publicity create a demand for record
reproduction which may temporarily exceed our ability to provide you with rapid service. We ask for
your patience during these times.
§ 59-4. Hours.
Our policy is that records are available for examination by the public during regular business hours, or
from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday of each week.
§ 59-5. Supervision of record review.
We prefer that a township employee monitor review of records to ensure that the records are not
removed, altered or destroyed.
§ 59-6. Time needed for review.
If your review is expected to take more than 15 minutes, we would request advance notice because of
our desire to have someone in attendance for observation during inspection. If there is a sensitive
issue creating an unusual demand, we will process these requests in the order they occur.
§ 59-7. Fees.
[Amended last 5-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-3]
Fees for looseleaf or bound copies of the following documents are as follows:
Standard-size documents: $0.10 per side of copy.
Zoning Maps: $10.
Zoning Ordinance: $30.
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance: $30.
Strategic Comprehensive Plan: $50.
“Growing Together,” A Regional Comprehensive Plan: $75.
Chapter 64. Recreation Commission
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 1-28-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-1. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 64-1. Participation in joint Commission.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 32/520
The Township of Lancaster hereby joins with the City of Lancaster and the City of Lancaster School
District as a member of the Lancaster Recreation Commission.
§ 64-2. Powers and duties.
The Board of Supervisors hereby authorizes the Lancaster Recreation Commission to exercise the
powers to equip, supervise and maintain parks, recreation areas and facilities and to conduct
recreation programs in accordance with law.
§ 64-3. Appointment of members; allocations.
The Board of Supervisors shall nominate members and make such allocations as are appropriate from
time to time for the proper functioning of the said Commission.
Chapter 72. Salaries and Compensation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 36.
Pensions — See Ch. 42.
Taxation — See Ch. 247.
Article I. Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-10]
§ 72-1. Compensation established.
[Amended 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-06]
Each Supervisor of Lancaster Township elected or appointed to office on or after the effective date of
this article shall receive compensation as a Supervisor in the annual amount of $4,125.
§ 72-2. Payment.
Such compensation shall be paid in monthly installments.
Article II. Tax Collector
[Adopted 2-10-1997 by Res. No. 1997-3]
§ 72-3. Compensation established.
The compensation of the Township Tax Collector shall be reduced to the amount of $1 per year.
Part II: General Legislation
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 33/520
[1]
A.
B.
Chapter 86. Alarm Systems
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 7-12-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-04.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 185.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 86, Alarm Systems, adopted 5-11-1992 by
Ord. No. 1992-5.
§ 86-1. Definitions.
Certain terms when used in this chapter are defined as follows, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ALARM AGENT
Any person who is self-employed in or employed by an alarm business, either directly or indirectly,
whose duties include selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving
or installing on or in any building, structure or facility any alarm system. This definition does not
include a person who engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location
and who neither visits the location where the alarm system is to be installed nor designs the
scheme for physical location and installation of the alarm system in a specific location.
ALARM BUSINESS
Any business operated by any individual, including a person self-employed, partnership,
corporation or other entity which engages in the activity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased,
maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on
any building, structure or facility or employing alarm agent(s). This definition does not include a
person who engages in the manufacture or sale of an alarm system from a fixed location and who
neither visits the location where the alarm system is to be installed nor designs the scheme for
physical location and installation of the alarm system in a specific location.
ALARM SYSTEM
Any mechanical or electrically operated instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related
hardware which is designed or used for the detection of a fire or an unauthorized entry or
attempted entry into a building, structure or facility or for alerting others of the commission of an
unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or both, and which emits a sound or transmits a
signal or message when activated. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, local alarm
systems, audible alarms, automatic telephone devices, alarms connected directly to the
communications center, central stations, and certain proprietary systems as set forth in Subsection
A hereof. This definition shall not include the following devices and their related hardware:
Devices which are not designed for and as used do not register alarms that are audible,
visible or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility unless police
response is expected or is a result of the alarm; or
Devices which are designed for and installed upon motorized vehicles or trailers.
ALARM USER
Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained which system is not specifically
exempted from regulation under this chapter. Sanctions imposed by this chapter shall be
determined based upon false alarms occurring per permitted location and not based upon the total
number of permits possessed by an alarm user.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 34/520
A.
B.
C.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE (APD)
Any mechanical or electrically operated instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related
hardware which is designated or used for the detection of a fire or an unauthorized entry into a
building, structure or facility or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a
building, structure or facility, or both, and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message
when activated. Automatic protection devices include, but are not limited to, audible alarms,
automatic dialing devices, alarms connected directly to communications centers and proprietor
alarms. This definition shall not include the following devices and their related hardware:
Devices which are not designed for and as used do not register alarms that are audible,
visible or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility unless police
response is expected or is a result of the alarm; or
Devices which are designed for and installed upon motorized vehicles or trailers; or
Devices maintained and operated by the Bureau of Police used for the detection of unlawful
acts and sometimes known as a "portable stakeout alarm system."
AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DEVICE
An alarm system which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a
predetermined telephone number and transmit by prerecorded voice message or coded signal an
emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.
CENTRAL STATION
Any office, except the communications center, to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling
devices are connected, where operators supervise the circuits and/or where guards are
maintained continuously to investigate alarm signals.
COMMUNICATIONS CENTER
The Communication Room of the Lancaster County Police Radio Network and/or other rooms
which house auxiliary communication equipment.
FALSE ALARM
An activation of an automatic protection device (APD) signal, necessitating a response where an
emergency situation does not exist at a particular permitted location. The term does not include
alarms caused by acts of nature or utility service interruptions.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM
An alarm system which is attached to the interior or exterior of a building and which when
activated causes an audible and/or visual warning signal which can be heard and/or seen outside
the building and is designed to attract attention when activated by a fire or an intrusion or other
emergency requiring police response.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind
and, when used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, "person" includes the individual
members, partners, officers and managers, or any of them, of partnerships, associations and
similar entities, and the officers, directors and managers, or any of them, of corporations.
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM
Any alarm system which sounds within the protected premises or a control center under the
supervision of the proprietor of the protected building, structure or facility. If police response is
expected or is a result of that proprietary alarm signal or message, it thereby becomes an alarm
system as defined by this chapter.
RESPONSE ASSESSMENT FEE
A fee charged to a permittee for each and every false alarm to which the police or fire department
responds. Exemption: No fee shall be charged if:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 35/520
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
The alarm is received indicating line trouble.
The false alarm was caused by an act of nature.
The false alarm was caused by utility service interruptions.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER
The Township Manager of Lancaster Township or his designated representative. Wherever in this
chapter duties or responsibilities are assigned to the Township Manager, he may delegate them to
such person or persons with the Township as he deems necessary and expedient for the effective
administration of this chapter.
§ 86-2. Permits; identification; prohibited activities.
Business permit required. No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on an alarm business at
any time without first applying for and receiving an alarm business permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
Alarm agent identification required. No person shall engage in or conduct business or operate as
an alarm agent within the limits of the Township without carrying and displaying upon request to
any police officer an alarm agent identification card issued by a business in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
Alarm user permit required. No person shall install or use an alarm system without having applied
for and having been issued a current and valid alarm user permit that has not been suspended or
revoked in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and to display that permit on the
premises where the system is located.
Alarm system installations without permit. No alarm business or alarm agent shall install any alarm
system upon any premises unless and until an alarm user permit for such alarm system has first
been issued to the alarm user in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
False alarm fee. No alarm user shall fail to pay when due the response assessment fee required
by this chapter.
Testing prohibited without permission. No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of any
alarm system designed to make direct connection to the communications center at any time within
the limits of Lancaster Township without first obtaining permission from the Township Manager.
Such permission is not required where the equipment to be tested or demonstrated is connected
to an intermediary and the receipt of the alarm or signal is not relayed the communications center
by any means.
Intentional false alarm. No person shall intentionally activate an alarm system under
circumstances where the physical security of the premises or safety of the activator or other
persons upon the premises is not threatened.
Automatic dialing device prohibited. No person shall program, interconnect, use or permit to be
used any automatic dialing device that has been programmed to automatically transmit a request
for emergency response directly to the communications center or any other police department
telephone number.
§ 86-3. Alarm business permits.
Applications and fees.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 36/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
Applications. Any person engaging in alarm business activities defined in this chapter within
30 days of the effective date of this section shall apply for an alarm business permit. Such
application shall be signed by the individual proprietor of such business or by a partner or by
the proper corporate officials as is appropriate for the form of the business seeking the permit,
shall contain such information as the Township Manager shall by regulation require as
necessary to administer and enforce this chapter and shall be accompanied by the required
fee.
Applicants shall agree, in writing and as a condition for receiving and keeping permits, to
notify the Township Manager in writing within 10 days of any changes in the application
currently on file, i.e., ownership, management, or persons to be notified in the event of an
alarm activation.
Permit fee. An annual fee as listed in the schedule of fees for Lancaster Township shall be
due and payable by April 1 of each year. The initial fee shall be due with the application.
There shall be no prorating of the initial fee even though the permit has been applied for after
April 1. Under no circumstances shall fees be refunded.
Expiration date. An alarm business permit shall automatically terminate and expire on March
31 next following issuance of the permit but shall be automatically renewed upon payment of
the permit fee if received prior to or on the expiration date.
Processing of applications.
Time. Following completion of the application and payment of the fee, the Township Manager
shall have 15 working days to investigate the applicant, process the application and grant or
deny a permit.
When an application for any permit is approved, the Township Manager or his designated
representative is authorized to sign and issue the appropriate permit.
Grounds for denial. Permits to any applicant shall be denied if:
The applicant does not agree to comply or fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter and rules and regulations adopted and orders of the Township Manager issued
pursuant to this chapter; or
The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of
material fact in the application or in any report or record required to be filed with the
Township or the Township Manager; or
The applicant has had a similar-type permit previously revoked for good causes within a
two-year period preceding the filing of the application, provided that after two years a
permit may be issued where the applicant can show a material change in the
circumstances since the date of the revocation demonstrating competency and ability to
conduct business in accordance with this chapter; or
The applicant fails to pay all due or past-due response assessment fees, fines, costs, or
other charges owed, which were related to any previously issued permit(s).
Notice of denial. When an application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in
writing of the denial with the basis thereof. If the reason(s) for denial is/are correctable, the
applicant shall be so advised with suggestions on how these corrections can be made and
what time limit has been set for making such corrections. The notice of denial shall inform the
applicant that appeals may be made in the manner outlined in this chapter.
Applicability. Applicants already doing business in the Township on the effective date of this
section may continue to do business while their permit applications are being processed. An
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 37/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
E.
applicant not previously doing business in the Township on the effective date of this section
shall not commence doing business until his application is approved and a permit received.
Alarm business responsibilities. Alarm businesses shall be required to:
Alarm agent ID cards. Issue to all alarm agents connected with or in the employment of the
business identification cards containing as a minimum:
The name of the business.
The Township alarm business permit number;
The name of the alarm agent and recent photograph of agent embossed on the
identification card; and
The signature of an official of the business and agent named.
Identify existing alarm system. Within 30 days after the effective date of this section or upon
receipt of an alarm business permit, whichever first occurs, supply the Township Manager
with a complete list of the names and addresses of all persons within the Township to whom
or for whom alarm systems have been sold or installed and/or who are currently under
contract for service to such a system. Such list shall be updated on a quarterly basis and shall
also be supplied on an annual basis at the same time as payment of the annual fee for a
permit.
Investigation of false alarms. At the direction of the Township Manager, investigate false
alarms transmitted from any alarm system they have installed or presently service where the
police have been unable to determine the cause of a recent false alarm, and thereafter submit
a written report of their findings within 15 days of being directed to conduct the investigation
unless the time to report has been extended by the Township Manager for good cause shown.
Statistical data. In addition to any other information that may be required to be supplied by the
provisions of this chapter, the Township Manager may require an alarm business to furnish
him with such statistical data as may be reasonably available relative to specified periods of
operation.
Furnish instructions to alarm users. Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to any
alarm user an alarm system shall furnish the user with written instructions that provide
information to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and to obtain service for
the alarm system at any time.
Grounds for suspension or revocation. In addition to any penalties which may be imposed for the
violation of provisions of this chapter, an alarm business permit may be suspended or revoked by
the Township Manager for any of the following reasons:
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; or
The failure to comply with rules and regulations adopted and orders of the Township Manager
issued pursuant to this chapter; or
Where the applicant or permit holder has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or record to be filed
with the Township Manager.
Suspension or revocation procedure.
Notice. Prior to the suspension or revocation of an alarm business permit becoming effective,
the Township Manager shall notify the permittee in writing of the suspension or revocation, the
reasons therefor, the right to a hearing before the Township Manager if desired, and that
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 38/520
[1]
(2)
A.
B.
C.
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
B.
unless a request for a hearing before the Township Manager is filed in writing within five days
of the date of the notice of suspension or revocation, that the suspension or revocation shall
then become effective without further action. Such notice shall be served upon the permittee
by delivering the same personally or by leaving the notice at the place of business or
residence of the permittee in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. In the
event the permittee cannot be found and the service of the notice cannot be otherwise made
in the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed, registered mail, postage
fully prepaid, addressed to the permittee at his or her place of business or residence as
shown on the permit application.
Hearing. If a hearing is requested, it shall be conducted by the Township Manager or his
designee within 15 days of the request and shall be conducted in accordance with the Local
Agency Law.[1] If following the hearing the suspension or revocation is upheld, the reasons
therefore shall be set forth in writing and delivered to the permittee by ordinary mail. A
decision upholding or sustaining the suspension or revocation shall result in such suspension
or revocation becoming effective and not subject to further stay except upon order of court.
Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
§ 86-4. Alarm system regulations and standards.
Discontinue automatic dialing devices. Within 90 days after the effective date of this section, all
automatic dialing devices that have been programmed to automatically transmit a request for
emergency response directly to the communications center or any other police telephone number
shall be disconnected.
Local alarm systems. Local alarm systems shall be equipped with a timing mechanism that shall
disengage the audible and/or visual alarm after a maximum period of 15 minutes. Audible alarms
without such a timing mechanism, other than fire alarms, shall be unlawful in the township and
shall be disconnected by the user within 60 days from the effective date of this section.
Inspections. Every premises upon which an alarm system is installed shall be subject to inspection
at reasonable times by authorized personnel of the Township or its designated representatives,
such inspection to be limited to such areas as are necessary to inspect the installation and
operation of the alarm system.
§ 86-5. Alarm user permits.
Permit required. Any alarm user or any person desiring to use an alarm system who does not
already have a permit shall, within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter, file an application
for an alarm user permit for each system in use with the Township Manager; thereafter no person
shall install or use an alarm system without having applied for and having been issued a current
and valid alarm user permit that has not been suspended or revoked. A separate permit shall be
required for each protected location.
Applications and annual fee.
Required information. The alarm user permit application shall, in addition to such information
as is required by the Township Manager to administer and enforce this chapter, contain the
following information:
Applicant's name, address and telephone number;
The address of the residence or business in or upon which the alarm system has been or
shall be installed;
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 39/520
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
Type of alarm system installed or to be installed and name of the primary manufacturer of
the system or its major components;
The name, address and alarm business permit number of the alarm business, seller,
installer and/or alarm business who shall service or monitor the alarm system; and
The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two persons, three in the case
of corporations, who are authorized to respond to an emergency and gain access to the
premises where the alarm system is installed.
Permit fee. An annual fee as listed in the schedule of fees for Lancaster Township shall be
due and payable by April 1 of each year. The initial fee shall be due with the application.
There shall be no prorating of the initial fee even though the permit has been applied for after
April 1. Under no circumstances shall fees be refunded.
Expiration date. An alarm user permit shall automatically terminate and expire on March 31
next following issuance of the permit but shall be automatically renewed upon payment of the
annual permit fee if received prior to or on the expiration date.
Exemption from fees. The following persons are exempt from fees:
Residential alarm users who are over the age of 65 and are the primary residents of the
residence; and where no business is conducted in said residence.
The United States government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, counties, municipal
corporations, departments thereof and other governmental entities are exempt by the
fees required in this chapter.
Processing of applications. Following completion of the application and payment of the required
fee, the Township Manager shall have 15 working days to investigate the applicant, process the
application and to grant or deny a permit.
Denial of permits.
Grounds for denial. Alarm user permits to any applicant shall be denied if:
The applicant does not agree to comply or fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter and rules and regulations adopted pursuant to it; or
The applicant has knowingly made any false misleading or fraudulent statements of a
material fact in the application or in any report or record required to be filed under this
chapter; or
The applicant has had a similar-type permit previously revoked for good cause in the
past, unless the applicant can show a material change in the circumstance since the date
of revocation through acceptable conduct under a special interim permit.
Notice of denial. When an application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in
writing of the denial with the basis thereof. If the reason(s) for denial is/are correctable, the
applicant shall be so advised with suggestions on how these corrections can be made and
what time limit has been set for making such corrections. The notice of denial shall inform the
applicant that appeals may be made in the manner outlined in this chapter.
Display of permit. An alarm user permit shall be kept on the premises where the alarm system is
located and shall be produced and displayed to any police officer upon request.
Maintain current information. Applicants for alarm user permits shall agree in writing, as a
condition for receiving and keeping permits, to notify the Township Manager in writing within 10
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 40/520
A.
[1]
B.
C.
days of any changes in the application currently on file, i.e., ownership, management, or persons
to be notified in the event of alarm activation.
§ 86-6. Appeals to Board of Appeals.
Time and manner; appeal fee. Within five days after denial of an application for or renewal of any
permit by the Township Manager, or action by the Township Manager suspending or revoking a
permit, any person so affected may appeal such action to the Board of Supervisors by filing a
notice of appeal in writing with the Township Manager setting forth the specific grounds upon
which the appeal is based together with an appeal fee as listed in the schedule of fees for
Lancaster Township.
Hearing and decision. Upon the filing of an appeal, the Township Manager shall set a time and
place for hearing before the Board and shall notify the appellant thereof. The hearing shall be set
to coincide with a regularly scheduled Board of Supervisors meeting. The hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Local Agency Law.[1] The appellant and any
other interested party shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard in order to show cause
why the determination of the Township Manager should not be upheld. In all cases, the burden of
proof shall be upon the appellant to show that there was no substantial evidence to support the
decision of the Township Manager. The decision of the Board shall be in writing and shall state the
reasons therefor.
Editor's Note: See ` Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
Appeal not a stay. The filing of an appeal hereunder shall not operate to stay the Action or
decision of the Township Manager which is the subject of the appeal.
§ 86-7. Approval and promulgation of regulations.
The Township Manager may promulgate such regulations as are necessary for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter. Before becoming effective, any such regulations shall be approved by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 86-8. Confidentiality of records.
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and
shall not be disclosed except in accordance with law, order of court, or if required in connection with
the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
§ 86-9. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Bureau of Police acting through the Township Manager or his
designated representative.
§ 86-10. Written notice.
A written notice advising of said false alarm and indicating an appropriate response assessment fee
due shall be issued in the name of and served upon the permittee or any other connected with the
alarm system.
§ 86-11. Violations and penalties.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 41/520
A.
[1]
B.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or of the regulations promulgated hereunder shall,
upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 and
not more than $600 and costs for each and every offense and, in default of payment, to imprisonment
for not more than 30 days. Each day during which any person violates any provision of this chapter
shall constitute a separate offense. The payment of any fees required in the chapter shall not be a bar
against prosecution for any violation of the chapter. In addition to the foregoing penalty, the Township
may seek injunctive or other equitable relief and exercise such other rights as may exist at law or
equity.
Chapter 91. Amusement Devices
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 8-9-1982 by Res. No.
1982-7. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 91-1. Definitions and word usage.
The following words or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
JUKEBOX
Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug,
token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or other opening, or upon the payment of any
price, operates or may be operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL DEVICE
Any device other than a jukebox, which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or
key, may be operated for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not
registering a score and whether or not a prize is offered, and shall include, but shall not be
limited to, electronic video game machines or apparatus, marble machines, pinball machines,
skillball machines, mechanical grab machines, automatic or mechanical pin-setting devices
used in bowling alleys, pool tables or coin-operated pool tables and all other similar devices.
PERSON
Includes natural persons, firms, associations, copartnerships or corporations, except such
corporations as are specifically exempt from taxation under the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended.[1]
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT
Any place indoors or outdoors within the Township of Lancaster where the general public or a
limited or selected number thereof or any other persons may, upon payment of any
established price, operate, attend or engage in the operation of any jukebox or mechanical
device as herein defined.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 91-2. Tax imposed.
There is hereby imposed upon each place of amusement a tax as hereinafter set forth. The period for
which this tax shall initially be imposed shall commence October 1, 1982, and end December 31, 1982,
and, for the aforesaid initial period of taxation, the rate of tax shall be $25 for each mechanical device
and jukebox in use on the premises. Thereafter, commencing January 1, 1983, and annually thereafter
each calendar year, this tax shall remain in effect, without annual reenactment, at the rate of $100 per
each mechanical device and jukebox in use in any place of amusement as aforesaid.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 42/520
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
§ 91-3. Proration of tax; rebates.
Commencing January 1, 1983, and annually thereafter, the tax imposed herein for the aforesaid
twelve-month period shall be reduced as follows:
For licenses issued after April 1 of each period, 3/4 of the annual tax.
For licenses issued after July 1 of each period, 1/2 of the annual tax.
For licenses issued after October 1 of each period, 1/4 of the annual tax.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year. Rebates shall be
allowed by reason of reduction of the number of machines by a licensee as follows:
For discontinuance of use by a licensee prior to April 1 of each period, 3/4 of the annual tax.
For discontinuance of use by a licensee between April 1 and June 30 of each period, 1/2 of
the annual tax.
For discontinuance of use by a licensee between July 1 and September 30 of each period,
1/4 of the annual tax.
§ 91-4. Taxes payable to Treasurer.
The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be payable to the Township Treasurer by the person owning or
operating the place of amusement in which the jukebox or mechanical device has been installed.
§ 91-5. Contents of license.
The Township Secretary shall procure, at the expense of the township, a sufficient number of licenses,
each of which shall contain the following information:
The name of the township.
The number of the license.
The year or portion thereof for which the tax has been paid.
The name and the address of the establishment for which the license is issued.
The type and number of devices for which the license is issued.
The amount of the tax paid.
§ 91-6. Issuance, filing and display of license.
The Township Secretary shall issue a license to each person owning or operating a place of
amusement who pays the tax imposed by this chapter to the Township Treasurer. Each license shall
be prepared in duplicate; the original shall be given to the person owning or operating the
establishment for which the license is issued, and the duplicate shall be kept on file by the Township
Secretary. The original license shall be prominently displayed by the person to whom it is issued in a
prominent place in the establishment for which it is issued at all times during the license period.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 43/520
[1]
§ 91-7. Confidential information.
All information gained by the Township Secretary or Treasurer or any other official or agent of the
township by reason of any returns, investigations or verifications required or authorized by this chapter
shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in accordance with proper judicial order or
as otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any such information, contrary to the provisions of this
section, shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 91-8. Penalty for nonpayment; interest.
All taxes are due and payable within 10 days of the installation of any jukeboxes or mechanical devices
covered herein. If any taxes imposed by this chapter are not paid when due, a penalty of 10% on the
amount of tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto. Any tax not paid as required hereunder shall
bear interest at the rate of 1/2% per month or a fraction thereof.
§ 91-9. Recovery of taxes.
All taxes levied by this chapter, together with all back taxes and costs, shall be recoverable by the
Township Secretary or Township Solicitor for and on behalf of the township as all other similar debts
are recoverable.
§ 91-10. Failure to pay tax or obtain license unlawful.
The failure of any person to pay the tax or taxes levied by this chapter, or to obtain the licenses
specified herein while operating any jukebox or mechanical device shall constitute a violation of this
chapter.
§ 91-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted for violating or failing to carry out any of the provisions or requirements of this
chapter, or to pay any tax or taxes levied by this chapter at the times required or to do anything
whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this chapter, shall,
upon conviction, be fined not more than $300 for each offense, together with costs of prosecution, and,
in default thereof, be imprisoned for not more than 30 days; provided, however, that such fine or
imprisonment shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter.
§ 91-12. Legislative authority.
This chapter is being presented and adopted under the authority granted by the Local Tax Enabling Act
of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended, of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
Chapter 96. Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 185.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 44/520
[1]
Parks — See Ch. 192.
Article I. Dogs
[Adopted 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-2]
§ 96-1. Repealer; continuation of provisions for enforcement.
This article repeals the ordinances specifically mentioned above[1] and any other ordinances dealing
with the handling of dogs adopted by the Board of Supervisors before the date of adoption of this
article to the extent any such ordinances are inconsistent with the terms of this article. Any
enforcement action, however, which has commenced or which may hereafter commence in response
to conduct occurring before the effective date of this article may be brought, prosecuted or enforced
under the terms of the ordinances which existed at the time the conduct occurred, and to the extent of
such prosecution or enforcement, the said repealed ordinances shall remain in full force and effect.
Editor's Note: The prefatory material to this ordinance mentioned Ord. Nos. 58-4, 3-1986 and 2-1988.
§ 96-2. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section:
OWNER
Any person having a right of property or having custody of any dog or other animal governed by
this article or any person who harbors or permits a dog or other animal governed by this article to
remain on or around his or her property.
PUBLIC PROPERTY or THE PROPERTY OF ANOTHER PERSON
Any highway, street, alley, park, school, sidewalk or other land to which the public is invited or any
property of any person other than the owner.
§ 96-3. Running at large prohibited.
No owner shall permit any dog to be upon any public property or the property of another person unless
the dog is accompanied by or under the immediate control of the owner.
§ 96-4. Defecating on public property.
No owner shall permit any dog or other animal to defecate upon any public property or the property of
another person unless the owner immediately cleans up and removes the defecation and disposes of it
in a sanitary manner. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a guide dog accompanying a
blind person or otherwise assisting a person with a disability.
§ 96-5. Duty to keep dog securely tied or penned.
The owner of every dog shall keep the dog penned in a dwelling or other enclosure or securely tied in
such a manner that the dog cannot walk or run on any public property or the property of another
person.
§ 96-6. Duty to keep dog under control.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 45/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
Every owner of a dog shall keep the dog under sufficient control so as to prevent the dog from entering
upon any public property or the property of another person without the owner's consent.
§ 96-7. Persons authorized to enforce article.
Every police officer is authorized to enforce this article. In addition, the Board of Supervisors may from
time to time appoint one or more representatives of the township to enforce the terms of this article.
Any police officer and any other person so authorized may seize a dog or other animal whose owner is
violating the terms of this article and may dispose of such dog or other animal in accordance with law.
§ 96-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine in accordance with the following schedule and pay the costs
of prosecution, and in default of the payment of the fine and costs, undergo imprisonment in the
Lancaster County Prison for a period of not more than 10 days:
First offense: $25.
Second offense: $50.
Third offense: $100.
Fourth and each successive offense: up to $600.
Chapter 105. Brush, Grass and Weeds
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 9-11-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-5. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Vector control — See Ch. 258.
§ 105-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and shall be cited and referred to as the "Grass and Weed Ordinance
of Lancaster Township."
§ 105-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings so ascribed:
GRASS
Any of a large family (Gramineae) of monocotyledonous mostly herbaceous plants with jointed
stems, slender sheathing leaves, and flowers borne in spikelets of bracts.
PERSON
Any natural person, partnership, association, firm, corporation, or any other entity organized for
any reason whatsoever.
PREMISES
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 46/520
A parcel, plat, lot, or any other portion of land divided into a discrete unit. The term "premises"
shall include both unnatural and natural objects which are built, standing, growing, or otherwise
located or occurring upon the land which is subject to this definition.
WEEDS
Any plant or vegetation whatsoever which is inedible, poisonous, or not planted by the owner or
occupier of the premises or their predecessors in interest, specifically for purposes customarily
considered ornamental or agricultural.
§ 105-3. Regulation of overgrowth.
Every person owning or occupying any premises within the Township of Lancaster, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania ("township"), upon which premises any grass or weeds shall grow in excess of six inches
in height, shall cut or remove such grass or weeds from the premises or cause the same to be cut or
removed from the premises; provided, however, that on tracts of ground in excess of 10 acres, grass or
grain shall be permitted to grow in excess of six inches only for the purpose of cutting and harvesting
the same for hay or other agricultural purposes. The owner of the premises, in the case of vacant
premises or premises occupied by the owner thereof, and the occupant of the premises, in the case of
premises occupied by other than the owner thereof, shall comply with the requirements of this section.
§ 105-4. Enforcement.
Upon direction of the Board of Supervisors, the Township Code Enforcement Officer shall give written
notice, by personal service or by United States First Class Mail, to the owner or occupant of any
premises whereon grass or weeds are growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of § 105-3 of
this chapter. The written notice shall direct and require the owner or occupant, as the case may be, to
cut or remove all grass or weeds so as to conform to the requirements of this chapter, within seven
days after giving of the written notice by personal service or by depositing the notice in the United
States Mail addressed to the last known residence of the owner or occupant. In case any person shall
neglect, fail, or refuse to comply with the written notice within the period of time stated therein, the
Board of Supervisors may cause such grass or weeds to be cut or removed, and the cost thereof,
together with any penalty authorized by law, may be collected from such person, in the manner
provided by law.
§ 105-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty of not more than
$1,000 and costs of prosecution, such fine or penalty to be paid over to the township treasury. In
default of payment of such fine or penalty, such person shall be sentenced and committed to the
county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day's violation of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 110. Building Construction
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 12-13-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-07.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 126.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See Ch. 180.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 236.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 47/520
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 241.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
Editor's Note: This chapter also repealed former Ch. 110, Building Construction, adopted 10-23-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-7, as amended.
§ 110-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be the "Building Code of Lancaster Township."
§ 110-2. Adoption of Building Code.
The Uniform Construction Code, as contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 through 405, as amended
from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated as the Municipal Building Code of Lancaster
Township.
§ 110-3. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 110-3, Adoption of Property Maintenance Code, was repealed 4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-02. See now Ch. 204, Property Maintenance.
§ 110-4. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and Enforcement of the code within Lancaster Township shall be undertaken by any of
the means set forth below, as the governing body of the Township shall from time to time adopt by
resolution:
By the designation of an employee of the Township to serve as the Municipal Code Official to act
on behalf of the Township;
By the retention of one or more construction code officials with third-party agencies to act on
behalf of the Township;
By agreement with of one or more other municipalities for the joint administration and enforcement
of this chapter through an intermunicipal agreement;
By entering into a contract by the other municipality for the administration and enforcement of this
chapter on behalf of the Township;
By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry for plan
review, inspections and enforcement of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling
units and utility and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 110-5. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing body of the Township in
conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time,
and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration of the code shall
be undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, the Board of Appeals shall be established
by the joint action of the participating municipalities by resolution.
§ 110-6. Installation of smoke detectors.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 48/520
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
As of the effective date of this chapter, hard-wired smoke detectors with battery backup shall be
installed in all new dwellings either under construction or approved for construction in accordance
with all applicable state and municipal building codes.
As of the effective date of this chapter, hard-wired smoke detectors with battery backup shall be
installed in existing dwellings at the time of any renovation, rebuilding, or addition to the dwelling in
accordance with all applicable state and municipal building codes.
At the time of sale or transfer of ownership of any dwelling after the effective date of this chapter,
an inspection is required by the seller thereof of all previously installed smoke detectors and an
acknowledgement of the proper working condition in conformity with the Uniform Construction
Code and any other applicable state and municipal building codes of each such previously
installed smoke detector shall be forwarded to the Township. If no smoke detectors are installed or
if those installed are not certified as being in compliance with the Uniform Construction Code and
any other applicable building codes, then the Owner of the dwelling at his or her own expense
must install smoke detectors as required by all applicable state and municipal building codes and
provide an acknowledgement of such installation to the Township. Such inspection and
certification shall be valid for a period of 10 years.
§ 110-7. Fees.
Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to
this chapter and the code shall be established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
§ 110-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall neglect, fail, or refuse to comply with any provision of this chapter or applicable
standard building codes incorporated by this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before a District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution, such
fine and penalty to be paid over to the Township treasury. In default of payment of such fine or penalty,
such person shall be sentenced and committed to the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that the violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. In the event
that any of the building codes incorporated by this chapter prescribe different penalties from the one
imposed herein, the penalty contained in the applicable standard building code shall apply.
§ 110-9. Effect on existing provisions.
All Building Code ordinances or such portions thereof which are in effect as of the effective date of
this chapter and whose requirements are less than the minimum requirements of the code are
hereby amended to conform to the comparable provision of the code.
All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this Township not governed by the code shall
remain full force and effect.
§ 110-10. Most restrictive provisions to control.
In all matters that are regulated by the Laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United
States of America, or by regulation of departments or agencies of the commonwealth or the United
States promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, as the case may be, shall control
where the requirements thereof are the same or in excess of provisions of this chapter. This chapter
shall control in all cases where the requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United
States are not as strict as those contained herein.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 49/520
A.
B.
§ 110-11. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective five days after the date of passage of this chapter.
§ 110-12. Validity.
If any section, subsection, sentence, or clause of this chapter is held, for any reason, to be invalid,
such decision or decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
Chapter 121. Burning, Outdoor
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 1-27-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-1. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 105.
Dumps and dumping — See Ch. 136.
Parks — See Ch. 192.
Solid waste — See Ch. 222.
§ 121-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Lancaster Township Burning Ordinance."
§ 121-2. Definitions and word usage.
The singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular and the masculine shall
include the feminine.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in this section, unless from the particular context thereof it clearly appears that some other
meaning is intended:
PERSON
Natural persons, individuals, partnerships, associations, firms, corporations, owners, lessees,
licensees and the agents of each of them.
§ 121-3. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to ignite, kindle or maintain any bonfire
or other fire or to authorize or permit any such fire to be ignited, kindled or maintained on any public or
private street, avenue, highway, road, alley or public or private land within the Township of Lancaster,
County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, except as may be provided for in this chapter.
§ 121-4. Exceptions.
[Amended 5-12-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-2]
Nothing herein provided shall prohibit:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 50/520
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
[1]
A.
B.
Any fires or incineration, so long as such activity is carried on wholly within the confines of a
permanent structure intended for the habitation of human beings.
Any fire, the sole purpose of which is to cook or prepare food, provided that said fire is confined in
a fireproof container.
Any fire maintained on property in excess of 10 acres and used exclusively for agricultural
purposes.
Any controlled fire set for the purpose of instructing personnel in fire fighting, subject to the
following:
Prior written approval has been received from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection or any successor agency and is available for inspection by township
representatives;
The township has received written indemnification, suitable in form and substance to the
township or its consultants, indemnifying the township against liability for damages to persons
or property resulting from the controlled fire;
Proof of adequate insurance for any damage caused by the fire;
Express written consent of the underlying landowner of the property on which the controlled
fire will be set; and
The Board of Supervisors, upon review of any application for a controlled burning exercise,
shall have the right to approve or deny such requests in the Board's sole discretion.
§ 121-5. Other provisions adopted by reference.
In addition to the regulations and conditions for burning contained herein, the Air Pollution Control
Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, P.L. 2119,[1] and the provisions and conditions
contained therein, as they provide on the date of enactment hereof, as well as regulations of the
Department of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as they pertain to
said Act and as they provide on the date of enactment hereof, are incorporated herein as if the
same were set forth at length herein. Copies of said regulations are available for public inspection
at the township office during normal business hours.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 4001 et seq.
In the event that said regulations are amended after the date of enactment hereof, then said
amendments shall not be incorporated herein unless express action is taken by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 121-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee or otherwise, who violates or assists another in
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction
before any District Justice or similar official having jurisdiction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $50 nor more than $300, together with the costs of prosecution, and, in default of the
payment of said fine and costs, shall be committed to the Lancaster County Prison for a period not
exceeding 30 days. Each violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense
for which a summary conviction may be brought.
Chapter 126. Construction Codes, Uniform
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 51/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 6-14-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-1; amended in its entirety 12-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-08. Subsequent amendments noted
where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 236.
§ 126-1. Election to administer and enforce.
Lancaster Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 Pa. Code §§ 7210.101 through 7210.103, as amended from
time to time, and all regulations promulgated pursuant thereto as herein provided.
§ 126-2. Code adopted.
The Uniform Construction Code ("Code") as contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 to 405, as
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal
building code of Lancaster Township.
§ 126-3. Methods of administration and enforcement.
The administration and enforcement of the code within Lancaster Township shall be undertaken in any
of the following ways, or a combination thereof, as determined by the Board of Supervisors of
Lancaster Township, from time to time, by resolution:
By designation of an employee of Lancaster Township to serve as the Municipal Code Official to
act on behalf of the Township regarding the administration and enforcement of this chapter and
the code.
By retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party agencies to act on behalf of
Lancaster Township regarding the administration and enforcement of this chapter and the code.
By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint administration and enforcement of
this chapter and the code through an intermunicipal agreement pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter
23, Subchapter A (relating to intergovernmental cooperation).
By entering into a contract with the proper authorities of another municipality for the administration
and enforcement of this chapter and the code on behalf of Lancaster Township.
By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry for plan
reviews, inspections and enforcements of structures other than one family or two family dwelling
units and utility and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 126-4. Board of Appeals.
The Township shall by resolution establish a Board of Appeals in conformity with the requirements of
the relevant provisions of the code, as the same may be amended from time to time, for the purposes
set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly with one or more
other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by the joint action of the participating
municipalities. No members of the Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township may serve as
members of the Board of Appeals.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 52/520
A.
B.
C.
§ 126-5. Effect on existing provisions.
All building code ordinances or such portions thereof which were adopted by Lancaster Township
on or before July 1, 1999, and are in effect as of the effective date of this chapter, the provisions of
which are equal to or exceed the requirements of the code, shall continue in full force and effect
until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum requirements of the code,
as amended from time to time, at which time, such provisions shall be deemed amended to
provide for the minimum requirements of the code. However, upon transfer of ownership of any
existing dwelling after the effective date of this chapter, the seller shall be subject to the
requirement of inspection and certification of the smoke detectors as provided in the code.
Existing and new inspections and certifications shall be effective for a period of 10 years.
All building code ordinances or such portions thereof which were adopted by Lancaster Township
on or before July 1, 1999, and are in effect as of the effective date of this chapter, and whose
requirements are less or the minimum requirements of all applicable state and municipal codes or
regulations are hereby amended to conform with the comparable provision of the code.
All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this Township not governed by the code shall
remain full force and effect.
§ 126-6. Fees.
The Township, by resolution adopted from time to time, shall establish such fees as are assessable by
the Township for the administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the
code.
§ 126-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with any provisions of this chapter or the code
incorporated herein, shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
or penalty of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution, which fine and penalty shall be paid over
to the Township treasury. In default of payment of such fine or penalty, such person shall be sentenced
and committed to the country jail for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that the violation of this
chapter and the code incorporated herein continues shall constitute a separate offense. In the event
that any of the code provisions incorporated herein prescribe different penalties from the one imposed
herein, the penalty contained in the applicable code provision shall apply.
§ 126-8. Supercession of less strict requirements.
In all matters that are regulated by the Laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United
States of America, or by regulation of departments or agencies of the commonwealth or the United
States promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations, as the case may be, shall control
where the requirements thereof are the same or in excess of provisions of this chapter. This chapter
shall control in all cases where the requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United
States are not as strict as those contained herein.
§ 126-9. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective five days after the date of passage of this chapter.
§ 126-10. Validity.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 53/520
A.
B.
C.
If any section, subsection, sentence, or clause of this chapter is held, for any reason, to be invalid,
such decision or decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
Chapter 129. Curfew
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 2-12-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-1. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 129-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Lancaster Township Curfew Ordinance."
§ 129-2. Legislative intent.
The Township of Lancaster, recognizing the problem of crimes committed by and against juveniles
during the nighttime, and believing that it can be dealt with more effectively by regulating the hours
during which minors less than 18 years of age may remain in public places and certain establishments
without adult supervision, and by defining more clearly certain duties and responsibilities upon those
who have the custody and responsibility for the care of such minors, hereby enacts this chapter for the
purpose of:
Promoting the general welfare and protecting the general public through reduction of juvenile
violence and crime within the Township of Lancaster;
Promoting the safety and welfare of Lancaster Township citizens under the age of 18 whose youth
and inexperience render them particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in criminal activity
or in being victimized by perpetrators of crime; and
Fostering and strengthening parental responsibility for their minor children.
§ 129-3. Definitions.
In this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
AFTER HOURS
The period of time between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday
nights and 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights.
EMERGENCY
Refers to unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition resulting therefrom, requiring
immediate action to safeguard life, limb, or property. The term includes, but is not limited to, fires,
natural disaster, automobile accidents, or other similar circumstances.
ESTABLISHMENT
Any privately owned place of business operated for profit, including any place of amusement or
entertainment, to which the public is invited.
MINOR
Any person less than 18 years of age. For the purpose of this chapter any person shall be deemed
to be 18 years of age on the date of his or her 18th birthday and not before this time.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 54/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
OPERATOR
Any individual, entity, firm, association, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation
owning, operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. Whenever used in any provision
prescribing a penalty, the word "operator" shall include the members, partners, officers, and
managers of any firm, association, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation.
PARENT
The biological or adoptive parent of a minor; a legal guardian of a minor; or an adult person 18
years of age or over and who is authorized by a minor's parent or legal guardian to be
responsible, either temporarily or permanently, for the custody or care of any minor or for the
control of such minor.
PUBLIC PLACE
Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, vacant lot, or any private building,
structure or area to which the public is invited or in which the public is allowed to remain.
REMAIN
To be at or stay at a place.
§ 129-4. Unlawful conduct of minor.
It shall be unlawful for a minor to remain in or upon any public place or to remain in any motor vehicle
operating or parked therein or thereon, or to remain in or upon an establishment in Lancaster Township
after hours except as follows:
The minor is accompanied by a parent; or
The minor is involved in an emergency; or
The minor is engaged in an activity related to his or her employment, or is going to or returning
home from such employment activity, without detour or stop; or
The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or she, with a parent, resides; or
The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious, or civic organization, by a
public organization or agency, or by another similar organization or entity, which activity is
supervised by adults, and/or the minor is going to or returning from such an activity without detour
or stop; or
The minor is on an errand at the direction of a parent, and the minor has in his or her possession a
written statement signed by the parent containing the following information: the name, signature,
address, and telephone number of the parent authorizing the errand, the telephone number where
the parent may be reached during the errand, the name of the minor, a brief description of the
errand, the minor's destination(s), and the hours the minor is authorized to be engaged in the
errand; no minor or parent shall falsify the documents described above; or
The minor is involved in interstate travel through or beginning or terminating in Lancaster
Township; or
The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such
as the free exercise of religion.
§ 129-5. Unlawful conduct of parents.
No parent shall knowingly permit any minor to remain in or upon any public place or establishment
after hours unless the minor is engaged in an activity permitted under § 129-4 of this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 55/520
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
"Knowingly" shall mean knows or has reason to know.
§ 129-6. Unlawful conduct of operators of establishments.
No operator of an establishment shall knowingly permit any minor to remain upon the premises of such
establishment after hours.
§ 129-7. Rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized from time to time to promulgate such rules and regulations,
including the extension of hours for special occasions, as in his or her opinion shall be necessary or
useful in the enforcement of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall, however, be subject to the
approval of the Lancaster Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 129-8. Offenses.
Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 129-9. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent
offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that,
based on any response and other circumstances, no exception set forth in § 129-4 applies.
Any minor or parent who violates the provisions of this chapter for the first time may be issued a
citation. The minor may be taken into temporary custody, in which case his or her parents or other
appropriate person, as defined in the definition of "parent," shall be notified and the minor shall be
released into the custody of the appropriate parent or parents of the minor or to a brother or sister
18 years of age or older, as defined in the definition of parent. If no such person is available after
reasonable efforts have been made to locate such person, then the minor shall be released to
such agencies or institutions as are established for juvenile welfare.
Any minor or parent who violates any provisions of this chapter is guilty of a summary offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to fine or imprisonment as follows:
First offense: up to $10.
Second offense: up to $25.
Third offense: up to $50.
Fourth offense: up to $100. Parents are subject to imprisonment up to 90 days and minors to
referral to the juvenile court system.
Fifth and subsequent offenses: up to $300. Parents are subject to imprisonment up to 90 days
and minors to referral to the juvenile court system.
Any operator convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter for the first time shall be fined
$50 and shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Any operator
convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter for the second or subsequent time shall be
fined $300 and shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 56/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[1]
A.
B.
§ 129-10. Annual review.
This chapter and the need for it shall be reviewed annually. By March 1, 2002, and each year
thereafter, the Manager or designee and/or the Chief of Police of Lancaster Township shall review the
chapter and report and/or make recommendations to the Lancaster Township Board of Supervisors
concerning the effectiveness of and the continuing need for this chapter. The report shall include, but
not be limited to, the following information:
The practicality of enforcing the chapter and any problems with enforcement identified by the City
of Lancaster Bureau of Police for Lancaster Township;
The impact of this chapter and support programs on juvenile crime statistics;
Number of juveniles taken into custody for curfew violations;
Number of official citizen complaints filed regarding the enforcement of this chapter;
Number of operators who have violated the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 131. Demolition Review
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 5-14-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historical Commission — See Ch. 16.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 48.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 131-1. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the
Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, in particular § 603(a) thereof, which states that any ordinance in the
nature of a zoning ordinance "should reflect the policy goals of the statement of community
development objectives...and give consideration to the character of the municipality, the needs of the
citizens and the suitabilities and special nature of particular parts of the municipality;" § 602 thereof,
which allows a municipality to "regulate, restrict and determine: ...size, height, bulk, location, erection,
construction, repair, maintenance, alteration, razing, removal and use of structures;" and § 603(g)(2)
thereof, which states "Zoning ordinances shall provide for protection of natural and historic features
and resources." this chapter is supplementary to and is intended to be read in pari materia with the
Zoning Ordinance of Lancaster Township.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 131-2. Purpose and objectives.
The Comprehensive Plan for Lancaster Township, adopted December 9, 1996, states the desire of
the Township to discourage demolition and encourage adaptive reuse of historic and other
buildings; provide housing opportunities to all age and income levels; protect the character of
established neighborhoods through appropriate land use controls and codes enforcement. This is
reiterated and strengthened in the multimunicipal comprehensive plan to be adopted in 2007.
It is the intent of this chapter to establish a procedure for review of applications for demolition,
razing or removal so that the structural integrity of a building can be determined; opportunities for
continued use or adaptive reuse can be explored; the impact of the proposed demolition, razing or
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 57/520
C.
D.
removal upon the neighborhood streetscape can be determined; and proposed plans for the site
can be reviewed.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants
or deed restrictions.
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this chapter shall be held to be
invalid, illegal or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity, illegality or
unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair the remaining provisions, sections, sentences, clauses,
or parts of this chapter, it being the intent of the Board of Supervisors that the remainder of this
chapter shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 131-3. Short title.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the "Demolition Review Ordinance."
§ 131-4. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the following words and phrases shall be construed throughout to have these
meanings. The present tense includes the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural
the singular, the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
ACCESSORY BUILDING
A detached, subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal
building, and which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal building. Unroofed
decks and patios shall be considered as accessory buildings within the meaning of this chapter.
APPURTENANCE
A subordinate component or structural feature attached or affixed to a principal structure or
erected on the parcel.
BUILDING
Any structure constructed or used for a residence, business, industry or other public or private
purpose, or accessory thereto, and including porches, decks, swimming pools, greenhouses,
stables, garages, roadside stands, mobile homes, and similar structures, whether stationary or
movable, but excluding fences, walls, signs and awnings. Features which are structurally essential
and connected to the structure shall be considered as part of the structure within the meaning of
this chapter.
CHARACTER-DEFINING
Architectural design, materials, details, forms, workmanship or components that are important
elements reflecting a distinctive design.
DEMOLITION
The dismantling or tearing down of a building or structure, in whole or in part.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT
The absence of routine maintenance and repair, which leads to structural weakness, decay and
deterioration in a building or structure to the point where the building or structure meets the criteria
for condemnation.
HISTORIC RESOURCE
A building, structure, site, or object that is 50 years old or older and is a good example of a type or
style and/or is associated with a person or event that has state or national significance; or
contributes to the character and constitutes the fabric of the community; and/or that has local
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 58/520
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
significance. A building that is old but has lost its integrity or a building that is less than 50 years
old is not an historic resource and is not regulated under the provisions of this chapter. This
definition is further subject to the provisions of the section of this chapter titled "Historic Resources
Inventory."
MAINTENANCE
Work that does not alter the exterior fabric or features of a building or structure.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE
Building in which has been, is, or will be conducted the principal use or uses of the parcel.
RAZE
To destroy to the ground, demolish.
REPAIR
The process of rehabilitation that warrants additional work beyond maintenance.
STREETSCAPE
The overall view of a public street, including front and side yards, its component elements and the
relationships of buildings' setbacks, rhythms, height, shapes, spacing, and textures that give the
street or neighborhood its distinctive character or appearance.
STRUCTURE
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether
or not affixed to the land.
§ 131-5. Historic Commission.
A Historic Commission has been created by Resolution No. 1997-12, consisting of seven
members.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 16, Historical Commission.
The Supervisors have appointed seven residents of Lancaster Township as members of the
Commission. Any adult shall be eligible except a member of the Board of Supervisors, the Zoning
Hearing Board or the Planning Commission.
The Commission members are appointed to four-year terms except that members shall serve until
a replacement is appointed at the annual organizational meeting of the Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors may, but shall not be required to, appoint up to two alternate members
of the Historic Commission. An alternate member shall be entitled to participate and vote in any
meeting in which the attendance of regular members is less than seven, so long as the total
number of participants does not exceed seven.
A quorum for any decision of the Commission shall be a majority of the Historic Commission
members in office at the time of any meeting of the Commission. Alternate members participating
in any meeting shall be counted toward the quorum.
Powers and duties. The Historic Commission shall:
Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors from time to time regarding amendments
to the Historic Resources Inventory;
Receive input from an applicant at a regular meeting;
Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors on applications;
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 59/520
(4)
(5)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
The Board of Supervisors may remove any member at any time for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for any other just cause, so long as such action is not
taken until the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a
vote;
The Historic Commission may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, and
keep full public records of its business, which records shall be the property of the Township.
§ 131-6. Prohibited activities.
Compliance. No historic resource within Lancaster Township shall hereafter be removed,
relocated, altered or demolished, in whole or in part, without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter.
Demolition, removal or relocation of historic resources. General requirements:
No Class 1 or Class 2 historic resource (as defined below in this chapter) shall be
demolished, altered, removed or otherwise relocated without a permit obtained under the
provisions of this section, except for emergency demolitions.
Emergency demolitions to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Lancaster
Township are regulated under the Lancaster Township Property Maintenance Code, BOCA
1996 or its successors, and the provisions of that code shall take precedence over the
provisions contained herein.
§ 131-7. Application and approval process.
Application procedures: Applications for demolition review may be obtained at the municipal
building.
Preapproved activities: If the Zoning Officer determines that the historic resource has no historic or
architectural significance and does not contribute to the character of the property or neighborhood,
the requested permit may be issued without any further review. The Zoning Officer shall keep a
record of these determinations to include: name of property owner; address where structure is
located; date of determination; date permit was issued; and a photograph of the structure. This list
shall be provided to the Historical Commission for its review monthly.
Criteria for review: Applicants for a permit to demolish must provide, as part of their application, a
written statement as to whether the following statements are correct and detailed substantiation
for each statement which is believed to be correct. In each instance the burden of proof is on the
property owner to demonstrate that the property owner has been deprived any profitable use of
the relevant parcel as a whole. The recommendation of the Historical Commission and the
decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be based upon a review of the information submitted by
the applicant against all criteria and not any one criterion. The goals and development objectives
of the Township shall also be considered.
It is not feasible to continue the current use.
Other uses permitted within the underlying zoning district, either as permitted uses, special
exception uses, or conditional uses, have been denied or are not feasible due to constraints
on the building or structure.
Adaptive use opportunities do not exist due to constraints related to the building, structure or
property.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 60/520
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
The building, its permitted uses, and adaptive use potential do not provide a reasonable rate
of return, based on a reasonable initial investment. Such reasonable rate of return shall be
calculated with respect to the property taken as a whole.
The applicant has not contributed to the existing conditions, either through neglect or prior
renovation, conversion, alteration or similar physical action.
The demolition or removal will not adversely affect the character of the property, streetscape,
neighborhood or community.
A proposed new building, structure or use (if applicable) on or of the property will not
adversely affect the character of the streetscape, neighborhood or community.
The building is structurally unsound.
The denial of demolition would result in unreasonable economic hardship to the owner. The
requirements for proving unreasonable economic hardships may be obtained from the Zoning
Officer.
Sale of the building or structure is impossible or impractical.
Denial of demolition will deprive the property as a whole of all beneficial use.
As part of the review process, the Historical Commission and/or the Board of Supervisors may
request additional information to be provided. Such materials may include but are not limited to:
Site plan;
Detailed floor plans of the building proposed for demolition;
Exterior elevations of the building proposed for demolition;
A report from a professional civil engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
on the structural soundness of the building proposed for demolition;
Photographs;
Historic overview of the building and/or property; and
A written description of the proposed use of the property.
Review procedure:
The Zoning Officer shall forward completed applications for demolition, removal or relocation
of Class 1 and Class 2 historic resources to the Historical Commission. All information
submitted in compliance with the review criteria above shall be taken into consideration during
the deliberation process as shall the community goals and development objectives of the
municipality.
The applicant shall be provided an opportunity to present the proposal to the Historical
Commission at a regularly scheduled monthly meeting, subject to written advance notice.
The written recommendations of the Historical Commission shall be forwarded to the Board of
Supervisors for its consideration. It shall consider the review criteria, the written
recommendations of the Historical Commission and the community goals and development
objectives set forth in the Comprehensive Plan, and make its determination at a public
meeting which the applicant may attend.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 61/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
Associated land development plan. If the application for a permit for demolition, relocation or
removal is being requested to facilitate future development of the land, the said permit shall not be
issued by the Building Official until the following additional requirements have been satisfied:
Approval of the land development plan by Board of Supervisors;
The recording of an approved subdivision or land development plan for the lot where the
demolition, removal or relocation is proposed;
Issuance of any necessary zoning approvals.
§ 131-8. Inventory of Historic Resources.
The Historic Commission shall prepare, with the help of the Township Manager, Zoning Officer and
the Township staff, an inventory of historic resources as defined elsewhere in this chapter.
Contents of Historic Resources Inventory. The Inventory of Historic Resources data shall identify
every historic resource by tax parcel number. The street address, owner's name, type of resource
and category of each resource shall also be included in the list. The data to be gathered in the
inventory process represents the requirements of the Pennsylvania Historic Resource Survey
Form which has been incorporated into a standardized database format used countywide and
supplied by the Lancaster County Planning Commission (LCPC).
Historic resource map. All parcels identified as containing one or more historic resource(s) shall be
shown on an historic resource map that shall be maintained, with the corresponding Historic
Resource List, at the municipal office.
Classification. Historic resources shall be categorized as follows:
Class 1. A building that is a good example of a type or style and/or is associated with a
person or event that has state or national significance.
Class 2. A building that contributes to the character and constitutes the fabric of the
community and/or that has local historical significance.
Class 3. A building that is old but has lost its integrity or a building that is less than 50 years
old is not an historic resource and is not regulated under the provisions of this chapter.
Changes in classification. Changes to any class shall occur only when in compliance with the
terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
Revisions to inventory and map. The Historic Resource Inventory and Map may be revised from
time to time by legislative action of the Board of Supervisors who will consider recommendations
from the Historical Commission following a public meeting at which time the proposed changes
shall be presented.
Revisions are defined as additions, deletions, or changes of classification. Revisions do not
include routine list maintenance to update ownership information or to add information about
a change that occurred to the building unless that change affects the classification.
The Historic Resources List and Map shall be reviewed no less than annually, and
recommendations for revisions, if any, shall be compiled by the Historical Commission and
submitted to the Board of Supervisors for its review and action.
§ 131-9. Enforcement and penalties.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 62/520
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
D.
E.
F.
If it appears to the municipality that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the municipality shall
initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation
has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices
regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
In the event of demolition by neglect, the following special provisions shall apply:
Codes violations. If the Codes Enforcement Officer has cited a property owner for conditions
that could lead to structural weakness, decay or deterioration in a building or structure and the
property owner fails to correct the condition(s) in the time specified, that property owner may
be cited also for demolition by neglect under these provisions and be subject to the penalties
contained herein.
Owners of unoccupied principal or accessory buildings or structures cited for codes violations
shall develop a written maintenance program for the protection of any and all unoccupied
principal or accessory buildings or structures. Said maintenance program shall be established
in accordance with the Lancaster Township Property Maintenance Code. A copy of the
maintenance program shall be filed with the Codes Enforcement Officer and implementation
begun in accordance with an established timetable.
The maintenance program shall address measures to assure that structural components are
protected and reinforced to stabilize and maintain the essential form of the building or
structure. Structural features requiring stabilization include, but may not be limited to: roof;
chimney(s); cornice, soffit, fascia, spouting, columns, beams, posts, as well as window and
door sills, lintels and jambs.
The exterior and interior of the building or structure shall be inspected no less than annually
by the Codes Enforcement Officer with the owner or the owner's agent to determine
compliance with the established maintenance program.
An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the municipality intends
to take action.
The location of the property in violation.
The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met, citing in
each instance the applicable provisions of this chapter.
The date on or before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date on or
before which the steps must be completed.
That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a
prescribed period of time in accordance with procedures set forth in the chapter.
That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board the municipality shall have
the responsibility of presenting its evidence first.
Any filing fees paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board shall
be returned to the appealing party by the municipality if the Zoning Hearing Board, or any court in
a subsequent appeal, rules in the appealing party's favor.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 63/520
G.
H.
I.
J.
Causes of action. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be,
demolished, relocated or removed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in
violation of this chapter, the Supervisors or, with the approval of the Township Manager, the
Zoning Officer, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or
about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
Enforcement remedies. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced on behalf of the Township, pay a judgment of not more
than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the district judge determining that there has been a violation further determines that there
was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
district judge, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of zoning
ordinances shall be paid over to the Township.
In addition to the enforcement provisions found in the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance and
incorporated herein by reference, the Board of Supervisors may authorize action to withhold
issuance of any and all zoning and building permits for a period of up to three years for any
property that at the time of the enactment of these provisions was occupied by a building or
structure that was subsequently demolished, removed or relocated without obtaining a permit as
provided for herein.
The Board of Supervisors may take other appropriate legal action, which may include equitable
and injunctive relief, to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 136. Dumps and Dumping
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 3-5-1954 by Ord. No.
1954-3. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 121.
Solid waste — See Ch. 136.
Vector control — See Ch. 258.
§ 136-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DUMP
Any lot or piece of land within the Township of Lancaster, County of Lancaster and Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, which is open to the public or used by the public for the deposit of ashes, refuse,
trash, rubbish or other waste matter, whether said land is used permissively, adversely,
gratuitously, for pay or otherwise.
§ 136-2. Supervision and control.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 64/520
The Supervisors of Lancaster Township shall have supervision and control over all dumps within
Lancaster Township, and said Supervisors may at any time, in their discretion, for proper cause,
declare any dump in Lancaster Township a public nuisance by reason of offensive smoke, noise,
odors, dust, fumes, gases or otherwise.
§ 136-3. Permit required; application; fee; revocation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to begin the operation of any dump, as herein defined, in Lancaster
Township, without first applying for and obtaining a permit from the Supervisors of the township. The
application for such permit shall describe the premises to be used as a dump and shall set forth the
proposed method of operation thereof. The charge for such permit shall be $10. Such permit may be
revoked by said Supervisors at any time, for proper cause. Any person who shall be operating a dump
in Lancaster Township at the effective date of this chapter shall apply for such permit within 30 days
after the effective date of this chapter, and shall not continue to operate the dump at the expiration of
such thirty-day period unless a permit for the operation thereof shall have been granted by the
Supervisors.
§ 136-4. Unlawful deposits.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as owner, lessee, occupant or licensee or in any other
capacity, to deposit or permit to be deposited on any dump within Lancaster Township, as herein
defined, any putrescible, fermentable or disease- or vermin-breeding matter of any kind whatsoever.
§ 136-5. Land to be permanently filled; processing waste
materials.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any dump except with the bona fide intention of
permanently filling the land used therefor. It shall be unlawful for any operator of a dump to process
any waste material by burning off the burnable portion thereof and removing the remaining or
unburned portion thereof, other than metal, from the dump.
§ 136-6. Fires in dumps unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to kindle or maintain or permit to be kindled and maintained any fire
on any dump within Lancaster Township.
§ 136-7. Custodians.
Any person operating a dump in Lancaster Township shall furnish one or more custodians, who shall
be present at all times on such dump, during any hours when dumping shall be allowed, and who shall
be directed by the operator thereof to comply with the terms of this chapter.
§ 136-8. Permitted hours of operation.
No dumping shall be permitted on any dump in Lancaster Township on Sundays or legal holidays or
between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., prevailing time, on any other day.
§ 136-9. Materials to be deposited during permitted hours.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 65/520
[1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any material of any sort upon any dump in Lancaster
Township, except during the times permitted in the foregoing section hereof.
§ 136-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person or any officer of any firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof before a District Justice of Lancaster County, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $100, together with costs of prosecution, for each offense and, in default of the payment
thereof, to be imprisoned in the Lancaster County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day of
illegal operation of such dump shall be a separate offense hereunder.
Chapter 148. Firearms
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 2-5-1953 by Ord. No.
1953-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 148-1. Unlawful use by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to use within the limits of the Township of
Lancaster any air pistol or air rifle, commonly known as a "BB gun," slingshot, bow and arrow, rifle,
firearm or any similar device which propels an object by force within the township limits, except as
hereinafter provided.
§ 148-2. Permitting use by minors unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian to authorize or permit the use of any of the abovementioned
devices in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 148-3. Lawful use by minors.
It shall be lawful for any person, if under the age of 14 years, to use any of the above-mentioned
devices when accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some other member of his family 21 years of
age or older, or, if between the ages of 14 and 18 years, when accompanied by an adult at least 21
years of age or except as allowed or permitted under the Game Law of Pennsylvania.[1]
Editor's Note: See 34 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 148-4. Seizure of unlawful devices.
Any peace officer is hereby authorized to seize, remove and destroy any device, the use of which is
prohibited by this chapter, which shall be used within the limits of the Township of Lancaster contrary to
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 148-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before any
District Justice, be subject to a fine not less than $10 nor more than $50, or, in default of payment of
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 66/520
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
the fine and costs, shall undergo imprisonment in the Lancaster County Prison for a period of not more
than 30 days.
Chapter 155. Fireworks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 6-14-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-4. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 155-1. Displays permitted; conformance with codes.
Fireworks displays shall be permitted in Lancaster Township as provided for in this chapter. All displays
shall be planned and conducted in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association Standard
1123, 1995 Edition, plus any and all applicable provisions of the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code
which was adopted by reference in Ordinance No. 1995-7 and amended by Ordinance No. 1998-1, the
BOCA National Building Code and National Property Maintenance Code.
§ 155-2. Issuance of permits; fees; standards; administration and
enforcement.
The Planning and Zoning Department/Codes Department is responsible for issuing permits.
Applications for permits must be received at least 30 days in advance of the date of the proposed
display. After an application has been approved, a permit may be issued only for the approved
event. No permit shall be transferable. A nonrefundable application fee of $200 shall be paid to the
general fund of the township, whether or not a permit is subsequently approved. An additional
$300 escrow fee is required upon application for permit. This escrow amount will be applied
against any cleanup or damage costs incurred by the township after the event. Any unused portion
will be refunded after cleanup and/or repairs. The entire amount will be refunded provided, after
township inspection, the entire area is left as it was found prior to the event.
Applicants shall be required to complete the application package in the form provided by the
township as follows:
Fire permit application for pyrotechnics;
Hold harmless agreement;
Insurance certificates in the amount of $1,000,000 general liability and $5,000,000 umbrella
coverage;
Detailed site/security plan (NFPA 1123) clearly showing property lines, parking areas,
spectator viewing areas and structure locations in relation to fireworks discharge area.
The sale, possession, use, and/or distribution of fireworks for display purposes shall be conducted
so as to be safe to all persons and property. Evidence that the sale, possession, use, and/or
distribution of fireworks for display purposes has been conducted in accordance with the
applicable standard specified in NFPA 1123 shall be evidence that such sale, possession, use
and/or distribution of fireworks for display purposes provide safety to persons and property.
Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of
in a safe way pursuant to industry standards.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 67/520
E.
F.
G.
H.
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
The township shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the permit
holder any and all fireworks offered or exposed for sale, possession, use, and/or distribution in
violation of this section.
Fireworks displays shall not be held between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
The Police Department and the Lancaster Township Fire Department shall be advised of all
applications and may be consulted for recommendations.
Any person or organization that receives a permit under the conditions of this chapter shall be
responsible for obtaining and ensuring all traffic safety and traffic control before, during, and after
the event including related costs. The township has final authority concerning any and all
decisions as to the need for safety precautions and traffic control.
Chapter 160. Floodplain Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 3-29-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Construction codes — See Ch. 126.
Sewers — See Ch. 209.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 229.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 236.
Water — See Ch. 276.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
Editor's Note: These provisions were also adopted 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02 as Ch. 160.
Article I. Authority
§ 160-1. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage of the Pennsylvania Flood
Plain Management Act of 1978,[1] delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township does hereby order as follows.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Article II. General Provisions
§ 160-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the Township.
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize
flood damage in the future.
Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and natural drainage.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 68/520
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Reduce financial burdens imposed on the Township, its governmental units, and its residents by
preventing excessive development in areas subject to flooding.
Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
§ 160-3. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation to undertake, or cause to
be undertaken, any construction or development anywhere within Lancaster Township unless a
permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or structures.
§ 160-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain
areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that
those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this
chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 160-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams
and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside any
identified floodplain areas or that land uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Lancaster Township or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Article III. Administration
§ 160-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to
herein as the "Floodplain Administrator." The Floodplain Administrator may 1) fulfill the duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations; 2) delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in
these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other
employees; or 3) enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency or private
sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of
these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the Township of its responsibilities pursuant to
the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain Administrator duties are to
be fulfilled by the Township Manager.
§ 160-7. Permits required.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 69/520
A.
[1]
[2]
[3]
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is undertaken within any area of
Lancaster Township.
§ 160-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been determined that the
proposed work to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the application for the
permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-
537, as amended);[1] the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended);[2] the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);[3] and the United
States Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official shall
inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she
shall make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to enter
any building, structure, premises or development in the identified floodplain area, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does not comply with the permit
application or any applicable laws and ordinances or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall revoke the permit and
report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for whatever action it considers necessary.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records associated with the
requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, finished construction elevation data,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a biennial report to FEMA
concerning Township participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments of the Floodplain
Administrator can be delegated from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies
with the person identified in the Floodplain Ordinance as the Floodplain Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code and the 2009
International Building Code (IBC) and the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or latest
revisions thereof.
§ 160-9. Application procedures and requirements.
Application for a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied
by Lancaster Township. Such application shall contain the following:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 70/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
C.
The name and address of the applicant.
The name and address of the owner of the land on which proposed construction is to occur.
The name and address of the contractor.
The site location, including address.
A listing of other permits required.
A brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a breakout of flood-related
cost and the market value of the building before the flood damage occurred, where
appropriate.
A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the proposed construction as well as
any existing buildings or structures.
If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially within any identified
floodplain area, applicants for permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and conform with
the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Building materials are flood-resistant.
Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities have been designed and located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent information as may
be required by the Floodplain Administrator to make the above determination:
A completed permit application form.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less, showing the following:
North arrow, scale, and date;
Topographic contour lines, if available;
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements,
including the location of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
The location of all existing streets, drives, and other accessways; and
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified floodplain areas,
and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 71/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[1]
[2]
(d)
(e)
(f)
(4)
D.
Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, drawn at suitable scale,
showing the following:
The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based upon North
American Vertical Datum of 1988;
The elevation of the base flood; and
Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the
2009 IRC.
The following data and documentation:
If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces and other factors associated with a base flood; and Floodway Area (see § 160-
18A), when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the base flood elevation (BFE) at any point.
Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, to show that
the cumulative effect of any proposed development within an AE Area/District without
floodway (see § 160-18B), when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the BFE more than one foot at any point within the
Township.
A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which states that
the proposed construction or development has been adequately designed to withstand
the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the base flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the development.
Detailed information needed to determine compliance with § 160-24F, Storage, and
§ 160-25, Development that may endanger human life, including:
The amount, location and purpose of any materials or substances referred to in
§§ 160-24F and 160-25 which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
A description of the safeguards incorporated into the design of the proposed
structure to prevent leaks or spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 160-25 during a base flood.
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection's "Planning
Module for Land Development."
Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the municipality, based upon
the estimated cost of the proposed construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 160-10. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the
County Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 72/520
A.
B.
C.
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the Floodplain Administrator for
possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
§ 160-11. Review of application by other agencies and
individuals.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any
other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.) for
review and comment.
§ 160-12. Changes to application, permit or plans.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to
the application, permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any
such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant to Floodplain Administrator for
consideration.
§ 160-13. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard which shall be displayed on
the premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
permit and the date of its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 160-14. Start of construction; time limits.
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180 days after the date of
issuance of the development permit. Work shall also be completed within 12 months after the date
of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing,
by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of a permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted by the applicant, who sets
forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request
and the original permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the
extension is granted.
§ 160-15. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 73/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
A.
[1]
B.
[2]
C.
Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized municipal representative
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter, or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
Be in writing;
Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the performance of any act it
requires;
Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however,
that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other method authorized
or required by the laws of this State;
Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this
chapter or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to Lancaster Township, of not less than $25
nor more than $600 plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The
imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of or noncompliance with this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any
development initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or
relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Board of Supervisors to be a
public nuisance and abatable as such.
§ 160-16. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator concerning the
administration of the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such
appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of the
Floodplain Administrator.
Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the appeal in accordance
with the Municipalities Planning Code[1] and any other local ordinance.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may seek relief therefrom by
appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.[2]
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Article IV. Floodplain Areas
§ 160-17. Identification.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 74/520
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Lancaster Township classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated April 5, 2016, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part of
the Flood Insurance Study.
The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and amendments, are
hereby adopted by Lancaster Township and declared to be a part of this chapter.
§ 160-18. Description.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the FIRM as floodway and which
represent the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more than one
foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway
has been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the Township during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
Within any floodway area, no new construction or development shall be allowed, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the
FIS prepared by FEMA for which BFEs have been provided. The AE Area adjacent to the
floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which BFEs have been provided and a floodway has been delineated.
A Area/District.
The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in the
FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no BFEs have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable sources shall
be used when available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the BFE shall
be determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain
area which is nearest the construction site.
In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the elevation with
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall
certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts.
Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the municipality.
§ 160-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of Supervisors where studies or
information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision. However,
prior to any such change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 75/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, the Township shall notify FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by
submitting technical or scientific data. See § 160-22B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 160-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be
made by Lancaster Township, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of proof shall be on the property owner. The property owner
shall pay all costs associated with the hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board, including all costs for
advertising public notice, for fees to Zoning Hearing Board members, for fees to the Township
Engineer and Township Solicitor, and for all stenographic records, including the attendance of a
stenographer and, when necessary, the transcription of the record.
§ 160-21. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
proposed or have occurred, the Township shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to
boundary changes. The Township shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
Article V. Technical Provisions
§ 160-22. General requirements.
Alteration or relocation of watercourses.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
until all adjacent municipalities which may be affected by such action have been notified by
the municipality and until all required permits or approvals have first been obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse
unless it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
When an applicant proposes to permit the following encroachments: any development that causes
a rise in the BFEs within the floodway; or any development occurring in Zone AE without a
designated floodway which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the BFE; or alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts and bridges), the applicant
shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the encroachments
to occur.
Upon receipt of the Floodplain Administrator's conditional approval of map change and prior
to approving the proposed encroachments, the applicant shall provide evidence to FEMA of
the adoption of floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased BFEs and/or
revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 76/520
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, the applicant shall provide as-built
certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such certifications in
accordance with 44 CFR 67.
Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within any identified floodplain area
shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other
applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 160-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial improvements shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new construction or substantial improvements in the identified
floodplain area in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
Residential structures.
In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated up to or above the regulatory flood elevation.
In A Zones, where there are no BFEs specified on the FIRM, any new construction or
substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to or
above the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with § 160-18C of this chapter.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405 as amended)
shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
Nonresidential structures.
In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory
flood elevation:
Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water; and
Has structural components with the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
In A Zones, where no BFEs are specified on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to or above the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 160-18C of this chapter.
Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be floodproofed in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification
standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations" published by the
United States Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some
other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional engineer or architect which
states that the proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
The design and construction standards and specifications contained in the 2009 International
Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 77/520
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
E.
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405 as amended)
shall be utilized where they are more restrictive.
Space below the lowest floor.
Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements) which will be used solely
for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a
substantial improvement as defined in this chapter must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. Documentation
that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need not be elevated or
floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation but shall be limited to the
parking of vehicles, or to the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the principal
use or activity.
Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
The structure will have a low damage potential.
The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least obstruction to the flow of
floodwaters.
Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as furnaces, heaters, washers,
dryers, etc., are prohibited.
Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater
for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet
or exceed the following minimum criteria:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 78/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
E.
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 160-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points;
Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall not be permitted;
Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring, or
settling;
Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated data justifying
steeper slopes are submitted to and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of stormwater
runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and
provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to prevent the
discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be
located, designed and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration
of floodwaters.
Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent the discharge of untreated
sewage into floodwaters.
No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within any identified floodplain
area except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for such systems. If any
such system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination
from it, during a flood.
The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No. 348, "Protecting Building
Utilities From Flood Damages," and the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be
utilized.
Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems, shall be
located, elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a
flood.
Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one foot below the
regulatory flood elevation.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 79/520
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
(1)
(2)
K.
L.
M.
Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in times of flooding could be
injurious to human, animal, or plant life and not listed in § 160-25, Development that may
endanger human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or floodproofed to
the maximum extent possible.
Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed, located, and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
Anchoring.
All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering
practices to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or components located
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
Floors, walls and ceilings.
Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without
causing structural damage to the building.
Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant
variety.
Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
made of metal or other water-resistant material.
Paints and adhesives.
Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of marine or
water-resistant quality.
Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or waterresistant
variety.
All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
Electrical components.
Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the BFE.
Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units, and other electrical,
mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation.
Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 80/520
(1)
(2)
N.
[1]
A.
B.
Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa.
Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as amended, and not limited to the following provisions, shall
apply to the above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they are
more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter:
International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403,
1603, 1605, 1612 and 3402 and Appendix G.
International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof: Sections
R104, R105, R109 and R322 and Appendix E and Appendix J.
§ 160-25. Development that may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection A below shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following
provisions apply:
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act[1] and the regulations adopted
by the Department of Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject to the provisions of this
section, in addition to all other applicable provisions. The following is a list of materials and
substances that are considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure of the kind
described in Subsection A above shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward
from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 81/520
C.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be
prohibited. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved residential structure of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be elevated to
remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above BFE and built in accordance with §§ 160-22,
160-23 and 160-24.
New or substantially improved structures within any floodplain area.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
nonresidential structure of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be built in
accordance with §§ 160-22, 160-23 and 160-24, including:
Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet
above BFE; and
Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a base
flood.
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (United States Army
Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
watertight standard.
§ 160-26. Special requirements for subdivisions and
development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres,
whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain areas where BFE data are not available, shall be
supported by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine BFEs and floodway
information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required
by FEMA for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision and Letter of Map Revision. Submittal requirements
and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 160-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any identified floodplain area and/or any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following
provisions apply:
Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured homes and any
improvements thereto shall be:
Placed on a permanent foundation;
Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least 1 1/2 feet above BFE;
Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump, elevated to the regulatory flood
elevation.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 82/520
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with the manufacturer's
installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the
above information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International Residential Building
Code or the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development's "Permanent
Foundations for Manufactured Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa.
Code, Chapters 401 through 405, shall apply.
Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or
the most recent revisions thereto and 34 Pa. Code, as amended where appropriate and/or
applicable to units where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were
not established for the proposed units' installation.
§ 160-28. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
Recreational vehicles in Zones A and AE must either:
Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for
highway use; or
Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 160-27.
Article VI. Prohibited Activities
§ 160-29. Activities prohibited in any identified floodplain area.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of Community and
Economic Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following
activities shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
The commencement of any of the following activities, or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
Article VII. Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 160-30. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully
existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of
§ 160-31 shall apply.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 83/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
A.
§ 160-31. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an existing structure
located within any identified floodplain area:
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any identified
floodplain area that would cause any increase in BFE.
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any Floodway
Area/District that would cause any increase in BFE.
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within an AE Area/District
without floodway that would, together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase
the BFE more than one foot at any point.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure to
an extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement
and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa. Code, as amended, and the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
Within any Floodway Area/District (see § 160-18A), no new construction or development shall be
allowed unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
Within any AE Area/District without floodway (see § 160-18B), no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to an existing structure, to
an extent or amount of less than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
Article VIII. Variances
§ 160-32. Grant authorized.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an exceptional hardship to a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, Lancaster Township may, upon request, grant relief from
the strict application of the requirements.
§ 160-33. Procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
procedures contained in § 160-16 and the following:
No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area that would cause any
increase in BFE.
No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any
Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in the BFE.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 84/520
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(7)
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(8)
B.
C.
No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any AE
Area/District without floodway that would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation requirement involved, no
variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to
development regulated by special permit (or prohibited activities) (Article VI) or to
development that may endanger human life (§ 160-25).
If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary to provide relief.
In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach whatever reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
Whenever a variance is granted, the Floodplain Administrator shall notify the applicant in
writing that:
The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider, at a
minimum, the following:
That there is good and sufficient cause.
That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
That the granting of the variance will neither:
Result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional threats
to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; nor
Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public or conflict with any other
applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the
Floodplain Administrator. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be
included in the annual report to FEMA.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed so as
to have the capability of resisting the one-percent-annual-chance flood.
Article IX. Definitions
§ 160-34. Interpretation of terms.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
§ 160-35. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 85/520
A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to,
the principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD
A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also
called the "one-hundred-year flood" or "one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE
The volume of water resulting from a base flood as it passes a given location within a given time,
usually expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE)
The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zone AE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides.
BUILDING
A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall
be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
CHANNEL
A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
CULVERT
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).[1]
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities; filling,
grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials;
and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the
Township.
EXPANSION OF AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FILL
A quantity of earth, stones, etc., for building up the level of an area of ground.
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)
The official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the Township.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 86/520
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS)
The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood
profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water
surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE
The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls
of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES
Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
This term is an umbrella term that includes all of the areas within which the Township has selected
to enforce floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the special flood
hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Insurance Study, but may include
additional areas identified by the Township. See §§ 160-17 and 160-18 for the specifics on what
areas the Township has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished, floodresistant
partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a
building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of
the applicable non elevation design requirements of this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 87/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, and recreational and other similar vehicles which
are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MINOR REPAIR
The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion
thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change
of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of
any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping,
electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the April 5, 2016, effective
date of the Floodplain Management Ordinance adopted by the community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started after December 18, 1979,
and before April 5, 2016, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued,
provided that the start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation
of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the
Township.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after December 12, 1988,
and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE
A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before December 12,
1988 and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 88/520
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The base flood elevation (BFE) or estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)
An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION
Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the
permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days after the date of the
permit and shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a
time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start" means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of
construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE
A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above the
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs, or devisees,
transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by
lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new
street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure of which the cost
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC)
The statewide building code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to
new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality, a third party or the
Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the code
adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain construction. For
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 89/520
[1]
[1]
coordination purposes, references to the above are made specifically to various sections of the
IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE
A grant of relief by the Township from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION
The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the Township's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 229, Stormwater Management.
Article X. Enactment
§ 160-36. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective on April 5, 2016, and shall remain in force until modified, amended or
rescinded by Lancaster Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
Chapter 164. Insurance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 4-12-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-2]
§ 164-1. Designation of enforcing officer.
The Treasurer of Lancaster Township, or designee, is hereby appointed as the designated officer who
is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and duties stated herein.
§ 164-2. Payment of claims.
No insurance company, association, or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring agent") doing business in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a
structure located in Lancaster Township (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount recoverable
for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500 unless the named insured or insuring
agent is furnished by the Municipal Treasurer with a municipal certificate or verbal notification
confirmed in writing by the insuring agent pursuant to Section 508(b) of Act 98 of 1992 as amended by
Act 93 of 1994[1] and unless there is compliance with Section 508(c) and (d) of Act 98 of 1992
amended by Act 93 of 1994 and the provisions of this article.
Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 164-3. Municipal certificate; payment procedures.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 90/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
F.
Where pursuant to Section 508(b)(1)(I) of Act 98 of 1992, the Municipal Treasurer issues a certificate
indicating that there are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real
property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured, provided however, that if the loss
agreed upon by the named insured and the insuring agency equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate
limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building or structure, the following procedures must be
followed:
The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the Treasurer of Lancaster
Township in the aggregate $2,000 for each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount
of a claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the amount
transferred to Lancaster Township shall be $2,000.
If at the time of a loss report the named insured has submitted a contractor's signed estimate of
the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure in the amount less than
the amount calculated as provided in Subsection A above, the insuring agent shall transfer to
Lancaster Township from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies, associations or exchanges
insuring the building or other structure.
After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure, and the Treasurer shall return the
amount of the funds transferred to Lancaster Township in excess of the estimate to the named
insured, if the municipality has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other
structure.
Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, Lancaster Township shall do the following:
The Treasurer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund to be used solely as security
against the total costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or structure which are
incurred by Lancaster Township. Such costs will include, without limitation, any engineering,
legal or administrative costs incurred by the municipality in connection with such removal,
repair or securing of the building or any proceedings related thereto; and
It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the proceeds to provide Lancaster
Township with the name and address of the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred
funds and the name and address of the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been
received by the Lancaster Township and notify the named insured that the procedures under
this subsection shall be followed; and
When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure have been completed in
accordance with all applicable regulations and orders of Lancaster Township and the required
proof of such completion received by the Treasurer, and if Lancaster Township has not
incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to the named
insured. If Lancaster Township has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of the
building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the fund and if excess funds remain,
Lancaster Township shall transfer the remaining funds to the named insured; and
To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by Lancaster Township pursuant to this
section and not returned to the named insured, such interest shall belong to the township. To
the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest earned on such proceeds
shall be distributed to the named insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of Lancaster Township to recover any
deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit Lancaster
Township and the named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of
funds to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has
been negotiated.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 91/520
[1]
§ 164-4. Adoption of fees and regulations.
The Board of Supervisors may by resolution adopt procedures and regulations to implement Act 98 of
1992[1] and this article, and may by resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities
or services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992 and this article, including but not limited to issuance of
certificates and bills, performance of inspections, and opening separate fund accounts.
Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 164-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who violates this article shall be
subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per violation.
§ 164-6. Filing of article.
The Treasurer of Lancaster Township shall file an exact copy of Ord. No. 1999-2 with the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development together with the name and phone number of
the Treasurer of Lancaster Township, as required by the provisions of Act 93 of 1994.
Chapter 185. Noise
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 7-27-1981 by Ord. No.
1981-5. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 96.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
§ 185-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Lancaster Township Noise Control Ordinance."
§ 185-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All terminology
used in this chapter, not defined below, shall be in conformance with the applicable publications of the
American National Standards Institute [ANSI S1.1 — 1960 (R1971) and its revisions] or its successor
body.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL
The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting
network. The level so read is designated dB(A).
AMBIENT NOISE
The all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being usually a composite of
sounds from many sources near and far.
CONSTRUCTION OPERATION
The erection, repair, renovation, demolition, or removal of any building or structure; and the
excavation, filling, grading and regulation of lots in connection therewith.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 92/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
DECIBEL (dB)
A unit for measuring the sound pressure level, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of
the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20
micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).
EMERGENCY
Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property
damage.
EMERGENCY WORK
Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property
damage threatened or caused by an emergency.
IMPULSIVE SOUND
Sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
Examples of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of
firearms.
MUFFLER or SOUND DISSIPATIVE DEVICE
A device designed or used for decreasing or abating the level of sound escaping from an engine
or machinery system.
NOISE
Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse
psychological or physiological effect on humans.
NOISE DISTURBANCE
Any sound which:
Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; or
Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
Endangers or injures personal or real property; or
Is in excess of the sound levels by zoning districts established in § 185-4A.
PERSON
Any individual, association, partnership, or corporation, and includes any officer, employee,
department, agency, or instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, "person" includes the individual members,
partners, officers and managers, or any of them, of partnerships and associations, and as to
corporations, the officers and managers thereof or any of them.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLE
Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or landborne plane, vessel, or vehicle, which is not
designed to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE
Any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
PURE TONE
Any sound which can be heard as a single pitch or a set of single pitches. For the purpose of this
chapter, a pure tone shall exist if the 1/3 octave band sound pressure level in the band with the
tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous octave
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 93/520
A.
(a)
(1)
B.
bands by five dB for center frequencies of 500 Hz and above and by eight dB for center
frequencies between 160 and 400 Hz and by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to
125 Hz.
PROPERTY LINE (BOUNDARY)
An imaginary line drawn through the points of contact of adjoining lands, apartments,
condominiums, townhouses and duplexes owned, rented or leased by different persons, a
demarcation or a line of separation of properties, and also, for any two or more buildings sharing
common grounds, the line drawn midway between any two said buildings. All areas devoted to
public right-of-way shall be deemed to be across the property line. For the purpose of this
regulation, the property line includes all points on a plane formed by projecting the property line in
a manner deemed appropriate by the enforcing police officer.
REAL PROPERTY
All land whether publicly or privately owned, whether improved or not improved, with or without
structures, exclusive of any areas devoted to public right-of-way.
SOUND
An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a
medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium, or the
superposition of such propagated oscillation which evokes an auditory sensation. The description
of sound may include any characteristics of such sound, including duration, intensity, and
frequency.
SOUND LEVEL
The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency
weighting network, such as A, B or C, as specified in American National Standards Institute
specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4-1971, or the latest revision thereof). If the
frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND LEVEL METER
An instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager,
output meter and any applicable weighting network used to measure sound pressure levels which
meets or exceeds the requirement for a Type I or Type II sound level meter as specified in ANSI
Specification S1.4-1971. The manufacturer's published indication of compliance with such
specifications shall be prima facie evidence of such compliance.
ZONING DISTRICTS
The land use districts established by Chapter 280, Zoning, and all subsequent amendments.
§ 185-3. Prohibited acts.
Noise disturbance prohibited. No person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued
any noise disturbance, nor shall any person suffer, allow or permit any noise disturbance to be
made or continued from or at any property, whether real or personal, that is subject to such
person's right to control.
Specific prohibitions. The following acts, and the causing thereof, are declared to be noise
disturbances and therefore in violation of this chapter:
Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices. Operating, playing or
permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical
instrument, sound amplifier, automobile radio, automobile stereo or high fidelity equipment or
similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound:
At any time in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a property line
(boundary), or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to be plainly audible
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 94/520
(b)
(c)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
across a property line (boundary); or
In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a property line (boundary) or at
50 feet from such device, whichever is less, when the device is operated in or on a motor
vehicle, or hand carried, on a public right-of-way or public space; or
In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any person other than the operator
of the device, when operated by any passenger or a common carrier.
Yelling and shouting, etc. Engaging in loud or raucous yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or
singing:
On the public streets between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; or
At any time or place in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance.
Construction. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or equipment used in
construction operations, drilling, or demolition work:
Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on weekdays and
Saturdays or at any time on Sundays or legal holidays, such that the sound therefrom
creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property line (boundary), except for
emergency work.
At any other time such that the sound level at or across a real property line (boundary)
exceeds 85 dB(A) for a period of one hour.
This section shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools subject to Subsection
B(4).
Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered
saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snowblower, or similar device used outdoors in
residential areas (see § 185-4A, Table I) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as
to cause a noise disturbance across a residential property line (boundary).
Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes,
crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance
across a residential property line (boundary). This section shall not apply to municipal or utility
services in or about the public right-of-way.
Animals and birds. Owning, possessing, harboring or controlling any animal or bird which
howls, barks, meows, squawks, or makes other sounds continuously and/or incessantly for a
period of 10 minutes or makes such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the
disturbance of any person at any time of the day or night regardless of whether the animal or
bird is situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that at the time the animal or
bird is making such noise, no person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private
property in or upon which the animal or bird is situated or for any other legitimate cause which
teased or provoked the animal or bird.
Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of powered model vehicles so
as to create a noise disturbance across a residential property line (boundary) between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Street sales. Offering for sale or selling by shouting or outcry or by any other amplified or
unamplified sound within any residential or commercial area of the Township of Lancaster
except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and at no time in such a manner as to
violate § 185-4A of this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 95/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(9)
(10)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
A.
Tampering. The following acts or the causing thereof are prohibited:
The removal or rendering inoperative by any person other than for purposes of
maintenance, repair or replacement, of any muffler or sound dissipative device or
element of design or noise label of any product.
The intentional moving or rendering inaccurate or inoperative of any sound monitoring
instrument or device positioned by or for the Bureau of Police, provided such device or
the immediate area is clearly labeled in accordance with noise control regulations, to
warn of the potential illegality.
The use of a product which has had a muffler or sound dissipative device or element of
design or noise label removed or rendered inoperative, with knowledge that such action
has occurred.
Vehicle, motorboat, or aircraft repairs and testing. Repairing, rebuilding, or testing any motor
vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, or aircraft in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance
across a residential real property line (boundary).
Motor vehicle prohibitions.
Motor vehicle and motorcycles on public rights-of-way. No person shall operate or cause to be
operated a public or private motor vehicle or motorcycle, or any equipment attached to such a
vehicle, on a public right-of-way at any time in such a manner that the sound level emitted by
the motor vehicle or motorcycle, or any equipment attached to such a vehicle, exceeds the
level set forth in Title 67, Chapter 450, of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Regulations (Established Sound Levels).
Standing motor vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle
or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a period longer than 15 minutes in
any hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion, anywhere
within 150 feet of any residence in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential property line (boundary).
Unnecessary horn blowing. No person shall at any time sound the horn or other warning
device of a vehicle except when absolutely necessary as a warning while actually driving such
vehicle.
Sound trucks. No person shall operate sound amplifying equipment mounted on or attached
to any motor vehicle at any time in such a manner as to exceed the maximum permissible
motor vehicle noise emissions as set forth in Subsection C(1) of this section.
Prima facie violation. The noise from any of the aforesaid prohibited acts that disturbs two or more
residents who are in general agreement as to the times and durations of the noise and who reside
in separate residences (including apartments and condominiums) located across a property line
(boundary) from the property on which the source of the noise is generated, shall be prima facie
evidence of a noise disturbance.
§ 185-4. Sound level by zoning districts.
Maximum permissible sound levels by zoning districts. No person shall operate or cause to be
operated any source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the
limits set forth in the zoning designations category in Table I when measured at or across the
property line (boundary) from the noise source. Any sound source that produces sound in excess
of those levels shall constitute a noise disturbance.
TABLE I
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 96/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
H.
A.
SOUND LEVELS BY ZONING DISTRICTS
Sound Level Limit [in dB(A)]
Zoning District of the Property on Which the Source
of the Noise is Located
7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Residential zoning districts 57 52
Commercial zoning districts (including
Office/Professional District)
[Amended 5-13-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-5]
67 62
Manufacturing zoning districts 77 77
When exceeded. The sound level limits set forth in Table I shall be exceeded when any one or
more of the following occur:
The sound at any one point in time exceeds any of the established zone limits in Table I by a
measured sound level of 15 dB(A); or
The sound exceeds any of the established zone limits in Table I by a measured sound level of
10 dB(A) for a cumulative total of one minute or more out of any ten-minute period; or
The sound exceeds, except in the Manufacturing District, any of the established zone limits in
Table I by a measured sound level of three dB(A) continually for a period of five minutes, or a
total of five minutes out of any ten-minute period.
Ambient sound. In the event the background ambient sound levels in an area of suspected noise
disturbance exceed the levels set forth in Table I, the sound level of the intrusive sound source
shall be measured with the ambient background sound level being substituted as the Table I
sound level limit.
Where measured. For the purposes of this section, sound shall be measured at or beyond the
property line (boundary) of the property on which the noise source is located.
Pure tone and impulsive sound. For any source of sound which emits a pure tone or impulsive
sound, the limits set forth in Table I shall be reduced by five dB(A).
Adjustment for nonconforming uses. Any noise which occurs on property which, according to
Chapter 280, Zoning, is being used in a legally nonconforming manner, and which noise relates to
said use, shall be judged as if the property bore a zoning designation under which the use would
be conforming.
Measuring instruments. All sound measurements shall be made on a sound level meter calibrated
in the manner required by the manufacturer's specifications.
Exemptions from sound level limits. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
Activities covered by the following sections: § 185-3B(3, Construction; § 185-3B(4), Domestic
power tools; or any emergency signaling device used because of an emergency;
Interstate railway locomotives and cars;
Motor vehicles.
§ 185-5. Exemptions.
The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
Amplified announcements. Electronically amplified announcements at athletic events.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 97/520
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
Blasting. Blasting, provided that a permit for same has been secured for a fee of $10 from the
Lancaster Township Zoning Officer upon application. Such blasting may occur only between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless specifically authorized by permit.
Concerts, etc. Band concerts, block parties, church carnivals, or other performances or similar
activities publicly or privately sponsored and presented in any public or private space outdoors
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter provided that:
Such activities do not produce sound 15 dB(A) in excess of the sound levels set forth in Table
I of § 185-4A of this chapter; and
Such activities do not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Emergency work. Sounds caused by the performance of emergency work, or by the ordinary and
accepted use of emergency apparatus and equipment.
Municipal and utility services. Sounds resulting from the repair or replacement of any municipal or
utility installation in or about the public right-of-way.
School and public activities. Sounds not electronically amplified, created by organized schoolrelated
programs, activities, athletic and entertainment events, or other public programs, activities
or events, other than motor vehicle racing events.
Warning devices. Sounds made by warning devices operating continuously for three minutes or
less except in the event of an actual emergency the time limitation shall not apply.
§ 185-6. Variances and Noise Control Board.
Variances.
Authority. The Noise Control Board shall have the authority to grant variances, consistent with
the provisions of this section, after public hearing, upon application of any person who owns,
controls or operates any sound source which does not comply with the provisions or
standards of this chapter.
Application. The application shall state the standard or provision from which the variance is
being sought, the period of time and reasons for which the variance is sought, shall contain
information which demonstrates that bringing the sources of sound or activity for which the
variance is sought into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable
hardship on the applicant and shall contain any other supporting information which may
reasonably be required.
Public notification. Public notice of an application and the date, time and place of the public
hearing to be held thereon for a variance shall be given by publishing notice thereof in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township and County of Lancaster at least once, not
less than three days prior to the scheduled public hearing and by, if practicable,
conspicuously posting the premises that is the source of the sound for which the variance is
sought.
Hearing. The Noise Control Board shall hold a public hearing to decide variance applications
presented to it. Any person who claims to be affected by allowance of the variance may
become a party to the hearing.
Review standards. In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the Noise Control
Board shall balance the hardship to the applicant versus the adverse impact to the public
health, safety and welfare and shall consider at a minimum the following conditions:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 98/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(6)
(7)
B.
C.
A.
(1)
B.
The physical characteristics of the emitted sound;
The times and duration of the emitted sound;
The geography, zone, and population density of the affected area;
Whether the public health and safety is endangered;
Whether the sound source predates the receiver(s); and
Whether compliance with the standard(s) from which the variance is sought would
produce hardship without equal or greater benefit to the public.
Decision. The Noise Control Board shall render a written decision in granting or denying the
application for variance and, if denied, shall state the reasons therefor. The Board's decision
shall be made available to the applicant and any other person who requests it in writing. In
granting a variance the Hearing Board may attach reasonable conditions including, but not
limited to, placing a time limit on the permitted activity and/or establishing a time schedule
within which the source of sound or activity for which the variance was sought must be
brought into compliance with this chapter. Where the grant of a variance is conditioned, the
variance shall not become effective until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant.
Noncompliance with any condition of the variance shall terminate it and subject the person
holding it to those provisions of this chapter regulating the source of sound or activity for
which the variance was granted. Variances may be granted for a period of up to one year. The
person obtaining the variance may reapply for additional variance periods under terms set
forth by the applicant and the Noise Control Board.
Appeals. Appeal from an adverse decision of the Noise Control Board shall be made to the
Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County.
Special variances. The Zoning Officer of the Township of Lancaster, or any member of the Board
of Supervisors of Lancaster Township, or their designee, may, upon application and guided by the
standards for review set forth in Subsection A(5), grant special variances for infrequent events or
activities which do not exceed 24 hours in duration. Such special variances are not renewable
except by action of the Noise Control Board pursuant to Subsection A. The Noise Control Board
shall hear and decide all appeals from the denial of a special variance, the practice and procedure
thereon to be in accordance with Subsection A.
Noise Control Board. The Noise Control Board for the purposes of this chapter shall be the Zoning
Hearing Board of the Township of Lancaster, which Board shall have full authority to carry out the
duties of the Noise Control Board, as set forth in this chapter. All applications to the Board shall be
filed through the Zoning Officer and shall be accompanied by an application fee of $35. The
hearing shall be held not more than 30 days following the filing of the application and the decision
thereon rendered within 45 days of the last hearing in the case before the Board.
§ 185-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Authority for enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the Township of Lancaster Police
Department or by any police department performing such services under contract with the
Township of Lancaster, by any member of the Board of Supervisors or by the Lancaster Township
Zoning Officer. Any person not a police officer who is authorized to enforce this chapter is hereby
conferred with the powers of a police officer for this purpose except for the power of arrest.
Penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, in a
summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 for each and every
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 99/520
(2)
A.
B.
offense, to be collected as other fines and costs are by law collectible, or shall be imprisoned
for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day during which any person violates any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
This chapter and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit or deny the right of the
Township of Lancaster or any person to such equitable or other remedies as may otherwise
be available with or without process of law.
Chapter 192. Parks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 7-24-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-4. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 96.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 121.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 198.
Solid waste — See Ch. 222.
§ 192-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Lancaster Township Park Safety Ordinance."
§ 192-2. Purpose.
This chapter shall regulate the activities of persons in any park owned and/or maintained by Lancaster
Township (hereinafter, "park" or "parks").
§ 192-3. Park hours.
All parks shall be open from sunrise to sunset.
§ 192-4. Disorderly conduct.
The possession or use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs within any park is prohibited.
No person shall be intoxicated, under the influence of illegal drugs, gamble or use threatening,
abusive, insulting or indecent language, fight or commit disorderly or immoral conduct of any kind
within any park.
§ 192-5. Dumping and littering.
Dumping of rubbish, trash and littering of any kind within any park is prohibited.
§ 192-6. Defacement of property.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to deface, mutilate, mistreat, abuse, destroy, mark, write or paint upon
any park property whether natural or man-made.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 100/520
§ 192-7. Motor-operated vehicles.
Use or operation of motor-operated vehicles in any park is prohibited except in designated parking
areas during the hours any park is open as stated in this chapter under § 192-3. ATV's, snowmobiles
and recreation vehicles are prohibited anywhere in any park, including parking lots.
§ 192-8. Pets.
Pets permitted in the park must be leashed and under the control of the owner at all times. Pet waste
must be cleaned up and disposed of properly by the owner.
§ 192-9. Fires and grills.
Only fires in grills are permitted. All other fires of any kind, including but not limited to bonfires or camp
fires, are prohibited.
§ 192-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before a
District Justice, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and/or undergo imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days. All prosecutions shall be
brought in the name of the Township of Lancaster and all fines shall be paid to the Township of
Lancaster.
Chapter 198. Peace and Good Order
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 12-8-1967 by Ord. No.
1967-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 129.
Firearms — See Ch. 148.
Fireworks — See Ch. 155.
Noise — See Ch. 185.
Parks — See Ch. 192.
§ 198-1. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
Any person who shall be guilty of any act, work or conduct, causing or intending to cause a
disturbance of the peace and good order of the Township of Lancaster, or causing or intending to
cause any danger, discomfort or annoyance to any of the inhabitants of the township or users of the
township thoroughfares or who shall unlawfully make any loud, boisterous or unseemly noise or
disturbance, or who shall fight or quarrel or incite others to fight or quarrel, or who shall publicly make
use of obscene or indecent language or who shall loaf or loiter or congregate upon any of the public
streets, alleys or grounds or private property in the Township of Lancaster to the annoyance of
peaceful residents nearby or traveling upon any street or alley, or being unlawfully upon any of the
public grounds of the township, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public
annoyed, shall be guilty of disorderly conduct.
§ 198-2. Violations and penalties.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 101/520
A.
B.
C.
A.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction by summary
proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine for the use of the township of not more than $25 and costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, the defendant may be sentenced and
committed to imprisonment in the Lancaster County Prison for a period of time not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 204. Property Maintenance
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 4-9-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-02. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 105.
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 126.
Solid waste — See Ch. 222.
§ 204-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be the "Property Maintenance Code of Lancaster Township."
§ 204-2. Adoption of Property Maintenance Code.
The "2009 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC)," as published by the International Code
Council, is adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of Lancaster Township to create a
comprehensive and uniform code of regulations for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Township. Each of the sections of the 2009 IPMC, except as otherwise
provided in § 204-3 below, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein,
with the additions, deletions and changes as enumerated in § 204-3 below.
§ 204-3. Deletions, additions and changes.
Additions, deletions and changes from the IPMC adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of
Lancaster Township are as follows:
Section 101.1 shall be amended by inserting "Township of Lancaster, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania."
Section 103.5 shall be deleted in its entirety.
Section 106.3 shall be deleted in its entirety.
§ 204-4. Fees.
The fees for activities and services performed by the Code Official in carrying out his responsibilities
under this code shall be established by resolution as enacted or adopted by the Board of Supervisors
from time to time.
§ 204-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with any
provision of this chapter or applicable standard codes incorporated by this chapter, or which has
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 102/520
B.
C.
[1]
permitted the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or applicable standard codes
incorporated by this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, be sentenced
to pay a fine or penalty of not more than $1,000 and all costs of prosecution, such fine and penalty
to be paid over to the Township treasury. In default of payment of such fine or penalty, such
person shall be sentenced and committed to the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that the violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense, unless the
district justice determining that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of the violation by the district
justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All
judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be
paid over to the Township. This Code may also be enforced by an action in equity brought in the
Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas or by the institution of proceedings to place a lien upon
the premises for which a violation of this code has been determined. In the event that any uniform
code incorporated by this chapter prescribes different penalties from those imposed herein, the
penalty contained in the uniform code shall not apply.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity
other that the Township the right to commence any action or enforcement pursuant to this section.
Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
Township from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful erection or construction or to
restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent illegal use or occupancy of any structure,
building, sign, fence, parking lot, driveway, land or premises or to stop an illegal act, conduct
business, use or occupancy of a structure, building, sign or land in and about any premises.
Chapter 209. Sewers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 231.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 236.
Vector control — See Ch. 258.
Water — See Ch. 276.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
Article I. Disposal System Permits
[Adopted 3-8-1968 by Ord. No. 1968-1]
§ 209-1. Permit required.
No person shall install an individual or community sewage disposal system, or construct any building in
the Township of Lancaster, in which an individual or community sewage disposal system is to be
installed, without first obtaining a permit indicating that the site, plans and specifications of such
system are in compliance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act 537[1] and the Rules and
Regulations adopted pursuant to the Act.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 209-2. Permit fee.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 103/520
[1]
[Amended 5-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-3]
A fee in the amount of $85 shall be paid to the Township Sewer Enforcement Officer at the time of
making application for an individual or community sewage disposal system permit.
Editor's Note: See the Township's "Established Uniform Fees" Schedule for fees relating to sewage
permits.
§ 209-3. Percolation test fee.
[Amended 5-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-3]
In the event the Township Sewer Enforcement Officer conducts the percolation tests required pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, a fee in the amount of $125 will be paid for said service.
This provision shall not prohibit the applicant from having said tests conducted by any other person
who is authorized pursuant to said Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act to conduct percolation tests.
Article II. Connection to Public Sewers
[Adopted 6-14-1974 by Ord. No. 1974-2; amended in its entirety 4-8-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2]
§ 209-4. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this
article shall be as follows:
ALLOWABLE INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance, waterborne waste or form of energy ejected or escaping
from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development, recovery
or processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage, which is allowed to be
discharged into the sewer system by the Board of Directors of the Authority, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, or allowable by rules and regulations of the Authority.
AUTHORITY
Lancaster Area Sewer Authority (LASA) or City of Lancaster Sewer Department, in their
respective service areas within the Township of Lancaster.
[Amended 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
AUTHORITY ENGINEER
An engineer retained or employed by the Authority, including any authorized member of the staff
of such engineer.
DEP
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property within this municipality upon which there is erected any structure intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any property situate in the municipality used wholly or in part for the manufacture, processing,
cleaning, laundering, or assembling of any product, commodity or article, or any other property
situate in this municipality from which wastes, in addition to or other than sanitary sewage, are
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 104/520
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or waterborne wastes or form of energy ejected or
escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development,
recovering or processing of natural resources, but not sanitary sewage.
LATERAL SEWER OR SERVICE CONNECTION
That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the curbline or, if there shall be no
curbline, to the edge of the street abutting the property affected or, if no such lateral shall be
provided, then lateral sewer or service connection shall mean that portion of, or place in, a
sanitary sewer which is provided for the connection of any service line.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER
An engineer retained or employed by the municipality or any authorized member of the staff of
such engineer.
MUNICIPALITY
The Township of Lancaster, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, and its duly authorized
representatives or agents.
NATURAL OUTLET
Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, pond, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any property situated in
the municipality.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, corporation or other group.
PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM
Any sewer mains, lateral sewers from a sewer main to a service line or house connection, sewage
ejector and/or pumping stations, sewer force mains and all appurtenant facilities owned and
operated by an individual, corporation, homeowners' association or other person or entity other
than a municipal authority or a political subdivision and used in the furnishing of sewer services.
SANITARY FACILITIES
Toilets, sinks and other plumbing fixtures and related piping intended to receive and discharge
sanitary sewage into a service line.
SANITARY SEWAGE
The normal water-carried household and toilet waste from any improved property, excluding,
however, the effluent from septic tanks or cesspools, rain, stormwater and groundwater, as well as
roof or surface water, drainage of percolating or seeping waters, or accumulation thereof, whether
underground or in cellars or basements.
SANITARY SEWER
A sewer which is part of the sewer system and which carries sanitary sewage and/or allowable
industrial waste discharged into the sewer system, and to which stormwater, surface water, and
groundwater are not intentionally admitted.
SERVICE LINE OR HOUSE CONNECTION
That part of the main house drain or sewer line extending from a point five feet outside the outer
building wall or foundation wall to its connection with the lateral sewer.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT
Devices and/or structures or facilities owned by the Authority for the treatment and disposal of
sanitary sewage and industrial waste.
SEWER
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 105/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewage system and used or usable for sewage
collection or transportation purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM
Sewer mains, lateral sewers from a sewer main to service line or house connection, sewage
ejector and/or pumping stations, sewer force mains, sewage treatment plants, and all appurtenant
facilities operated by the Authority in furnishing sewage services.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN
A pipe or conduit which carries stormwater, surface water, drainage and certain industrial water
discharges, such as cooling and air-conditioning waters.
STREET
A public way including any highway, street, road, lane, court, public square, alley or other
passageway.
TENANT
Any person in possession of a whole or a part of improved property who is not an owner.
§ 209-5. Connection required; disposition of wastes.
The owner of any improved property situate in the municipality and abutting on, adjoining or
adjacent to, any Street, easement or right-of-way in which there shall have been constructed a
sanitary sewer forming part of the sewer system, where said property is accessible thereto and
any part of the principal building constructed on such improved property is within 150 feet of such
sewer, shall at his own expense install suitable sanitary facilities and service lines therein and
connect such facilities directly with such sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article
within 90 days after the date of official notice from this municipality so to do, which notice shall
have been given by personal service or as otherwise provided or permitted by law. In the event
any owner of any such improved property shall refuse or neglect to connect such property with
such sewer within said ninety-day period, the municipality or its duly authorized agent (the
Authority), or the agents of the municipality or said Authority, may enter upon such property and
construct such connection. In such case, the proper officials of this municipality shall, upon
completion of the work, send an itemized bill of the cost of construction of such connection to such
owner, which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or refusal by such owner of such
property to pay said bill within 30 days thereafter, it shall be the duty of said officials of this
municipality to cause a municipal lien for said construction to be filed, the same to be subject in all
respects to the general law provided for the filing and recovery of municipal liens.
All sanitary sewage and industrial waste from any improved property, after connection of such
improved property with a sewer as required under Subsection A, shall be discharged into a sewer,
subject to such limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be
established by this municipality or by the Authority through the Authority's Rules and Regulations
Concerning Connections to and Use of the Sanitary Sewer System (dated July 1997 and
amended December 20, 2001), the Authority's Specifications for Additions and Extensions to the
Sewer System (dated July 1997), and the Lancaster Area Sewer Authority Industrial Waste
Resolution (dated July 1981 and amended December 1992, May 1996, and September 1997).
It shall be unlawful to discharge or permit the discharge of sanitary or industrial waste or other
polluted water into any natural outlet within this municipality, unless such discharge is pursuant to
a permit issued by, or with the approval of, the DEP.
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, sinkhole or
similar receptacle intended for the disposal of sanitary sewage within this municipality where such
Sewage emanates from any improved property which the owner thereof is required to connect to
the sewer system. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle shall be
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 106/520
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
connected with a sewer at any time. Each such party vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or
similar receptacle shall be abandoned upon the making of such connection to the sewer system
and, at the request of this municipality, shall be cleansed and filled under the direction and
supervision of this municipality; and any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle not so abandoned and, if required by this municipality, cleansed and filled, shall
constitute a nuisance and such nuisance shall be abated as provided by law at the expense of the
owner of such improved property.
There is hereby reserved to the Authority and this municipality the right to refuse to any person the
privilege of connecting any improved property to a sewer, or to compel discontinuance of the use
of any sewer by any person, or to compel the pretreatment of industrial wastes, in order to prevent
discharge into the sewer system of wastes which may be deemed by the Authority, the Authority
Engineer, this municipality or the Municipal Engineer, to be harmful to the sewer system or to have
a deleterious effect on sewage treatment processes or to be injurious to personnel operating the
sewer system.
There is hereby reserved to the Authority and this municipality the right to refuse to any person the
privilege of connecting any private sewer system to the Authority's sewer system unless the
following conditions have been met:
The plans and specifications for such private sewer system have been reviewed and
approved by the Authority prior to construction and such private sewer system has been
constructed in accordance with such approved plans and the standards established by this
municipality and the Authority from time to time for such private sewer system;
The Authority has inspected such private sewer system prior to connection to the Authority's
sewer system and has determined that the private sewer system has been constructed in
accordance with the requirements set forth in this Subsection F; and
The owner of the private sewer system has entered into a written agreement with this
municipality or the Authority agreeing to maintain and repair the private sewer system and
posting such security as this municipality or the Authority, in their reasonable discretion, shall
deem adequate to secure the obligations of the owner of the private sewer system with
respect to the maintenance and repair of the private sewer system.
§ 209-6. Permits to make connections.
No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use, alter or disturb in any
manner any sewer or the sewer system without first making application for and obtaining a permit,
in writing, from the Authority.
Application to the Authority for a permit required under this article shall be made by the owner of
the improved property to be served in such form as may be prescribed by the Authority. The
application shall be accompanied by the required connection and/or tapping fee required by the
Authority.
No person other than this municipality, the Authority, or their agents, shall make or cause to be
made the connection of any improved property with a lateral sewer until such person shall have
fulfilled each of the following conditions:
Such person shall have notified the Authority of the desire and intention to connect to a lateral
sewer;
Such person shall apply for and obtain a permit as required by this article;
Such person shall have given the Authority at least 24 hours' notice of the time when such
service line is to be connected and such connection made so that the Authority, as the agent
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 107/520
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
A.
of this municipality, may inspect the service line, the work of connection and perform
necessary testing.
All costs and expenses of construction of a service line and all costs and expenses in connection
of such service line to a lateral sewer shall be borne by the owner of the improved property to be
connected, and such owner shall indemnify and save harmless the Authority and this municipality
from all loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of the
construction of a service line or the connection of a service line to a lateral sewer.
Whenever the surface of any public street, sidewalk or cartway is disturbed by the construction of
a service line, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant for connection to obtain street opening
permits from this municipality, or highway occupancy permits from the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation. Unless otherwise required, all surfacing materials must be restored in kind,
thickness and construction to the satisfaction of the Authority.
§ 209-7. Construction of service lines and connection to lateral
sewers and sewer system.
Service lines and connections to lateral sewers and connections to the sewer system shall be
constructed in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the Authority.
No service line or connection to a lateral sewer or connection to the sewer system shall be
covered until the same has been inspected and approved by the Authority. If any part of a service
line or connection to a lateral sewer is covered before being so inspected and approved, such
service line or such connection shall be uncovered for inspection, at the request of the Authority,
at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property to be served through such service
line.
Every service line shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of
the improved property served. Whenever the Authority or this municipality has reason to believe
any service line has become defective, such service line shall be subject to test and inspection.
Defects found upon such inspection shall be corrected as required by the Authority or this
municipality at the cost and expense of such owner.
§ 209-8. Construction of sewers, service lines and connections in
real estate developments.
Any person, individual, builder or developer, desiring or required by law to construct or install sanitary
sewers, lateral sewers and service lines to serve a house or any housing unit within a real estate
development prior to construction or installation, shall make proper written application to the Authority
for a special permit, pursuant to rules and regulations of the Authority applicable thereto.
§ 209-9. Restrictions on use of sewer system.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or Tenant of improved property located in the municipality to
discharge or cause to be discharged into the sewer system any of the following: stormwater;
surface drainage; ground drainage; roof runoff; subsurface drainage; cooling water; drainage from
tile fields; unpolluted process waters; and any other substance other than sanitary sewage or
allowable industrial waste. Without limiting the foregoing, this provision makes it illegal for any
owner or tenant of improved property to use a sump pump, gutter, downspout, or other device to
conduct stream, storm, roof, ground, or surface water into the sewer system; provided however,
floor drains or cellar drains may be connected to the service line or sewer system.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 108/520
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
Stormwater, industrial cooling water, unpolluted process waters and all other unpolluted drainage
shall be discharged into specifically designated storm sewers, if available, or to a natural outlet
approved by the Authority Engineer or the Municipal Engineer.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sewage into the sewer system which
shall contain any substances or possesses characteristics in violation of rules and regulations
promulgated by the Authority.
The admission into the sewer system of any polluted water, sanitary sewage or industrial waste
containing any of the substances or possessing the characteristics referred to in Subsection C
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Authority Engineer. Where necessary, the owner
of the property or premises producing such waters or wastes shall provide, at his own expense,
such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce objectionable characteristics or
constituents to within the maximum limitations provided for in the rules and regulations of the
Authority or to control the quantities or rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Construction
drawings, specifications and other pertinent information relating to the proposed preliminary
treatment facilities shall be prepared by the owner, at his expense, and shall be submitted for the
approval of the Authority Engineer, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until
said approval is obtained in writing. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided, the same
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at his
expense. In lieu of introducing untreated or partly treated polluted waters or industrial waste into
the sewer system, the owner of the premises producing such wastes may construct and operate,
at his expense, private waste treatment facilities with the effluent discharged to a natural outlet,
provided such facilities are constructed and operated in compliance with all requirements of the
DEP. Where private waste treatment facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously
in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at his expense.
It shall be unlawful for any plumber or any other person to install or connect, or permit to be
installed or connected to the service line or any part of the sewer system, any device or system
designed to discharge any substance other than sanitary sewage or allowable industrial waste into
the sewer system. Without limiting the foregoing, this provision makes it illegal for any plumber or
other persons to install or connect or permit to be installed or connected, a sump pump, gutter,
downspout or other device to conduct stream, storm, roof, ground, or surface water into the sewer
system; provided, however, floor drains and cellar drains may be connected to the service line or
sewer system.
Any owner or Tenant of improved property located in the municipality who currently has any roof
drains or downspouts connected to the service line or sewer system shall have said roof drains or
downspouts disconnected within 30 days of the effective date of this article.
Owners or tenants of improved property located in the municipality shall disconnect or cause to be
disconnected any sump pump connected to the service line or sewer system within 30 days of the
effective date of this article, without being subject to the penalties provided for in this article. At the
expiration of the thirty-day period, any owner or tenant of improved property who has, maintains,
or permits a sump pump to be connected to the service line or sewer system shall be subject to
the penalties provided for by this article.
§ 209-10. Appointment of Sewer Authority as agent of
municipality.
The Authority is hereby designated and appointed as the agent of this municipality for the purpose
of adopting or promulgating rules and regulations for the use of the sewer system and connection
thereto and receiving all applications for permits required under the provisions of this article,
designating place of connection, establishing rules and regulations on the materials and
construction of the sewer system, private sewer system, service line, house connection, lateral
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 109/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
B.
C.
sewer, and service connection, and carrying out all inspections, observations, measurements,
samplings and testing required or permitted hereunder.
The municipality specifically adopts and expressly incorporates by reference in their entirety, as
though set forth in full herein:
[Amended 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-3; 12-13-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05; 5-9-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-02]
Chapter 40, Definitions, of LASA's Rules and Regulations dated, as amended and restated,
September 23, 2010;
Chapter 60, Industrial Waste, of LASA's Rules and Regulations concerning Industrial Waste
dated, as amended and restated, September 23, 2010; and
Chapter 249, Article I, of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Lancaster, as amended, dated
September 25, 2007.
§ 209-11. Power and authority of inspectors.
The Authority Engineer and other duly authorized representatives or employees of the Authority and of
this municipality bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted, at all reasonable
times, to enter upon any premises connected or about to be connected or required to be connected to
the sewer system for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this article. The Authority Engineer and other duly authorized
representatives or employees of the Authority and of this municipality bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted, at all reasonable times, to enter any private sewer system connected
or about to be connected or required to be connected to the sewer system for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing.
§ 209-12. Protection of sewer system from damage.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently damage, destroy, deface, block or otherwise tamper
with any sewer or any other structure or equipment which is part of the sewer system.
§ 209-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, other than §§ 209-9E and 209-12, shall
be served with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender, within the period of time stated in such
notice, shall permanently cease all violations. Any person who shall continue any such violation
beyond such time limit or otherwise violate this article shall be liable, upon summary conviction, for
a first offense and, upon summary conviction, for each subsequent offense, to a fine of not more
than $1,000 for each violation, together with costs of prosecution in each case. Each day a
violation shall continue shall be deemed and shall be taken to be a separate offense and shall be
punishable as a separate violation.
Any person who shall violate any provision of § 209-9E or § 209-12 shall, upon summary
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each violation, together with costs of
prosecution in each case and in default of payment, to undergo imprisonment not exceeding 30
days.
Fines and costs imposed under the provisions of this article shall be enforceable and recoverable
in the manner at the time provided by applicable law.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 110/520
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, in addition to becoming liable for a fine
and costs of prosecution, shall be liable to the Authority for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the Authority by reason of such violation.
§ 209-14. Declaration of purpose.
It is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this municipality.
Article III. Prohibited Connections
[Adopted 7-27-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-4]
§ 209-15. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this
article shall be as follows:
APPROVED PROPERTY
Any property within this municipality upon which there is erected any structure intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial waste shall be or may be discharged which is
connected to a sewer line comprising a part of the sewer system of the City of Lancaster,
Pennsylvania and/or the City of Lancaster Sewer Authority.
AUTHORITY
The City of Lancaster Sewer Authority and/or the City of Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
AUTHORITY ENGINEER
An engineer retained or employed by the Authority, including any authorized member of the staff
of such engineer.
LATERAL SEWER
That part of the sanitary sewer system extending from sewer to the curbline or if there shall be no
curbline, to the edge of the street abutting the property affected or, if no such lateral shall be
provided, then "lateral sewer" shall mean that portion of, or place in, a sanitary sewer which is
provided for the connection of any service line.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER
An engineer retained or employed by the municipality or any authorized member of the staff of
such engineer.
MUNICIPALITY
The Township of Lancaster, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, and its duly authorized
representatives or agents.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any property situated in
the municipality, which is connected to a sewer line comprising a part of the sewer system of the
City of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and/or the City of Lancaster Sewer Authority.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, corporation or other group.
SANITARY SEWER
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 111/520
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
A.
A sewer which is part of the sewer system and which carries sanitary sewage and/or industrial
waste permitted to be discharged into the sewer system and to which sewer storm, surface or
ground waters may not be intentionally admitted.
SERVICE LINE
That part of the main house drain or sanitary sewage line extending from a point five feet outside
the outer building wall or foundation wall to its connection with the lateral sewer.
SEWER
Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sanitary sewage system and used or usable for
sewage collection or transportation purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM
All facilities as of any particular time for collecting, pumping, transporting, treating and disposing of
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, situate or adjacent to this municipality and owned by the
Authority.
STREET
A public way including any highway, street, road, lane, court, public square, alley or other
passageway.
TENANT
Any person in possession of a whole or a part of improved property who is not an owner.
§ 209-16. Prohibited connections.
No owner or tenant of improved property located in the municipality shall connect or cause to be
connected or allow to remain connected any sump pump, cellar drain, roof or floor drain to the
service line, lateral sewer, or any part of the sanitary sewage system.
No plumber or other person who performs plumbing services shall connect a sump pump, roof and
floor drain or cellar drain to the service line or any part of the sanitary sewer system.
§ 209-17. Power and authority of Inspectors.
The Township of Lancaster, Pennsylvania does hereby appoint the City of Lancaster Sewer
Authority, the City of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and their engineers, executive directors, or other
duly authorized representatives or employees, as agents of this municipality for the purpose of
inspecting, enforcing and maintaining the provisions, including the penal provisions of this article.
The Authority Engineer, the Authority Executive Director and other duly authorized representatives
or employees of the Authority and of this municipality bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted, at all reasonable times, to enter upon any premises connected or about to be
connected or required to be connected to the sewer system for the purpose of inspection and
observation for purposes of determining compliance with this article.
§ 209-18. Violations and penalties.
Violation of § 209-16A.
Any person who shall violate § 209-16A of this article shall be served with a written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender, within the period of time stated in such notice, shall
permanently cease the violation.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 112/520
(2)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
Any person who shall continue any such violation beyond such time limit or otherwise violate
this article shall be liable, upon summary conviction, for a first offense and, upon summary
conviction for each subsequent offense, to a fine of not more than $100 for each violation,
together with costs of prosecution in each case. Each day a violation shall continue shall be
deemed and shall be taken to be a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
Any person who shall violate any provision of § 209-16B shall be guilty of a summary offense and,
upon summary conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $300 for each violation, together
with costs of prosecution in each case.
Fines and costs imposed under the provisions of this article shall be enforceable and recoverable
in the manner at the time provided by applicable law.
Any person violating any provisions of this article, in addition to being liable for a fine and costs of
prosecution, shall be liable to this municipality for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by
this municipality by reason of such violation.
§ 209-19. Declaration of purpose.
It is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this municipality.
Article IV. Holding Tanks
[Adopted 9-23-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-4]
§ 209-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and maintenance of holding tanks
designed to receive and retain sewage whether from residential, commercial, or industrial uses and it
is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this Township.
§ 209-21. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article
shall be as follows:
BOARD
The Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township.
HOLDING TANK
A watertight receptacle which receives and retains sewage and is designed and constructed to
facilitate ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site. Holding tanks include but are not limited
to the following:
CHEMICAL TOILET
A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a holding tank.
RETENTION TANK
A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by a water-carrying system.
VAULT PIT PRIVY
A holding tank designed to receive sewage where water under pressure is not available.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 113/520
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property within the Township upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous
or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any property located in the
Township.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation or other group or entity.
SEWAGE
Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement or other discharge from the
bodies of human beings or animals and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or
inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation.
TOWNSHIP
Lancaster Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
§ 209-22. Rights and privileges granted.
The Board is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the Township the control and
methods of holding tank sewage disposal and the collection and transportation thereof.
§ 209-23. Rules and regulations.
The Township is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and regulations concerning
sewage which it may deem necessary from time to time to effect the purposes herein. In absence of
adoption of rules and regulations by the Board relative to the administration of this article, the rules and
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or any successor
department or administrative agency of the state pertaining to the conditions justifying use of holding
tanks, the method of construction and installation of said tanks, the method of maintenance of holding
tanks and all other matters relative to the use of holding tanks within municipalities shall be considered
and deemed rules and regulations of the Township and shall be applied by the Township in the
administration of this article.
§ 209-24. Rules and regulations to be in conformity with
applicable law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Township shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
article, all other ordinances of the Township, and all applicable laws, rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 209-25. Rates and charges.
The Township shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect rates, assessments, and
other charges in the area served by its facilities at reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by
applicable law.
§ 209-26. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 114/520
A.
B.
A.
B.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property utilizing a holding tank
shall be done solely by or under the direction and control of the Township, and the disposal thereof
shall be made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The owner shall be required to furnish to the
Township a written contract entered into between the owner and the hauler, noncancelable in form,
whereby the hauler agrees to receive and dispose of the sewage at site or sites acceptable to the
Township and not to cancel or terminate the contract except upon at least 90 days' written notice to the
Township of intention to terminate.
§ 209-27. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this or any ordinance of this Township, the
provisions of any applicable law, and the rules and regulations of the Township and any
administrative agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Permit only the Township or, if the Township so directs, a person under contract with the property
owner to collect, transport, and dispose of the contents therein.
§ 209-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of § 209-27 shall, upon conviction thereof by summary
proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and costs and, in default of said fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment in the Lancaster County Prison for a period not to exceed five
days.
§ 209-29. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of § 209-27 above shall
constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the Township by either seeking appropriate equitable or
legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
Article V. Illicit Connections and Illegal Discharges
[Adopted 6-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-2]
§ 209-30. Purpose/intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
Lancaster Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania through the regulation of nonstormwater
discharges into the storm drainage or storm sewer system of Lancaster Township, to the maximum
extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling
the introduction of pollutants into the Lancaster Township's separate storm drainage or sewer system
(the "MS4") in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are:
To regulate the contribution of pollutants into Lancaster Township's separate storm drainage or
storm sewer system ("MS4") through stormwater discharges by any user;
To prohibit illicit connections and illegal discharges into the Lancaster Township's separate storm
drainage or sewer system ("MS4");
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 115/520
C.
A.
B.
To establish and adopt rules, regulations and the authority to perform all inspections, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
§ 209-31. Definitions.
As used in the article, terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different meaning clearly
appears from the context:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
Employees, representatives or designees of Lancaster Township who are designated and
authorized by the Board of Supervisors of the Township to enforce this article.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS)
Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
designed to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into stormwater,
receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices,
operating procedures, and practices designed to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
COMMONWEALTH
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
Activities subject to NPDES construction permits, these include construction projects resulting in
land disturbance of five acres or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its
quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or
significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
general welfare, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE
Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge into the storm drainage system, except as
otherwise permitted in § 209-37 of this article.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS
Shall be either of the following:
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal
discharge to enter the storm drainage system, including but not limited to any conveyances
which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash
water to enter the storm drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage system
from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use into the storm
drainage system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and
approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 116/520
A.
B.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY
Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT
A permit issued by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency [or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)] that authorizes the discharge of pollutants into waters of
the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide
basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE
Any discharge into the storm drainage system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
OWNER
Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have:
Legal title to any premises, dwelling, dwelling unit or commercial or industrial establishment,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
Charge, care, control of any premises, dwelling, dwelling unit, or commercial or industrial
establishment, as a tenant, subtenant, owner or tenant of owner or an executor, administrator,
trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual
owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of the article and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.
PERSON
Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation, public utility, tenant, lessee
or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT
Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to:
paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides,
herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES
Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved including
adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not
limited to the Township's separate storm drainage or storm sewer system ("MS4") and any roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels,
reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER
Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural
precipitation and resulting from such precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by
a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at premises and the actions
to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges into stormwater, storm drainage system, and/or
receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 117/520
A.
TOWNSHIP
Lancaster Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
WATERCOURSE
A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as a stream or creek, having defined beds and
banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WASTEWATER
Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility or
premises.
§ 209-32. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all water or other discharges entering the storm drainage system generated
on any developed and undeveloped lands or premises, unless explicitly exempted by an authorized
enforcement agency.
§ 209-33. Responsibility for administration.
Lancaster Township, through its authorized enforcement agency, shall administer, implement and
enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized
enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township to
persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of Lancaster Township.
§ 209-34. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or
paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstance shall
be held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or the application of this article.
§ 209-35. Repealer.
Any ordinance inconsistent with any of the provisions of this article is hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency.
§ 209-36. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards;
therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will
be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
§ 209-37. Discharge prohibitions.
Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
storm drainage system or watercourses of the Township, commonwealth or the United States any
materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The
commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge into the storm drainage system is
prohibited except as herein described:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 118/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
The following discharges are exempt from the discharge prohibitions established by this
article: waterline or other potable water sources; flushing landscape irrigation or lawn
watering; diverted stream flows; rising groundwater; groundwater infiltration to storm drains;
uncontaminated pumped groundwater; foundation or footing drains (not including active
groundwater dewatering systems); crawl space pumps; air conditioning condensation;
springs; noncommercial washing of vehicles; natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;
swimming pools (if dechlorinated, typically less than one PPM chlorine); fire-fighting activities;
and any other water source not containing pollutants.
Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to
protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
Dye testing shall be an allowable discharge, but only if a written notification is given to the
authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test.
The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES
permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in
full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws
and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge into
the storm drainage system.
Prohibition of illicit connections.
The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections into the storm
drainage system is prohibited.
This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of initial connection.
A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying
sewage to the storm drainage system or allows such a connection to continue.
§ 209-38. Suspension of storm drainage system access.
Suspension due to illegal discharges or illicit connections in emergency situations. Lancaster
Township, through its authorized enforcement agency may, without prior notice, suspend storm
drainage system discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to
the environment, or to the health, safety or general welfare of persons, or to the storm drainage
system or waters of the Township, commonwealth or the United States. If the violator fails to
comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may
take such steps as are deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm drainage
system or waters of the Township, commonwealth or United States, or to minimize danger to
persons.
Suspension due to the detection of illegal discharges or illicit connections.
Any person discharging into the storm drainage system in violation of this article may have
their storm drainage system access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illegal discharge or illicit connection. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator
of the proposed termination of its storm drainage system access. The violator may petition the
authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates storm drainage system access to a
premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 119/520
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
enforcement agency.
§ 209-39. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to a construction or industrial activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall
comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a
form acceptable to the authorized enforcement agency prior to allowing discharges into the storm
drainage system.
§ 209-40. Monitoring of discharges.
Applicability. This section applies to all facilities and any premises that have stormwater
discharges associated with commercial or industrial activity, including construction activity.
Access to facilities.
The authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities or a
premises subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into premises, the discharger shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to the authorized enforcement agency or its
representatives.
Facility operators shall allow the authorized enforcement agency or its representatives ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and
copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
The authorized enforcement agency and its representatives shall have the right to set up on
any such permitted facility or premises such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's or
premises' stormwater discharge.
The authorized enforcement agency has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's or premises' sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
discharger at its own cost and expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and
quality shall be calibrated on an annual basis to ensure their accuracy. The discharger shall
provide to the authorized enforcement agency copies of such calibration test results.
Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to a facility or premises to
be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner of such facility or
premises at the written or oral request of the authorized enforcement agency and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner of such facility.
Unreasonable delays in allowing the authorized enforcement agency or its representatives
access to a permitted facility or premises is a violation of the NPDES stormwater discharge
permit and of this article. A person who is the operator or owner of a facility or premises with
an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with a commercial or industrial activity
commits an offense if such person denies the authorized enforcement agency or its
representatives reasonable access to the permitted facility or premises for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this article.
If the authorized enforcement agency or its representatives have been refused access to any
part of a facility or premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 120/520
A.
B.
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or that
there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program
designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder or to protect the
public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Township or the
commonwealth, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 209-41. Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce
stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices.
The Township, through its authorized enforcement agency, will adopt requirements identifying best
management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drainage system, or waters of the Township,
commonwealth or United States.
The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at his own
expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the storm drainage system or watercourses through the use of these structural and
nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a facility or premises, which is or may be
the source of an illicit connection or illegal discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of
pollutants into the storm drainage system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid
NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with an industrial or
commercial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the
provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
§ 209-42. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning a facility or premises through which a watercourse passes, or such person's
lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the premises free of trash, debris,
excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the
flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately
owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard
to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 209-43. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding any other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility,
operation or a premises, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, operation or a premises,
has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in
illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drainage system, or waters of
the Township, commonwealth or United States, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure
the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall
notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and
mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within three business days of the phone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner
or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the
actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 121/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
A.
§ 209-44. Enforcement.
Notice of violation. Whenever the authorized enforcement agency finds that a person has violated
a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the authorized enforcement agency
may order compliance by written notice of violation to the owner or responsible person. Such
notice may require, without limitation:
The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
The elimination of illegal discharges or illicit connections;
That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of an affected premises or other property is required,
the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be
completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the owner or violator fail to remediate or
restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental
agency or a contractor selected by the Township and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
owner or violator.
§ 209-45. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement
agency. The notice of appeal to the Township's Board of Supervisors must be received within seven
days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the Board of Supervisors or
its designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The
decision of the Board of Supervisors or its designee shall be final.
§ 209-46. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation
or, in the event of an appeal, within five days of the decision of the Board of Supervisors or its
designee upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the
authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property or premises and are
authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property or
premises. Any costs incurred by the authorized enforcement agency or contractor engaged by it to
abate such violation shall be charged to and be collectible from the owner or violator. It shall be
unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
authorized enforcement agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes
set forth above.
§ 209-47. Cost of abatement of the violation.
Within 10 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the premises will be notified of the
cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The owner may file a written protest objecting to
the amount of the assessment within seven days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 122/520
B.
manner, as determined by the decision of the Board of Supervisors or after the expiration of the
time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the subject
premises and shall constitute a lien on the premises for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall become liable to the Township by
reason of such violation. The assessment may be paid in not more than 12 equal payments.
Interest at the rate of 6% per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 10th day
following the bill for such assessment until paid in full.
§ 209-48. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements
of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the
authorized enforcement agency may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County for a
preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further
violations or compelling that person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
§ 209-49. Compensatory action.
In lieu of the enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the
Township, through its Board of Supervisors or the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a
violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance
workshops, creek cleanup, and the like.
§ 209-50. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement provisions and penalties provided in this article, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to the public health,
safety and general welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or
restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken by means of injunction or other appropriate relief by action at
law or in equity. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 209-51. Criminal prosecution.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with
costs or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day that the violation
continues shall be a separate offense.
§ 209-52. Reimbursement of expenses.
The authorized enforcement agency and Township may recover all attorneys' fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring
expenses.
§ 209-53. Remedies not exclusive.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 123/520
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any
applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement
agency to seek cumulative remedies.
Chapter 215. Skateboards, Scooters and Rollerblades
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 3-12-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 231.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 263.
§ 215-1. Intent and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township finds and declares that the provisions of this chapter
are enacted to establish regulations regarding the operation of skateboards, scooters and rollerblades
on the highways, streets, roadways, sidewalks, public parks, school yards, paths or other public places
within Lancaster Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
§ 215-2. Applicability.
Unless otherwise indicated, all provisions of this chapter shall apply to all skateboards, scooters and
rollerblades, as herein defined, operated or controlled within the jurisdictional boundaries of Lancaster
Township.
§ 215-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ROADWAY
That portion of the highway designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, excluding sidewalks.
ROLLERBLADES
Shoes or boots affixed to two plastic or other synthetic material wheels used to glide or skate over
surfaces.
SCOOTER
A single platform mounted upon two plastic or other synthetic material wheels which is propelled
solely by human power and which has a single bar steering device with which to control the
movement or direction of the scooter.
SIDEWALK
That portion of the highway designated or ordinarily used for pedestrian travel.
SKATEBOARD
A single platform mounted on metal, rubber, plastic or other synthetic material wheels, which is
propelled solely by human power and which has no mechanisms or other device with which to
steer or to control the movement or direction of the platform.
VEHICULAR TRAFFIC
Traffic generated by every device, excluding skateboards, scooters, rollerblades, wagons,
wheelchairs, unicycles, pushcarts, tricycles, and other children's toys, by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, street, roadway or sidewalk.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 124/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
§ 215-4. Rules of the road.
No person shall ride or use a skateboard, scooter or rollerblades upon any highway, street,
roadway, sidewalk, public park, school yard, path or any other public place in a manner that would
obstruct pedestrian traffic or endanger another person's safety, or ride or use a skateboard,
scooter or rollerblades on any highway, street, or roadway in a manner that would impede the
normal flow of vehicular traffic.
No person shall permit a skateboard, scooter or rollerblades to stand upon any highway, street,
roadway, sidewalk, public park, school yard, path, or any other public place where it is an
obstruction or hazard to pedestrians.
No person shall ride a skateboard, scooter or rollerblades, onto or off of any bench, chair, flower
box, retaining wall, stairway, or other public accessory or structure not intended for pedestrian foot
traffic, or intended only for pedestrian foot traffic.
The Lancaster Township Police Department is authorized to erect official traffic control devices on
those highways, streets, roadways or other public places or property where skateboarding,
rollerblading or riding of scooters shall be designated as prohibited.
No person shall operate, ride or use a skateboard, scooter or rollerblades on any highway, street
or roadway where the volume or speed of the vehicular traffic or the width of the roadway renders
the highway, street or roadway unsafe or unsuitable for skateboarding, rollerblading or the riding of
scooters.
Skateboard, scooter or rollerblade operators on sidewalks, highways, streets or roadways shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicular and to all other pedestrian (non-skateboard, -scooter or -
rollerblade) traffic upon the sidewalk, highway, street or roadway.
No more than one person shall operate or ride on a single skateboard or scooter.
§ 215-5. Establishment of regulations.
The Chief of Police or his/her designee is authorized to establish all written regulations necessary to
implement this chapter's provisions, including regulations on posting of signs on private or public
property where the riding of skateboards, scooters or use of rollerblades shall be prohibited.
§ 215-6. Compliance with other laws.
No person shall operate a skateboard or scooter or use rollerblades on any highway, street, roadway
or public alley in Lancaster Township in violation of any traffic ordinance of Lancaster Township or the
law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 215-7. Violations and penalties.
Every person convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $50 and shall be ordered to pay restitution should any damage or injury have resulted from
the act giving rise to the violation of this chapter.
Chapter 221. Soliciting and Canvassing
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 125/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 12-13-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-06. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 221-1. Intent and purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township finds and declares that the provisions of this chapter
are enacted to establish regulations regarding solicitation, peddling and canvassing within Lancaster
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
§ 221-2. Applicability.
Except as otherwise indicated, all provisions in this chapter shall be applied to all solicitation, peddling
and canvassing within the jurisdictional boundaries of Lancaster Township.
§ 221-3. Registration and permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in commercial or business solicitation, peddling and/or
canvassing for the purposes of soliciting orders, sales or subscriptions for any goods, wares or
merchandise, or for the purposes soliciting or obtaining any business or commercial information,
without first having registered with and obtained a permit from the Township.
§ 221-4. Application for permit.
Any person seeking such a permit shall submit a written application with the Township on a form
provided by the Township, containing the following information:
Name, address, telephone number, and contact person for the principal applicant;
The nature of the goods, wares, merchandise or services that are to be sold or distributed;
The proposed method of solicitation and/or operation within the Township, including but not limited
to days and hours of solicitation, peddling or canvassing;
A list of all persons who will solicit or canvass in the Township on behalf of applicant, including
name, address, telephone number, and a general description;
A current photograph to be affixed to the permit for purposes of personal identification; and
Such other and further information as the Township may deem relevant and require from time to
time.
§ 221-5. Identification.
No person shall solicit, peddle or canvass within the Township without possessing a current, valid copy
of the official permit issued by the Township, together with such other identification as may be required
by Township. Such person shall solicit, peddle or canvass only these items, commodities, services or
subscriptions identified in the registration application.
§ 221-6. Exemptions.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 126/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
The following are exempt from the requirement to secure a permit when conducting activities
consistent with their charter and under the protection of the First Amendment of the Constitution of
the United States. However, soliciting funds, selling items, or other similar activities are not exempt
in this requirement for a permit.
Officers or employees of the Township, county, state or federal government, or any
subdivision thereof, when on official business;
Charitable, religious or nonprofit organizations or corporations which have received tax
exempt status under 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), or other similar civic, charitable or nonprofit
organization; and
Representatives of political organizations.
Activities and arrangements having prior consent of the occupant are exempt from the provisions
of this chapter.
No groups or organizations are exempt from the provisions of § 221-8 of this chapter.
§ 221-7. Hours of operation.
Solicitation and canvassing shall only occur within the Township during the following hours:
Monday through Friday from 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Saturday and Sunday 12:00 noon to 8:00 p.m.
§ 221-8. No-soliciting signs compliance.
No solicitor, peddler or canvasser shall contact any residence within the Township that is posted with
signage providing that such contact, solicitation or canvassing is not desired by the resident thereof.
§ 221-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine for not more than $500
for each violation. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 221-10. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective five days after the date of passage of this chapter.
§ 221-11. Validity.
If any section, subsection, sentence, or clause of this chapter is held, for any reason, to be invalid,
such decision or decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
Chapter 222. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 127/520
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 105.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 121.
Dumps and dumping — See Ch. 136.
Vector control — See Ch. 258.
Article I. Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 12-11-1972 by Ord. No. 1972-3]
§ 222-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Solid Waste Management Ordinance."
§ 222-2. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that this municipality accepts the responsibility for the collection, transportation,
processing and disposal of solid wastes within its boundaries and, for that purpose, declares that this
article is to coordinate and to regulate the storage, collection, transportation, processing and disposal
of all solid waste materials in order to protect the public safety, health and welfare of this municipality.
§ 222-3. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
BULK CONTAINER
A container not intended to be moved or, if moved, transported by vehicle for purposes of
disposal.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Businesses such as offices, stores, markets, theaters, hospitals and other institutional buildings.
GARBAGE
All table refuse, animal and vegetable matter, offal from meat, fish and fowls, fruits, vegetables
and parts thereof, and other articles and materials ordinarily used for food which have become
unfit for such use or which are for any reason discarded.
PERSON
Every natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or institution.
REFUSE or SOLID WASTE
A general term and shall mean all matter and materials which are discarded or rejected by the
owners or producers thereof as offensive or useless, or which by their presence or accumulation
may injuriously affect the health, comfort and safety of the community; it shall include ashes,
garbage, rubbish and other refuse materials, but exclude human body waste.
RUBBISH
Leaves, branches, trees, sawdust, chips, shavings, wood, woodenware, paper, printed matter,
boxes, leather, rags, grass, straw, manure and all solid combustible matter not included in this
section under the term "garbage."
VECTOR
An insect or other organism that transmits a pathogenic fungus, virus, etc.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 128/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
[1]
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
§ 222-4. Responsible agency.
The governing body of this municipality shall be responsible for all aspects of solid waste management
within the municipality; except, however, that this governing body may, by official act, designate along
with adjoining municipalities a common responsible agency to function on its behalf.
§ 222-5. Functions and powers of responsible agency.
The responsible agency shall have the following functions and powers:
Regulate and control the collection, storage, transportation, processing and disposal of all solid
waste materials in accordance with a plan approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
Cooperate with other local units of government in close proximity and with appropriate private
organizations in carrying out its duties under this article.
Adopt such rules, regulations, standards and procedures as shall be necessary to conserve the
air, water and land resources of the municipality, protect the public health, prevent public
nuisances, and enable it to carry out the purpose and provisions of this article.
Issue permits and orders and conduct such inspections as may be necessary to implement the
provisions of this article or to delegate to proper persons or organizations such power.
To contract with any person, other municipality, or organization to carry out their responsibilities for
all or any part of the collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid wastes.
§ 222-6. General storage practices.
The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the attraction, harborage or
breeding of insects or rodents and to eliminate conditions harmful to public health or which create
safety hazards, odors, unsightliness and public nuisances.
A sufficient number of containers shall be provided to contain all waste materials generated during
periods between regularly scheduled collection as may be necessary to meet the requirements of
Subsection A of this section.
All storage practices shall conform to the rules and regulations promulgated under the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act[1] or this article, whichever is more strict.
Editor's Note: 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 222-7. Individual containers and bulk containers.
Individual containers utilized for the storage of solid waste at household and other premises shall
have the following physical characteristics:
Constructed of durable, watertight, rust-resistant material having a close-fitting lid and
handles to facilitate collection.
Containers for residences shall be of not less than 20 gallons nor more than 35 gallons in
capacity, except that one container per residence under the minimum size will be permitted.
Containers for commercial establishments shall not exceed 40 gallons in capacity.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 129/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
Methods of use of individual containers.
Containers shall not be filled so that the lid cannot fit properly.
The area around the containers shall be kept clean (including bulk containers).
The accumulation or residue of liquids, solids or a combination thereof shall not be permitted
on the bottom or sides of containers.
Bulk containers shall conform to all requirements for individual containers except size.
§ 222-8. Disposable containers.
Disposable containers such as paper and polyethylene bags shall be acceptable for storage of solid
waste provided the following conditions are met:
Only those bags specially designed for storage and collection shall be used.
Bags shall be protected against precipitation, animal damage and overloading to prevent littering
or attracting of vectors.
Bags shall have a holding strength capable of withstanding stresses until they are collected.
Bag openings shall be securely closed prior to setting out for collection.
§ 222-9. Preparation of refuse.
All refuse shall be drained free of liquids before storage.
Garbage shall be wrapped in paper or similar material.
All cans, bottles or other food containers shall be rinsed free of food particles and drained before
storage.
Rubbish shall be placed in approved containers or cut and baled, tied bundles, stacked or
packaged so as not to exceed 48 inches in length and 50 pounds in weight, where possible.
§ 222-10. Storage of refuse.
Each householder, commercial establishment or person having refuse, shall provide himself with
approved refuse containers and shall place and keep all refuse therein; except for wastes of
nondecomposable nature and bulky items (examples: bundled newspapers, magazines, packing
cases and materials, junk automobiles, machinery, tree prunings, yard trimmings, etc., which shall
be stored in tightly secured bundles of such size to be readily handled at time of collection and so
as to minimize litter.
Bulky items shall be stored so that collection of water and harborage of rodents are prevented.
Containers shall be stored on the owner's property.
§ 222-11. General collection practices.
Solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent public health hazards, safety
hazards and nuisances.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 130/520
[1]
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
All collection practices shall conform to the rules and regulations promulgated under the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act[1] or this article, whichever is more strict.
Editor's Note: 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
In the event this municipality contracts with other parties for collection, the practice of such other
party shall conform to this article.
§ 222-12. Place of collection.
Refuse containers shall, for the purpose of collection, be placed at ground level and be made
readily acceptable to the collector. They shall be placed at the curb or curbline at such time as
shall be designated for collection.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, householders, commercial establishments or
other persons may, by contract with collectors, be permitted to place containers at agreed places
upon their premises.
§ 222-13. Frequency of collection.
Refuse shall be collected in accordance with the following schedule, and in the event this municipality
has not made a contract for a collection, it shall be the duty of the producer of the refuse to make
arrangements to have his refuse collected in accordance with this schedule:
A minimum of once weekly throughout the year.
Hotels, restaurants, institutions and commercial establishments shall have daily collection in the
event the refuse contains any substantial amount of decomposable material.
§ 222-14. Permits for collectors.
No person shall collect, remove, haul, or convey any refuse other than that produced by himself
through or upon any of the streets or alleys of this municipality or dispose of the same in any manner
or place without obtaining a permit for each vehicle so used from the responsible agency or its
designee.
Refuse may be disposed of on premises owned or leased by the producer of the refuse provided it
is done in a safe, sanitary and nuisance-free manner and in compliance with all applicable
ordinances, statutes and rules and regulations.
The fee for such permit shall be $25 per vehicle per year and all permits shall be issued for the
calendar year or such portion thereof as shall remain after the issuance thereof. There shall be no
reduction in the fee for a permit issued after the beginning of the calendar year.
Every person who shall apply for a permit under this section shall state the type or types of refuse
to be collected, the manner of collection, and the place and method of disposal.
No permit shall be granted if any of the items mentioned in Subsection C above shall not conform
to the requirements of this article or any applicable ordinance, statute, rule or regulation.
§ 222-15. Construction of collection and transportation
equipment.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 131/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
Collection and transportation equipment shall be designed and constructed so as to be leakproof,
easily loaded, readily emptied and easily cleanable.
The waste shall be suitably enclosed or covered so as to prevent roadside littering, attraction of
vectors or creation of other nuisances.
All vehicles used for the collection or disposal of refuse shall have enclosed bodies or shall have
the body covered with a tarpaulin or canvas cover.
All vehicles used for the collection or disposal of garbage, or of refuse containing garbage, shall
have watertight, metal or metal-lined bodies of easily cleanable construction, shall be cleaned at
sufficient frequency to prevent nuisance or insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair.
The name of the owner of the vehicle and its permit number under § 222-14 shall be displayed in
a prominent and legible manner on both sides of all vehicles used principally for transportation of
ashes, garbage, rubbish and other refuse materials in this municipality.
§ 222-16. Care and maintenance of vehicles.
Collection and transportation vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 222-17. Special collections.
Bulky items, appliances, furniture and other solid waste which cannot be collected during regularly
scheduled pickups shall be collected as frequently as necessary.
Hazardous materials shall be collected as follows:
Chemicals, poisons, explosives, radiological wastes and other hazardous materials shall not
be collected with regular pickups.
Hazardous wastes shall not be allowed to accumulate in violation of § 222-6.
Collection and transportation of hazardous materials shall be in accordance with the
requirements of state and federal regulatory controls.
§ 222-18. Disposal sites.
All solid waste collected shall be transported to a processing or disposal site approved by the
regulatory agency having jurisdiction.
§ 222-19. Standards and regulations for disposal.
All refuse disposal shall be at a site approved by the Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, except refuse referred to in § 222-14A.
§ 222-20. Prohibited activities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
Deposit, dump, spill, throw, place or bury or permit another to deposit, dump, spill, throw, place or
bury in or upon any parcel of land, lot, street, highway, gutter or in any alley or in any water or
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 132/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
A.
B.
stream or in any quarry or ditch within the limits of this municipality, except as provided for in
§ 222-19, any solid waste material, provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply in the
following situations:
Refuse disposed of on premises owned or leased by the producer of the refuse, provided it is
done in a safe, sanitary and nuisance-free manner and in compliance with applicable
ordinances.
Manure, fertilizer and refuse used as fertilizer in farming or gardening.
Dead household pets interred in places set apart for that purpose.
Soil, earth, sand, clay, gravel, loam, ashes, slate, stones, bricks, plaster, cement, leaves,
branches, trees, sawdust, chips, shavings, wood, grass, straw and corn fodder when used as
fill, provided it is done in a safe, sanitary and nuisance-free manner.
Permit a collector without a permit to collect or remove refuse from a household, institution or
commercial enterprise.
Permit the accumulation or residue of liquids, solids or a combination of such material on the
bottom or sides of containers.
Collect or transport or convey refuse in nonconforming vehicles.
Scavenge any materials delivered and deposited for disposal.
Salvage or reclaim any solid wastes except at a properly permitted facility in which salvage is an
integral part of the operation.
Make refuse available for animal consumption unless such refuse has been heat-treated to kill any
disease agent therein.
Use, maintain or operate an open dump.
Burn any solid waste except in accordance with applicable ordinances and statutes.
Allow any abandoned vehicle to remain more than 48 hours upon any public property or on private
property with an expired vehicle license (salvage yards, specially licensed historical vehicles, and
those vehicles screened from sight shall not be considered abandoned).
§ 222-21. Requirements for permits.
No person shall engage in any disposal or processing of any solid waste material without a valid
permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
No collector shall use any vehicle for collection of waste material without a valid permit from the
responsible agency or its designee.
§ 222-22. Inspection procedures.
All containers, vehicles, equipment, books and records of applicants and permittees are subject to
inspection by the responsible agency or its authorized agents at any reasonable hour without prior
notice.
Vehicles and equipment shall be inspected by the responsible agency or its authorized agent
before being put into operation and during operation.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 133/520
C.
A.
If violations of this article are discovered in the course of these inspections the responsible
agency, on its own or after report to it by its duly authorized agent, may proceed with prosecution
under this article or may petition the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County for an
injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce this article.
§ 222-23. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 3-12-1973]
Any person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a summary offense which is punishable,
upon conviction, by a fine not exceeding $300. Each day of violation is a separate and distinct offense.
Article II. Solid Waste Management
[Adopted 12-22-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-11]
§ 222-24. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
COUNTY
The County of Lancaster.
EXISTING CONTRACT
Any agreement or contract fully executed prior to the effective date of this article for the
collection, disposal or transportation of municipal waste generated within this municipality.
FACILITY
The waste-to-energy incinerator to be constructed by or on behalf of LCSWMA pursuant to
the Plan.
FULL SYSTEM OPERATION or FULLY OPERATIONAL
That date which is 60 days from the date upon which the county and other municipalities
representing in the aggregate not less than 60% of the population of the county, as
determined by the 1980 Decennial Census of the United States, execute the intermunicipal
agreement and enact waste flow ordinances.
LCSWMA
The Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority, its assigns, its successors in
interest, and its predecessor in interest, the Lancaster Area Refuse Authority.
MUNICIPALITY
The Township of Lancaster, a Township of the second class located within the County of
Lancaster, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, cooperative enterprise, trust,
municipal authority, federal institution or agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other
governmental agency or any other entity or any group of such persons which is recognized by
law as the subject of rights and duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine,
penalty, imprisonment or denial or grant of any license, the term "person" shall include the
officers and directors of a corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLAN
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 134/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
The Municipal Waste Management Plan for the county adopted by the county or
municipalities therein and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
POINT OF ENTRY INTO THE SYSTEM
Any delivery site within the system designated by LCSWMA for delivery of regulated
municipal waste.
RECYCLING
The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, yard waste and
other materials which would otherwise become municipal waste.
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste, and other material including solid
or semisolid material resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial, or
institutional establishments and from community activities, and any other solid waste which is
within the definition "municipal waste" set forth in Section 103 of the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act, Act of July 2, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, 35 P.S. § 6018.103 (Purdon
Supp. 1985), and which LCSWMA, the county, or any contractor ("contractor") selected by the
county or LCSWMA to construct and/or operate a resource recovery facility or facilities to be
located within the municipal boundaries of the county by ordinance or regulation is willing to
accept at the facility, but excluding:
Any liquid waste or sludge;
Any waste which is defined by existing or future federal or state law or regulation as
hazardous waste or residual waste;
Infectious waste, pathological waste, or other waste for which treatment or handling
requirements different from those normally applicable to municipal waste apply;
Polychlorinated biphenyls;
Any waste which may be marketable and which is intentionally segregated for purposes
of recycling; and
Materials specifically excluded under applicable county or LCSWMA ordinances, rules or
regulations.
SOURCE SEPARATION
The segregation and collection, prior to delivery to a point of entry into the system, of
materials for the sole purpose of recycling.
SYSTEM
The overall solid waste management and disposal system and every aspect thereof owned or
operated by or on behalf of LCSWMA, including, without limitation, equipment, transfer
stations, resource recovery facilities, and landfills, owned or operated, or to be acquired,
constructed or operated by LCSWMA or any agent, designee or contractor thereof in
implementation of the plan.
TRANSFER FACILITY
Any solid waste facility which is now or hereafter may be established by LCSWMA or the
county for the purpose of accepting solid waste for processing and economical consolidation
for subsequent delivery to the facility or other solid waste disposal site.
All other words and phrases shall have the same meanings as set forth in the Pennsylvania Solid
Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. (Purdon
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 135/520
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
Supp 1985), as it may hereinafter be amended or supplemented by legislation regarding municipal
waste planning.
§ 222-25. Operation by licensed collectors.
Licensing. No person who is not duly licensed by LCSWMA to deliver waste to the county system
may collect or transport municipal waste located or generated within this municipality. This
prohibition shall become effective 120 days from the effective date of this section of this article.
Compliance with rules, regulations and ordinances. In carrying on activities related to solid waste
collection or transportation within this municipality, all municipal waste collectors and all municipal
waste transporters shall comply with all rules, regulations and ordinances pertaining to the
collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste as may be hereinafter enacted by this
municipality or by the county pursuant to a parallel county waste flow ordinance and all rules and
regulations enacted by LCSWMA pursuant to authority given it under 53 P.S. § 315 (Purdon 1974
and Purdon Supp. 1985), as hereafter amended.
Administration. Licenses hereunder shall be issued, revoked and administered by LCSWMA.
§ 222-26. Disposal at designated solid waste processing or
disposal facility.
Delivery to LCSWMA/county sites. All municipal waste collectors and transporters shall deliver
and dispose of all regulated municipal waste collected or generated within the municipality at a
transfer station or disposal facility owned and operated by or on behalf of LCSWMA, subject to
such reasonable regulations for the operation thereof as may be established by the county or
LCSWMA.
Disposal at other sites. Disposal of regulated municipal waste collected or generated within the
municipality may occur at other sites only as permitted by rule, regulation, ordinance or order duly
issued by the county or by the written agreement of the county, LCSWMA, and the municipality.
Disposal of regulated municipal waste at an existing facility from sources reflected on the notice to
the municipality, the county, and LCSWMA as provided in § 222-29C of this article shall be
permitted.
Recycling. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit source separation or recycling or to affect
any sites at which source separation or recycling may take place.
§ 222-27. Regulations.
Compliance with county and LCSWMA regulations. The collection, transportation and disposal of
municipal waste present or generated within the municipality shall be subject to such further
reasonable rules and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the county pursuant
to its waste flow ordinance and such rules and regulations as may be adopted by LCSWMA
pursuant to 53 P.S. § 315 (Purdon 1974 and Purdon Supp. 1985), as hereafter amended,
including, without limitation, regulations governing applications and standards for licensing, fees to
be charged for such licensing, the terms of licenses, procedures, record-keeping, transportation
routes and other matters.
County authorization to adopt regulations. Rules and regulations adopted by the county pursuant
to the parallel county waste flow ordinance to be adopted pursuant to the intermunicipal
agreement described in § 222-34 hereof, shall be deemed rules and regulations adopted under
this article and the county is hereby authorized to adopt such rules and regulations.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 136/520
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
Consistency of regulations with article and other laws. No rules or regulations adopted pursuant to
this article shall be contrary to or less stringent than the provisions of this article, the Plan, the
county waste flow ordinance, the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act or regulations
adopted thereunder, or such other laws, regulations or requirements as may be enacted by the
United States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or the Pennsylvania Environmental Quality Board governing municipal
waste planning, collection, storage, transportation, processing or disposal.
§ 222-28. Existing contracts.
Noninterference with existing contracts. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to
interfere with or in any way modify the provisions of any existing contract in force in the
municipality on the effective date of this article.
New contracts and renewals of existing contracts. No renewal of any existing contract upon the
expiration of the original term thereof and no new contract for municipal waste collection,
transportation, processing or disposal shall be entered into after the effective date of this article,
unless such renewal or such contract shall conform to the requirements of this article, the county
waste flow ordinance, rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, and the terms of licenses
issued thereunder.
§ 222-29. New or expanded private dumps, transfer stations and
landfills prohibited.
Prohibition of private waste processing and disposal facilities. No person other than LCSWMA, the
United States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a county, a municipality, an
authority created by the foregoing, or a person acting on behalf of the foregoing shall use or permit
to be used any property owned or occupied by that person within the municipality as a municipal
waste processing or disposal facility, either for municipal waste generated within the municipality
or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the municipality, the county and LARA.
Recycling. The prohibition set forth in Subsection A of this article shall not interfere with the
operation of any program for recycling.
Existing facilities. The prohibition set forth in Subsection A of this article shall not interfere with the
operation of any privately or publicly owned solid waste facility which has been issued a solid
waste permit before the effective date of this article, provided:
The owner or operator of the facility provides written notice to the county and the municipality
of the facility permit number, address, ownership and existing sources of waste no later than
60 days after the effective date of this article;
The facility accepts regulated municipal waste from no sources within the county other than
those then authorized by the facility's solid waste permit and then being accepted, as
reflected on the notice provided the county and municipality pursuant to this section; and
The facility shall not be expanded in capacity, with the exception of facilities owned or
operated by or on behalf of another county, which facilities may expand if such expansion is
consistent with a DEP approved municipal waste management plan.
Notices under this section shall be submitted to the Secretary of the municipality on behalf of
the municipality. The county may by resolution designate LCSWMA or another authority or
agency as the entity which will receive notice pursuant to this section.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 137/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
§ 222-30. Unlawful activities; nuisance.
Unlawful conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
Accumulate or cause to be accumulated municipal waste in an amount greater than 20 tons,
other than waste which has been source separated for the purpose of recycling;
Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of this article, any rule, regulation or
order promulgated hereunder, or any rule, regulation or order promulgated by LCSWMA or
the county consistent with this article;
Process, treat, transfer, or dispose of or cause to be processed, treated, transferred or
disposed regulated municipal waste generated within the municipality at any solid waste
facility other than a solid waste facility owned or operated by or on behalf of the county or
LCSWMA or at an existing solid waste facility as permitted by § 222-29C of this article,
without the express written consent of any municipality within which the facility is located, the
county, and LCSWMA;
Collect or transport municipal waste present or generated within the county without a valid
license for disposal issued by LCSWMA;
Hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with the municipality, the county, LCSWMA or their
personnel in the performance of any duty under this article or in the enforcement of this
article;
Act in a manner that is contrary to the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act,
regulations promulgated thereunder, the Plan, this article, the county ordinance, rules or
regulations promulgated thereunder, or the terms of licenses issued thereunder.
Public nuisance. Any unlawful conduct set forth in Subsection A hereof shall constitute a public
nuisance.
§ 222-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person who engages in unlawful conduct as defined in this article shall, upon conviction thereof, in
a summary proceeding before a District Justice be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and
not less than $150, and, in default of payment thereof, shall be committed to the county jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
§ 222-32. Revocation of license.
Upon finding that any person has engaged in unlawful conduct as defined in this article:
LCSWMA, the municipality, the county may revoke any license issued by LCSWMA to that person
in accordance with § 222-25 of this article; and
LCSWMA may deny any subsequent application by that person for a license pursuant to § 222-25
hereof.
§ 222-33. Injunctions; concurrent remedies.
Restraining violations. In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the municipality, the
county or LCSWMA may institute a suit in equity where unlawful conduct or public nuisance exists
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 138/520
B.
[1]
[2]
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
B.
as defined in this article for an injunction to restrain a violation of this article or rules, regulations,
orders or the terms of licenses promulgated or issued pursuant to this article. In addition to an
injunction, the Court may impose penalties as authorized by § 222-31 hereof and revoke any
licenses as authorized by § 222-32 hereof.
Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this article shall be deemed
concurrent. The existence or exercise of any remedy shall not prevent the municipality, the county
or LCSWMA from exercising any other remedy provided by this article or otherwise provided at
law or equity.
§ 222-34. Intermunicipal agreement.
Entry into intermunicipal agreement. In order to implement the intent and terms of this article, the
municipality, pursuant to the authority of the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act of July 12,
1972, No. 180, codified at 53 P.S. §§ 481 to 490[1] (Purdon 1974 and Purdon Supp. 1984) and
Article IX, Section 5, of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, hereby enters into
the Intermunicipal Joint Cooperation Agreement between this municipality, the county, and other
municipalities within the County of Lancaster, which is attached hereto as Exhibit A[2] and
incorporated herein, together with such changes consistent with this article, if any, as may be
approved by the officials of the parties executing the same, such execution to be conclusive
evidence of such approval ("intermunicipal agreement").
Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. §§ 481 to 490 were repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177,
§ 2a. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
Terms and implementation of intermunicipal agreement. As more fully set forth in the
intermunicipal agreement and this article:
Conditions and terms of agreement. In the agreement:
The county agrees to arrange for the provision of municipal waste disposal facilities for
the economical and environmentally sound disposal of municipal waste generated within
the participating municipalities; to coordinate recycling activities and marketing; and to
assure continuing municipal waste planning for the county and the participating
municipalities by entering into an agreement with LCSWMA;
The county and participating municipalities representing, in the aggregate, not less than
60% of the population of the county each agree to enact a waste flow ordinance in a form
substantially similar to this article and to assure otherwise that all acceptable municipal
solid waste be delivered to the county system;
The county agrees to enact rules and regulations; to cause LCSWMA to enact additional
rules and regulations and to administer a licensing program; and to enforce this article
and the parallel municipal and county waste flow ordinances;
The county agrees to assure reasonable solid waste disposal fees for residents of the
participating municipalities; and
The parties agree to cooperate in the joint enforcement of the intermunicipal agreement
and all ordinances enacted pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement and this
municipality thereby agrees cooperatively to exercise, to delegate to the county, and to
allow delegation of such powers, duties and responsibilities as set forth in the
intermunicipal agreement.
Duration of term of the agreement. The term of the intermunicipal agreement shall commence
upon the date on which the county and other municipalities representing at least 60% of the
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 139/520
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
[1]
population of the county have executed the intermunicipal agreement and shall terminate 40
years following that date, unless terminated earlier for cause.
Purpose and objectives of agreement. The purpose of the intermunicipal agreement is to
provide a mechanism to finance, to construct and to operate a municipal waste disposal
system to serve this municipality and other municipalities within the county; to administer a
countywide recycling program; and to provide continuing municipal waste planning, as more
fully set forth in the recitals to the intermunicipal agreement and this article.
Manner and extent of financing the agreement. Enforcement of this article shall be financed
by the county's general revenues, except insofar as the municipality elects to enforce this
article; administration of this article, the recycling program and planning shall be financed by
LCSWMA with revenues received from operation of the county system; and construction and
operation of the county system shall be financed by debt instruments issued by LCSWMA and
operating revenues.
Organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement. LCSWMA shall be formed
from LARA by amendment of LARA's Articles of Incorporation; LCSWMA shall construct and
operate or arrange for the construction and operation of the county system; and administer
and enforce this article and parallel ordinances adopted by the county and other
municipalities pursuant to the intermunicipal agreement; and the county and the municipality
shall enforce said waste flow ordinances with assistance from LCSWMA.
Management and acquisition of property. All property within the county system shall be
acquired, managed and disposed of by LCSWMA, in accordance with its separate agreement
with the county and the powers and duties imposed upon LCSWMA by law.
Execution. Appropriate officers of the municipality are authorized and directed to execute the
intermunicipal agreement on behalf of the municipality.
§ 222-35. County/LCSWMA operations and charges.
The municipality has been advised by the county that the plan proposes to provide for solid waste
processing and disposal facilities which will be operated efficiently and economically by LCSWMA and
in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations, and also that LCSWMA will impose reasonable
charges, which will be uniform among all classes of the users of the plant or plants from participating
municipalities which execute the intermunicipal agreement within 90 days of the date upon which DEP
grants preliminary approval to the plan. Charges may differ for different categories of waste and for
different points of entry into the system.
§ 222-36. Construction.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed, so as best to achieve and to
effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article shall be construed in pari materia with the Act of
July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, known as the "Solid Waste Management Act," 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et
seq. (Purdon Supp. 1985).
Article III. Recycling
[Adopted 4-14-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3[1]]
Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, Recycling, adopted 5-7-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-2.
§ 222-37. Definitions.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 140/520
A.
Any capitalized term, if not defined in this article, shall have the meaning as from time to time set forth
in the LCSWMA Rules and Regulations, which are incorporated into this article by reference. In
addition, as used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACT 97
The Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.S. 380, No. 97, as now or hereafter
amended.[1]
ACT 101
The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L.
528, No. 101, as now or hereafter amended.[2]
ALUMINUM
All food and beverage cans made of the light in weight, ductile and malleable metallic substance
or element commonly known as "aluminum." This description excludes aluminum foil, trays,
plates, and miscellaneous aluminum products.
BATTERY BAGS
Bags which LCSWMA makes available to generators of Municipal Waste and which shall be used
as disposal containers for batteries which are generated in households.
CLEAR GLASS
Clear glass consists only of clear food and beverage containers made of glass, of one gallon or
less capacity, and comprised of the hard, brittle, and transparent or partially transparent substance
produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing soda and lime and/or other chemicals
and substances usually included in the manufacture of glass.
COLORED GLASS
Colored glass consists only of green or brown food and beverage containers made of glass, of
one-gallon or less capacity, and comprised of the hard, brittle, and transparent or partially
transparent substance produced by fusion of silica and silicates or sand containing soda and lime
and/or other chemicals and substances usually included in the manufacture of glass.
COMMENCEMENT DATE
The date upon which the current and subsequent municipal contract collection services begin.
COMMINGLED
Designated recyclable materials which have been segregated from regulated municipal waste but
which have not been separated into different types of recyclable materials, and which have been
placed in a recycling container for the purpose of collection.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES
Events that are sponsored by public or private agencies or individuals, including but not limited to,
fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics, and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more individuals
per day.
COMPOSTING
The process by which solid organic waste is biologically decomposed under controlled aerobic or
anaerobic conditions to yield a humus-like product.
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION WASTE
A portion of Municipal Waste resulting from the construction or demolition of buildings and other
structures, including wood, plaster, drywall, and wall board, metals, asphaltic substances, bricks,
block, and unsegregated concrete. The term also includes street sweepings and Non-Friable
Asbestos Waste. The term does not include the following if they are separated from other Waste
and used as clean fill:
Uncontaminated soil, rock, stone, gravel, brick, block, concrete, and used asphalt.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 141/520
B.
(1)
A.
Waste from land clearing, grubbing, and excavation including trees, brush, stumps and
vegetative material.
CONTRACTOR
The person providing municipal contract waste and designated recyclable materials collection
services under the municipal contract.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD
Unbleached, unwaxed kraft paper that is formed into layers with a fluted medium and
manufactured into shipping boxes and related products.
CURBSIDE
The correct location for the placement of refuse containers and recycling containers for the
purpose of collection by the contractor, which shall be adjacent to the residential unit and no more
than five feet from the public street used by collection vehicles.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Those source-separated recyclable materials designated in § 222-42 of this article.
EXISTING CONTRACT
Any municipal contract for the storage, collection, transportation, processing or disposal of
regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable materials generated or located within the
Municipality which was legally entered into prior to the effective date of this article and when
entered into was legally enforceable.
EXTRA REFUSE CONTAINERS
Refuse containers which are in excess of the number of refuse containers per collection site limit
in the municipal contract.
EXTRA SERVICE TAG
A label which must be affixed to tires, white goods, oversized refuse items, and extra refuse
containers in order for such items to be collected by the contractor.
FACILITY
Any specific site designated or approved by LCSWMA as the specific place or site to which solid
waste or source-separated recyclable materials, or any portion of solid waste or source-separated
recyclable materials, must or may be delivered; or in the absence of a specific site being
designated by LCSWMA, any approved site for the delivery of any category of solid waste or
source-separated recyclable materials.
FARM
A tract of land containing 10 or more acres which is used for agricultural purposes, which
agricultural activities provide the major and primary source of income to the residents of the tract.
GENERATOR
A person who produces or creates any solid waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE
Garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or other wastewater treatment plant, sludge from a
water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility and other discarded material
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from municipal,
commercial, industrial, institutional, mining or agricultural operations, and from community
activities, or a combination of these factors, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or morbidity in either an
individual or the total population; or
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 142/520
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
The term does not include:
Coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act (52 U.S.C.A. §§ 30.51-
30.62);
Treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being
carried on under and in compliance with a valid permit issued under the Clean Streams
Law (35 P.S. §§ 691.1691.1001);
Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage;
Solid dissolved materials in irrigation return flows;
Industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits under Section 402 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.A. § 1342); and
Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of
1954 (42 U.S.C.A. §§ 2011-2394).
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER
Desktop-generated paper limited to white ledger, copy paper, and computer printout (CPO).
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE
A portion of Municipal Waste that would be considered hazardous under Act 97 but for the fact
that it is produced in quantities smaller than those regulated as hazardous waste under Act 97 and
is generated by persons not otherwise covered as hazardous waste generators by Act 97.
Household hazardous waste includes the following materials and other materials of a similar
nature:
Anti-freeze.
Batteries.
Chlorinated hydrocarbons.
Fluorescent light bulbs and other mercury-containing devices.
Gasoline and kerosene.
Grease and rust solvents.
Oven, toilet, and drain cleaners.
Paints, rust preventatives, wood preservatives and stains.
Pesticides, fungicides, herbicides insecticides, rodenticides, roach and ant killers.
Photographic and pool chemicals.
Thinners, solvents, and furniture strippers.
Transmission and brake fluids.
Used oil or other hydrocarbon-based lubricants.
Wood, metal, rug, and upholstery cleaners and/or polishes.
LCSWMA
The Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority, a municipal authority organized and
existing under the Municipality Authorities Act,[3] as amended.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 143/520
A.
B.
C.
LCSWMA FACILITY
Any facility owned or operated by or on behalf of LCSWMA.
MANIFEST
A form supplied by LCSWMA to be completed and signed by each person who collects or
transports solid waste or source-separated recyclable materials and which specifies, inter alia,
The source, type, quantity, and delivery point for the solid waste or source-separated
recyclable materials.
The applicable license number.
Other pertinent information.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT
A property with four or more residential units, including without limitation, apartment complexes,
condominium complexes, retirement homes and mobile home parks, excluding farms.
MUNICIPAL CONTRACT
The agreement between the Municipality and a permitted collector under which collection services
are to be provided to residential units for municipal contract waste and for designated recyclable
materials.
MUNICIPAL CONTRACT WASTE
Those portions of regulated municipal waste which are to be collected and disposed of under this
municipal contract. Municipal contract waste consists exclusively of refuse and oversized refuse
items.
MUNICIPALITY
Lancaster Township.
MUNICIPALITY'S POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
The rules and regulations adopted and revised from time to time by the Municipality which govern
and pertain to the Municipality's recycling program and the on-site collection or storage of
regulated municipal waste within the Municipality. (Reference Resolution No. 2003-05.[4])
NEWSPRINT
Paper that has been used for the production of daily, weekend and special edition publications,
commonly known as "newspapers."
NONPROCESSABLE WASTE
A portion of Municipal Waste consisting of materials which cannot be handled by LCSWMA's
normal processing or disposal methods. Nonprocessable waste includes items greater than six
feet in any dimension such as mattresses, large furniture, and recreational vehicles.
Nonprocessable waste (oversized) may consist of large auto parts, machines, and any other items
deemed appropriate by LCSWMA.
NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS
All commercial, municipal and institutional establishment, all community activities and all farms,
excluding residential units and Multifamily units.
OPEN BURNING
A fire, the air contaminants from which are emitted directly into the outdoor atmosphere and not
directed thereto through a flue.
OVERSIZED REFUSE ITEMS
Refuse which will not fit into refuse containers, but which is not nonprocessable waste, including
small furniture, carpet, portable televisions and the like, but excluding tires and white goods.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 144/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
PERMITTED COLLECTOR
A person/company who is in possession of all pertinent permits and licenses which may be
required by the Municipality and LCSWMA for the collection, storage, or disposal of solid waste or
recyclable materials.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, institution, cooperative enterprise,
municipality, municipal authority, governmental entity or agency, or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTICS
Recyclable Plastics are identified on the bottom of the container and consist of two types of
containers, namely: #1 PETE (such as soda bottles) and #2 HDPE (such as milk, spring water,
and detergent bottles).
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE
A portion of Municipal Waste consisting of organic waste materials, which due to biological
decomposition are, or have a tendency to be, rotten, foul, or odorous, including dead animals and
spoiled foods, but not including sludge.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Any material which would be regulated municipal waste but for source separation and which will
be processed into raw materials or products that are beneficially reused.
RECYCLING
The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, yard waste,
plastics, and other materials that would otherwise be disposed of or processed as solid waste, or
the mechanized separation and treatment of solid waste and creation and recovery of reusable
materials.
RECYCLING CONTAINER
For residential units, the term "Recycling Container" shall refer to the container supplied by the
Municipality. For multifamily units and nonresidential units, the term "Recycling Container" shall
refer to a receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass and has handles of
adequate strength for lifting.
REFUSE
That portion of regulated municipal waste except:
Construction/demolition waste.
NonProcessable Waste.
Putrescible waste.
Household hazardous waste.
REFUSE CONTAINER
A receptacle which is:
Constructed of plastic, metal, or fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for lifting and
having a tight-fitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by vectors.
A polyethylene bag which:
Is specifically designed for storage and collection.
Is protected against animal damage and overloading so as to prevent littering or
attraction of insects or rodents.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 145/520
(3)
A.
B.
Has a holding strength capable of withstanding normal stresses until it is collected. With
respect to residential units, the weight of a refuse Container and its contents shall not
exceed 30 pounds nor shall its capacity exceed 32 gallons.
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE
Any solid waste generated or collected within the Municipality which is garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
establishments and community activities, and any sludge meeting the definition of "residual waste"
or "hazardous waste" from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include designated
recyclable materials or unacceptable waste.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT
Any single-family detached, semidetached or townhouse dwelling, or a dwelling unit within a
multifamily building containing three or fewer dwelling units, excluding farms. When used in this
article or the municipality's policies and procedures, the term "Residential Unit" shall also refer to
any multifamily unit or nonresidential unit that requests and receives approval from the
Municipality to use the collection services provided under the municipal contract.
RESIDUAL WASTE
Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or other Waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and any
sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply treatment facility, wastewater
treatment facility or air pollution control facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term does not
include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act, or treatment sludges from
coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on under and in
compliance with a valid permit issued under the Clean Streams Law.[5]
SCAVENGING
The removal of designated recyclable materials in violation of § 222-46 of this article.
SINGLE STREAM
A system where recyclable materials, commonly fibers and glass, metal and plastic containers,
are collected and processed together.
SOLID WASTE or WASTE
Any waste, including but not limited to Municipal, Residual, or hazardous wastes, including solid,
liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials.
SOURCE SEPARATE or SOURCE SEPARATION
The process of separating or the separation of designated recyclable materials from other solid
waste at the location where generated for the purpose of recycling.
STEEL CANS
The ferrous metal food or beverage containers commonly known as "tin cans."
TIRES
Any pneumatic rubber automobile, truck, or farm implement tire.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE
The following types of solid waste are unacceptable waste unless approved by LCSWMA on a
case-by-case basis:
Chemotherapeutic Waste.
Drums, barrels, buckets, and paint cans unless lids have been removed and interiors are
cleaned and free of any residue.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 146/520
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
Explosives and Ordnance Materials.
Gas cylinders, unless empty and delivered separate from other solid waste.
Hazardous waste.
Infectious/Pathological Waste.
Radioactive Materials.
WHITE GOODS
A portion of regulated municipal waste consisting of large appliances, including the following:
clothes washers, clothes dryers, dishwashers, freezers, refrigerators, stoves, ovens, hot water
heaters, air conditioners, dehumidifiers, furnaces and electrical heaters.
YARD WASTE
All garden residues, leaves, shrubbery, tree trimmings (two inches in diameter or smaller), grass
clippings, and sod.
YARD WASTE BAG
Thirty gallon biodegradable kraft bag provided by the municipality for placement of yard waste.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
Editor's Note: Said resolution is on file in the Township offices.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 222-38. Mandatory recycling.
All persons within the Municipality shall Source Separate designated recyclable materials generated by
such person or generated within a Residential Unit, multifamily unit or nonresidential unit occupied by
such person.
§ 222-39. On-Site collection and disposal.
Each person who owns or occupies a Residential Unit, multifamily unit or nonresidential unit within the
Municipality shall ensure that regulated municipal waste and Designated Recyclable Material
generated at such Residential Unit, multifamily unit or nonresidential unit are collected and disposed of
in accordance with this article, the municipality's policies and procedures, and LCSWMA Rules and
Regulations.
§ 222-40. Residential units.
Collection services for municipal contract waste and for designated recyclable materials shall be
provided to residential units by the contractor. Each person who owns or occupies a Residential Unit
shall prepare designated recyclable materials and municipal contract waste for collection in
accordance with the municipality's policies and procedures. With respect to regulated municipal waste
which is not municipal contract waste, persons who own or occupy residential units shall elect to
provide proper on-site collection and disposal by either themselves delivering such materials to a
facility, or utilizing a permitted collector to collect and deliver such materials to a facility.
§ 222-41. Multifamily units and nonresidential units.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 147/520
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit or Multifamily Unit shall provide proper
collection and disposal for regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials by
utilizing a permitted collector to collect and deliver such materials to a facility. With respect to
municipal contract waste and designated recyclable materials, a person who owns or occupies a
multifamily unit or nonresidential unit may request Municipality approval to receive the services
under the municipal contract.
Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit approved to receive
services under the municipal contract shall comply with the municipality's policies and procedures
established for residential units, and notwithstanding the provisions of § 222-42B and C of this
article, shall Source Separate the recyclable materials designated in § 222-42A.
Each person who owns a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit that does not receive services
under the municipal contract shall:
Provide recycling Containers at easily accessible locations for source separation of
designated recyclable materials.
Provide written instructions to all persons occupying each multifamily unit and nonresidential
unit to ensure that all designated recyclable materials are source separated.
Provide collection and delivery of source-separated designated recyclable materials at a
frequency of not less than once per month.
§ 222-42. Designated recyclable materials.
Each person who owns or occupies a Residential Unit shall Source Separate the following
recyclable materials:
Clear glass.
Colored glass.
Aluminum.
Steel cans.
Plastic.
Newsprint.
Yard waste.
Tires.
White goods.
Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit shall Source Separate the following
recyclable materials:
Clear glass.
Colored glass.
Aluminum.
Steel cans.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 148/520
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
Plastic.
Yard waste.
Tires.
White goods.
Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit shall Source Separate the following
recyclable materials:
Clear glass.
Colored glass.
Aluminum.
Steel cans.
Plastic.
Yard waste.
High-grade office paper.
Corrugated cardboard.
Tires.
White goods.
§ 222-43. Approved haulers.
With respect to municipal contract waste and designated recyclable materials, no person other
than the contractor shall collect, transport, store, process or dispose of such Contract Waste.
With respect to regulated municipal waste, other than municipal contract waste which is generated
at residential units, and regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable materials generated at
multifamily units or Nonresidential units, no person other than a permitted collector shall collect,
store, process or dispose of such waste. (Collection of Leaves/yard waste may be arranged by the
municipality in accordance with the municipality's policies and procedures.) Each permitted
collector that collects or transports regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable materials
generated in any Residential Unit, nonresidential unit, or multifamily unit shall complete monthly
LCSWMA manifests reporting the amount of regulated municipal waste and Designated
Recyclable Material collected in the municipality.
No person who generates, owns or possesses designated recyclable materials or regulated
municipal waste shall, by contract for collection services or otherwise, cause, permit or assist in
the collection, storage, processing or disposal of such Waste by any person other than:
The contractor with respect to municipal contract waste or designated recyclable materials
generated at residential units.
A permitted collector with respect to regulated municipal waste other than municipal contract
waste generated at residential units, and regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable
materials generated at multifamily units or Nonresidential units. (Collection of Leaves/yard
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 149/520
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
A.
waste may be arranged by the municipality in accordance with the municipality's policies and
procedures.)
No permitted Collector who collects or disposes of designated recyclable materials or regulated
municipal waste shall, by municipal contract for such services or otherwise, cause, permit or assist
in the storage, collection, processing or disposal of designated recyclable materials in a manner
which treats such materials as regulated municipal waste, or which is otherwise inconsistent with
source separation or recycling. Any delivery of designated recyclable materials to a LCSWMA
facility, in accordance with the LCSWMA Rules and Regulations, shall be deemed to satisfy the
requirements of this § 222-43D.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 222-43A, B and C above, any person who occupies a
Residential Unit may deliver to a facility the regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable
materials which were generated at such person's residence.
All regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials generated or collected in the
municipality shall be delivered directly to a facility in accordance with the LCSWMA Rules and
Regulations and without any intervening transfer, unloading, processing, sorting, salvaging,
scavenging or reuse of any portion of any load of such regulated municipal waste and designated
recyclable materials from the time of its collection until the time of its delivery to the facility.
Each permitted collector shall collect and deliver, separately to a LCSWMA facility battery drop-off
location, all battery bags placed at Curbside by residential units.
§ 222-44. Illegal dumping and open burning.
No person shall store, process or dispose of any regulated municipal waste or designated
recyclable materials except at a facility. Notwithstanding the foregoing or § 222-42, yard waste
may be composted, to the extent and in the manner provided in the municipality's policies and
procedures, on the property on which such yard waste was generated.
No person shall process or dispose of any designated recyclable materials through Open Burning.
§ 222-45. Collection service fees.
Fees for services provided by the municipality shall be charged to all residential units within the
municipality. The amount of fees and the schedule for payment of fees shall be as adopted by
Resolution from time to time by the Elected Body of the municipality. The municipality's policies and
procedures may provide for the amount of annual fees, dates fees are due, interest and penalties for
late payments, and provisions for municipal liens and attorney's fees for unpaid collection service fees.
§ 222-46. Scavenging.
From the time of placement for collection of any designated recyclable materials, all such designated
recyclable materials shall be the property of the generator or the permitted collector who has
contracted to provide on-site collection as provided in the municipal contract. It shall be a violation of
this article for any person, other than such permitted collector, to collect or pick up, or cause to be
collected or picked up, any such designated recyclable materials. (Collection of Leaves/yard waste
may be arranged by the municipality in accordance with the municipality's policies and procedures.)
§ 222-47. Existing contracts.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair the obligations of any existing contract.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 150/520
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
No renewal or modification of any existing contract, and no new contract for the storage, on-site
collection, processing or disposal of regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable materials,
shall be entered into after the effective date of this article unless such renewal or modification or
new contract shall conform to the requirements of this article and the municipality's policies and
procedures.
No contract that is entered into, renewed, extended, modified or assigned after the effective date
of this § 222-47 shall provide for on-site collection services to be performed after the
commencement date for Contract Waste or designated recyclable materials generated at
residential units. This provision shall not apply to the Contract between the municipality and the
contractor. With respect to any contract which violates this § 222-47C, such contract shall be
deemed void and the hauler that is a party to such contract shall reimburse to the applicable
residential units any funds which have been paid for such on-site collection services and shall not
collect or attempt to collect any funds for such on-site collection services.
§ 222-48. Authorization of municipality.
The municipality shall have the power to issue the municipality's policies and procedures governing all
matters set forth in this article and any other related matters as may be necessary or convenient by the
municipality. The municipality's policies and procedures shall be effective when issued in writing and
signed by the manager of the municipality. The municipality shall have the power to establish record
and reporting requirements, and standards and procedures for the issuance, administration, and
revocation of licenses, as deemed necessary, including without limitation to:
Application procedures, fees, standards and conditions for licenses.
The fixing of a monetary bond, with or without surety, to secure the compliance by any permitted
collector with any such requirements, standards or procedures.
Any other matters deemed necessary or convenient by the municipality. In the event of
suspension or revocation of any license which is issued by the municipality or LCSWMA, the
person whose Collection Permit is suspended or revoked shall refund to each Customer any
prepaid fees.
§ 222-49. Unlawful activity.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, or cause or permit or assist in the violation of, any
provision of this article or any provision of the municipality's policies and procedures. All unlawful
conduct shall also constitute a public nuisance.
§ 222-50. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article or any provision of the municipality's policies and
procedures shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced for each violation to
pay a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment of such fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than three days. Each violation of any provision of
this article or of any provision of the municipality's policies and procedures, and each day that such a
violation shall exist, shall constitute a separate violation and offense.
§ 222-51. Persons liable.
For purposes of the obligations established by this article or the municipality's policies and procedures,
and for purposes of any fine, penalty, imprisonment or other sanction, the terms "person," "Residential
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 151/520
Unit," "multifamily unit" and "nonresidential unit" shall include officers and directors of any corporation
or other legal entity having officers and directors, and refer to and impose joint and several liability
upon both the persons residing in or occupying any such Residential, Multifamily or Nonresidential
units, and the owner, landlord, condominium owners' association, and/or agent of an owner, landlord or
condominium owners' association of such premises.
§ 222-52. Injunctive relief.
In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the municipality may institute proceedings to
restrain any violation of, or to require compliance with, this article and/or the municipality's policies and
procedures.
§ 222-53. Concurrent remedies.
The penalties and remedies set forth in this article are in addition to, not in lieu of, any fines, penalties
or remedies provided in the municipality's policies and procedures. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the municipality from exercising any other remedy provided under this article
or the municipality's policies and procedures or available at law or equity.
§ 222-54. Prior ordinances.
This article No. 2003-03 supersedes all previous ordinances and regulations, specifically Ordinance
1990-02, and any amendments. All previous ordinances and regulations are hereby repealed.
Chapter 229. Stormwater Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 4-14-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 210.
Construction codes — See Ch. 126.
Sewers — See Ch. 209.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 231.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 236.
Water — See Ch. 276.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
229a Appendix A
229b Appendix B
229c Appendix C
229d Appendix D
229e Appendix E
229f Appendix F
Article I. General Provisions
§ 229-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance."
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 152/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 229-2. Statement of findings.
The Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster find that:
Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting from development throughout
a watershed increases flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost
of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater, undermines floodplain management and
flood reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge,
and threatens public health and safety.
A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation of
development and activities causing accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health,
safety, welfare, and the protection of the people of the Township and all the people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides groundwater recharge for water
supplies and base flow of streams, which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of stormwater
controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES).
Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an essential component in
successfully addressing stormwater issues.
Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) can contribute to
pollution of waters of this commonwealth.
Inadequate maintenance of stormwater best management practices (BMPs) causes loss of water
quality, flooding, and other problems.
A program of reasonable regulation of connections and discharges to municipal stormwater
management facilities will be beneficial.
§ 229-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within Lancaster Township by
minimizing the damages described in § 229-2 of this chapter through provisions designed to:
Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations in PADEP Chapter 93,
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at their source by regulating
activities that cause these problems.
Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
Maintain recharge of groundwater to prevent degradation of surface water and groundwater
quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the Township and the
commonwealth.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 153/520
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
[1]
[2]
[3]
A.
Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
Provide proper operations and maintenance of all temporary and permanent stormwater
management facilities and best management practices (BMPs) that are constructed and
implemented.
Ensure consistency and compliance with the recommendations for quantity and quality controls
that are found in "Blueprints An Integrated Water Resources Plan for Lancaster County," including
the "County-wide Act 167 Plan" dated April 2013, revised August 16.
Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and stream beds and prevent scour, aggradation,
degradation, and erosion of stream banks and stream beds.
Provide procedures, performance standards, and design criteria for stormwater planning and
management.
Implement an "illegal discharge detection and elimination program" within MS4-permitted
urbanized areas to address nonstormwater discharges into a municipal separate storm sewer
system.
Promote stormwater runoff prevention through the use of nonstructural BMPs.
Provide a regulatory environment that supports the proportion, density and intensity of
development called for in the Comprehensive Plan, allow for creative methods of improving water
quality and managing stormwater runoff, and promote a regional approach to water resource
management.
Help preserve and protect exceptional natural resources and conserve and restore natural
resource systems.
Promote stormwater management practices that emphasize infiltration, evaporation, and
transpiration.
Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
§ 229-4. Statutory authority.
The Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster enact this chapter pursuant to the Pennsylvania Storm
Water Management Act, Act No. 167 of October 4, 1978 (P.L. 864) (Act 167), Section 680.1 et seq., as
amended;[1] the Second Class Township Code, Act of May 1, 1933 (P.L. 103, No. 69), as reenacted
and amended November 9, 1995 (P.L. 350, No. 60), as amended;[2] the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act, Act No. 166 of October 4, 1978 (P.L. 851);[3] and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq., the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 229-5. Applicability.
With the exception of activities exempted under § 229-33, the provisions, regulations, limitations, and
restrictions of this chapter shall apply to regulated activities as defined in this chapter, including;
Installation and proper operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and
appurtenances thereto.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 154/520
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
D.
A.
B.
All activities that may contribute nonstormwater discharges to the Township's regulated small
MS4.
Discharges from regulated earth disturbance activities.
The following additional activities:
All subdivisions or land developments.
Major or minor land disturbances.
Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
Installation or modification of stormwater management facilities or BMPs or appurtenances
thereto.
Any other activities where the Township determines that said activities may affect any existing
stormwater management facilities or stormwater drainage patterns.
§ 229-6. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans, the issuance of any zoning permit authorizing each disturbance or additional
impervious area, or the commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed until the
landowner or applicant or his/her agent has received written approval of a stormwater management
site plan from the Township or its designee and has received approval from the Lancaster County
Conservation District of a written erosion and sediment pollution control plan as specified in PADEP
Chapter 102 (where applicable).
§ 229-7. Repeals and continuation of prior regulations.
Except as otherwise required by law, this chapter is intended as a continuation of, and not a repeal
of, existing regulations governing the subject matter. To the extent that this chapter restates
regulations contained in ordinances previously enacted by the Supervisors, this chapter shall be
considered a restatement and not a repeal of such regulations. It is the specific intent of the
Supervisors that all provisions of this chapter shall be considered in full force and effect as of the
date such regulations were initially enacted. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. It is expressly provided that the provisions of
this chapter shall not affect any act done, contract executed or liability incurred prior to its effective
date, or affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any rights, rule,
regulation or ordinance, or part thereof, or to punish any violation which occurred under any prior
stormwater regulation or ordinance. In the event any violation has occurred under any prior
stormwater regulation or ordinance of the Township, prosecution may be initiated against the
alleged offender pursuant to the provisions of said prior stormwater regulation or ordinance, and
the provisions and penalties provided in said prior stormwater regulation or ordinance shall remain
effective as to said violation.
Any stormwater management site plan pending at the time of the effective date of this chapter
shall be allowed to proceed with revisions, finalization and implementation in accordance with any
ordinance in effect prior hereto.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 155/520
§ 229-8. Severability.
Should any section, provision or part thereof of this chapter be declared invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 229-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or interfere with any existing ordinances or
enactment, or with any rule, regulation, or permit adopted or issued thereunder, except insofar as the
same may be inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, provided that where
this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the use of land, or prescribed larger open spaces than
are required by the provisions of such other ordinance, enactment, rule, regulation or permit, then the
provisions of this chapter shall control. Furthermore, if a discrepancy exists between any regulations
contained within this chapter, that regulation which imposes the greater restriction shall apply.
§ 229-10. Chapter construction.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any
rights or liability incurred, or any permit issued, or any approval granted, or any cause or causes of
action existing prior to the enactment of this chapter.
§ 229-11. Municipal liability.
Except as specifically provided by the Pennsylvania Storm Water Management Act, Act of October 4,
1978, P.L. 864, No. 167, as amended, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., the making of any administrative
decision by the Township or any of its officials or employees shall not constitute a representation,
guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Township of the practicability or safety of any proposed
structure or use with respect to damage from erosion, sedimentation, stormwater runoff, flood, or any
other matter and shall create no liability upon or give rise to any cause of action against the Township
and its officials and employees. The Township, by enacting and amending this chapter, does not waive
or limit any immunity granted to the Township and its officials and employees by the Governmental
Immunity Act, 42 Pa. C.S.A. § 8541 et seq., and does not assume any liabilities or obligations.
§ 229-12. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading or erroneous information
provided by an applicant is void without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work
undertaken or use established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No action
may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Township purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 229-13. Duty of persons engaged in the development of land.
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any landowner or any person
engaged in the alteration or development of land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics
shall implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety, or
other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required to manage the rate, volume,
direction, and quality of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects
health, property, and water quality.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 156/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 229-14. through § 229-19. (Reserved)
Article II. Definitions
§ 229-20. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural,
and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include those of feminine
gender and vice-versa.
The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is intended to
extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, corporation, or any other similar entity.
The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are permissive.
The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed, maintained, or arranged to
be used or occupied."
§ 229-21. Definitions.
Specific terms or words used herein, unless otherwise expressly stated, shall have the following
meanings:
ACCELERATED EROSION
The removal of the surface of the land through the combined action of man's activity and the
natural processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
ACCESS EASEMENT
A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing entry for the purpose of inspecting,
maintaining and repairing stormwater management facilities.
ACT 167 PLAN
A plan prepared under the authority of Pennsylvania's Storm Water Management Act of October 4,
1978, P.L. 864, No. 167, as amended, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., and as may be amended in the
future.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES
The work of producing crops and raising livestock, including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing,
pasturing and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious
areas is not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION
As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of the moving of soil and rock from one
location or position to another; also the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to
be more or less impervious; any land disturbance.
ANIMAL HEAVY-USE AREAS
A barnyard, feedlot, loading area, exercise lot, or other similar area on an agricultural operation
where, due to the concentration of animals, it is not possible to establish and maintain vegetative
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 157/520
cover of a density capable of minimizing accelerated erosion and sedimentation by usual planting
methods. The term does not include entrances, pathways and walkways between areas where
animals are housed or kept in concentration.
APPLICANT
A landowner or developer who has filed an application for approval to engage in any regulated
activities as defined in § 229-5 of this chapter.
BMP MANUAL
The Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as published by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), December 2006, or most-recent version thereof.
BMPs (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES)
Activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater recharge
and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into
one of two broad categories or measures: "nonstructural" or "structural." Nonstructural BMPs are
measures referred to as operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize
stormwater runoff generation resulting from an alteration of the land surface or the contact of
pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs are measures that consist of a
physical device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs
include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale wet ponds
and constructed wetlands, to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian or
forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater
BMPs are permanent appurtenances to the project site.
BUILDING
Any enclosed or open structure, other than a boundary wall or fence, occupying more than four
square feet of area and/or having a roof supported by columns, piers, or walls.
CARBONATE GEOLOGY
Limestone or dolomite bedrock. Carbonate geology is often associated with karst topography.
CISTERN
A reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT
The Lancaster County Conservation District or any agency successor thereto.
CONSERVATION PLAN
A plan written by a National Resources Conservation Service (or any agency successor thereto)
certified planner that identifies conservation practices and includes site-specific BMPs for
agricultural plowing or tilling activities and animal heavy-use areas.
CONVEYANCE
The ability of a pipe, culvert, swale or similar facility to carry the peak flow from the design storm.
CULVERT
A structure with appurtenant works which carries a stream under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM
An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed for the purpose of impounding
or storing water or another fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid. The dam falls
under the requirements of PADEP Chapter 105, Dam Safety and Waterway Management, if any of
the following are true:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 158/520
A.
B.
C.
The contributory drainage area exceeds 100 acres.
The greatest depth of water measured by the upstream toe of the dam at maximum storage
elevation exceeds 15 feet.
The impounding capacity at maximum storage elevation exceeds 50 acre feet.
DEP also PA DEP or PADEP
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or any agency successor to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNEE
The agent of the Lancaster Township Supervisors involved with the administration, review or
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter.
DESIGN STORM
The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event, measured in
probability of occurrence (e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design
and evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN
An impoundment structure designed to manage stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff
and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DETENTION VOLUME
The volume of runoff that is captured and released into the waters of this commonwealth at a
controlled rate.
DEVELOPER
A person, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity, or any responsible person therein
or agent thereof, that undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE
The specific area of land for which a regulated activity is proposed, planned, conducted or
maintained.
DISAPPEARING STREAM
A stream in an area underlain by limestone or dolomite which flows underground for a portion of
its length.
DISTURBED AREA
A land area where an earth disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT
A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater
management, drainage, or conveyance purposes.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not
limited to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavation; embankments; land development;
agricultural plowing or tilling; operation of animal heavy-use areas; timber harvesting activities;
road maintenance activities; oil and gas activities; well drilling; mineral extraction; building
construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA
Slopes greater than 15%, shallow bedrock (located within six feet of ground surface), species of
concern (core habitat), riparian forest buffer, parks and open space, natural communities, interior
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 159/520
forests, one-hundred-year floodplain, forest block, wetlands, and other areas as determined by the
Zoning Officer.
[Amended 9-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-06]
EPHEMERAL STREAM
A transient stream, one that flows for a relatively short time.
EROSION
The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN
A plan which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXISTING CONDITIONS
The initial condition of a project site prior to the proposed regulated activity. If the initial condition
of the site is not forested or undeveloped land, the land use shall be considered as "meadow"
unless the natural land cover is documented to generate lower curve numbers or Rational "C"
coefficients, such as forested lands.
FACILITY DEPTH
For aboveground detention/retention/BMP facilities, the "facility depth" is defined to be the depth
between the bottom invert of the lowest orifice and the invert of the spillway. If there is no spillway,
the top of the berm shall be used. For basins with no orifices or outlet structure, the bottom
elevation of the basin shall be used.
FEMA
The Federal Emergency Management Agency or any agency successor thereto.
FLOOD
A general but temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE
That portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Floodplain Management Ordinance.[1]
[Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT ACT
Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166, as amended, 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq., and as may be
amended in the future.
FLOODWAY
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Floodplain Management Ordinance.[2]
[Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS
Planning and activities necessary for the management of forest land. These include timber
inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets,
logging road design and construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD
A vertical distance between the one-hundred-year design elevation of the water surface at the
emergency spillway, in a condition that assumes the primary outlet(s) are blocked, and the top of a
dam, levee, tank, basin, berm, or diversion ridge.
FREQUENCY
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 160/520
The probability or chance that a given storm event/flood will be equaled or exceeded in a given
year.
GRADE
A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground, specified in percent and shown on plans as
specified herein.
GRASSED WATERWAY
A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant
grasses, used to conduct surface water from cropland.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE
Replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG)
The classification of soils according to their runoff-producing characteristics by NRCS. Soils are
classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is
obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a
list of most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of
the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local
NRCS offices or Conservation District offices. Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from
A to D.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas)
shall include, but are not limited to: roofs, additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage
sheds and similar structures, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface area proposed to
initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious, unless designed and
maintained as an infiltration BMP. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as
impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration.
IMPOUNDMENT
A retention or detention basin designed to retain stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled
rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES
A structure designed to direct runoff into the ground (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, infiltration
trenches, rain gardens, etc.).
INLET
A surface connection to a closed drain; a structure at the diversion end of a conduit; the upstream
end of any structure through which water may flow.
KARST
A type of topography or landscape characterized by features including but not limited to surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface, underground drainage, and
caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.[3]
LAND DISTURBANCE
Any activity involving grading, tilling, digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any
other activity that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land; the erection of a
dwelling or other structure; or the modification, removal, filling, or alteration of an existing
stormwater management facility or drainage easement. Land disturbance activities shall be
classified as follows:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 161/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
B.
Major land disturbance activity:
Any use requiring the submission of a subdivision or land development plan as herein
defined;
Any land disturbance not defined as a minor land disturbance activity or deemed to
qualify as a minor land disturbance activity by the Township;
Any use involving the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse or
existing drainage pattern.
Minor land disturbance activity:
The use of land on an existing lot of record, including subdivided lots or land
developments approved under a major land disturbance activity, provided that:
The use is not within a floodplain area;
No diversion or piping of any natural or man-made watercourse or existing drainage
pattern is involved;
A residential use does not create more than 5,000 square feet of impervious area or
involve the removal of ground cover, grading, filling, or excavation of more than
5,000 square feet, either of which shall be measured on a cumulative basis from
April 14, 2014;
A nonresidential use does not involve the construction of a building or building
addition or other impervious area in excess of 1,500 square feet or involve the
removal of ground cover, filling, or excavation of more than 5,000 square feet, either
of which shall be measured on a cumulative basis from April 14, 2014; and
The use does not require the submission of a subdivision or land development plan
as herein defined.
Any use of the land which, in the opinion of the Township, represents minimal ground
disturbance or impact to the environment.
LANDOWNER
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the holder of an option or contract to
purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is
authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LIMITING ZONE
A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition which is so slowly permeable that it effectively
limits downward passage of effluent. Seasonal high-water tables, whether perched or regional,
also constitute a limiting zone.
LINEAMENT
A fracture on the order of tens of kilometers long, usually extending to the basement below
sedimentary rock.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA)
A method for calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. Open
channels may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP)
Applies when the applicant demonstrates to the Township's satisfaction that the performance
standard is not achievable. The applicant shall take into account the best available technology,
cost effectiveness, geographic features, and other competing interests, such as protection of
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 162/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
human safety and welfare, protection of endangered and threatened resources, and preservation
of historic properties, in making the assertion that the performance standard cannot be met and
that a different means of control is appropriate.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC)
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 1, 1967, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., and as may be amended in the future.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER
A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) which is all of
the following:
Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, township, county, district, association or
other public body (created under state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage,
industrial wastes, stormwater or other wastes;
Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
Not a combined sewer; and
Not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR 122.2.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4)
All separate storm sewers that are defined as "large" or "medium" or "small" municipal separate
storm sewer systems pursuant to 40 CFR 122.26(b)(18), or designated as regulated under 40
CFR 122.26(a)(1)(v).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
The federal government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act, which is
delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NATURAL DRAINAGEWAY
An existing channel for water runoff that was formed by natural forces.
NATURAL GROUND COVER
Ground cover which mimics the infiltration characteristics of the predominant hydrologic soil group
found at the site.
NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE (NRCS)
Previously the Soil Conservation Service (SCS), or any agency successor to the NRCS.
NOAA ATLAS 14
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, United States Department
of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland (2004). NOAA's Atlas 14 can
be accessed at internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
OPEN CHANNEL
A stormwater management element in which stormwater flows with an open surface. Open
channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made drainageways, swales,
streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly full.
OUTFALL
The point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain;
A point source, as described in 40 CFR 122.2, at the point where the municipal separate
storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of this commonwealth.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 163/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
OUTLET
Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or artificial drain.
PADEP CHAPTER 102
Chapter 102 of the regulations of PADEP, 25 Pa. Code § 102.1 et seq. (Erosion and Sediment
Control).
PADEP CHAPTER 105
Chapter 105 of the regulations of PADEP, 25 Pa. Code § 105.1 et seq. (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management).
PADEP CHAPTER 106
Chapter 106 of the regulations of PADEP, 25 Pa. Code § 106.1 et seq. (Floodplain Management).
PARENT TRACT
All contiguous land held in single and separate ownership, regardless of whether:
Such land is divided into one or more lots, parcels, purparts or tracts;
Such land was acquired by the landowner at different times or by different deeds, devise,
partition or otherwise; or
Such land is bisected by public or private streets or rights-of-way, which was held by the
landowner or his predecessor in title on the effective date of this chapter.
Single and separate ownership is the ownership of property by any person, partnership, or
corporation, in which ownership is separate and distinct from that of any adjoining property.
PEAK DISCHARGE
The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.
PENNDOT
The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or any agency successor thereto.
PERVIOUS AREA
Any material/surface that allows water to pass through at a rate equal to or greater than natural
ground cover.
PIPE
A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLAN
The stormwater management and erosion and sediment pollution control plan and narrative.
PLANNING COMMISSION
The Planning Commission of Lancaster Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
PROCESS WASTEWATER
Water that comes in contact with any raw material, product, by-product, or waste during any
production or industrial process.
PROJECT SITE
The specific area of land where any regulated activities in the Township are planned, conducted,
or maintained.
QUALIFIED PERSON
Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 164/520
RATE CONTROL
Stormwater management controls used to manage the peak flows for the purposes of channel
protection and flood mitigation.
RATIONAL FORMULA (RATIONAL METHOD)
A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak flow.
REGIONAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
A plan to manage stormwater runoff from an area larger than a single development site. A regional
stormwater management plan could include two adjacent parcels, an entire watershed, or some
defined area in between. Regional stormwater management plans can be prepared for new
development or as a retrofit to manage runoff from already developed areas.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES
Any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration or development of land
in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff and that are specified in § 229-5 of this chapter.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
Activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
RETENTION BASIN
An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and not released during the storm event. Stored
water may be released from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF
The volume of runoff that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD
The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected
to recur. For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average once every 25 years, or, stated in another way, the probability of a twenty-five-year storm
occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER
A vegetated area bordering perennial and intermittent streams and wetlands, that serves as a
protective filter to help protect streams and wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land uses.
RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER
Edge of woodlands or 35 feet from the top of the stream bank, whichever is greater.
RISER
A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond, that is used to control the discharge rate from
the pond for a specified design storm.
RUNOFF
Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SEDIMENT
Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION
The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated or deposited by the movement of
water.
SEDIMENT BASIN
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 165/520
A barrier, dam, or retention or detention basin located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel,
silt, or other material transported by water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION
The placement, discharge or any other introduction of sediment into the waters of the
commonwealth occurring from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control
measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH
An area of excavated earth filled with clean, loose stone or similar coarse material, into which
surface water is directed for infiltration into the ground.
SHEET FLOW
Runoff which flows over the ground surface as a thin, even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE (SCS)
Now known as the National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS).
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD
A method of runoff computation developed by the SCS (now NRCS) that is based on relating soil
type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter called "curve number (CN)."
SOIL HORIZON
A layer of soil or soil material approximately parallel to the land surface and differing from adjacent
genetically related layers in physical, chemical, and biological properties or characteristics such as
color, structure, texture, consistency, kinds and number of organisms present, degree of acidity or
alkalinity, etc.
SPILLWAY
A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which is used to pass peak discharges
greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the pond.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS
The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25
of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law and the Clean Water Act.
STORAGE
A volume above or below ground that is available to hold stormwater.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD
A reservoir routing procedure based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage), with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and depth.
STORM EVENT
A storm of a specific duration, intensity, and frequency.
STORM FREQUENCY
The number of times that a given storm event occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated
period of years. See "return period."
STORM SEWER
A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys intercepted runoff and stormwater from
other sources, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER
Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT ACT
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 166/520
Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, No. 167, as amended, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., and as may be
amended in the future.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT BMPs)
See "BMPs."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY
Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys,
stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management facilities include,
but are not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, road gutters, swales, storm
sewers, pipes, BMPs, and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN (O & M PLAN)
A plan, including a narrative, to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facilities
in accordance with Article VI of this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT
A permit issued by Lancaster Township after the stormwater management site plan is
unconditionally approved.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
The County-wide Act 167 Plan for Lancaster County for managing stormwater runoff, adopted by
Lancaster County, as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, 32 P.S., P.L. 864, (Act 167) as
amended, and known as the "Storm Water Management Act";[4] also the Act 167 watershed
stormwater management plans for Mill Creek, Little Conestoga Creek, and the Conestoga River.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN
The plan prepared by the applicant or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the particular site of interest according to this chapter.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of
ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land
for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or
easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBWATERSHED AREA
The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which stormwater management criteria have been
established in the stormwater management plan.
SUPERVISORS
The Lancaster Township Supervisors.
SWALE
A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS
See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc)
The time for surface runoff to travel from the hydraulically most-distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland flow time and
flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOWNSHIP
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 167/520
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
A.
B.
The Township of Lancaster, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
USDA
The United States Department of Agriculture or any agency successor thereto.
WATERCOURSE
A stream of water, river, brook, creek, or a channel or ditch for water, whether natural or manmade,
having a defined bed and banks with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED
The entire region or area drained by a watercourse.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH
Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed
water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface and
underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WETLAND
Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs,
fens, and similar areas. The term includes, but is not limited to, wetland areas listed in the State
Water Plan, the United States Forest Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania, the
Pennsylvania Coastal Zone Management Plan and a wetland area designated by a river basin
commission. This definition is used by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(USEPA) and the United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACOE).
Editor’s Note: See Ch. 160, Floodplain Management.
Editor’s Note: See Ch. 160, Floodplain Management.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Subdivision and Land Development.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 229-22. through § 229-25. (Reserved)
Article III. Plan Processing Procedures
§ 229-26. General requirements.
This article sets forth the application requirements for obtaining approval of a stormwater
management site plan. The form of the plans referred to in this article and information required to
be forwarded with such plans shall be as specified in Article IV.
Lancaster Township shall not approve any stormwater management site plan that is deficient in
meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this article,
when a stormwater management site plan is found to be deficient, Lancaster Township may either
disapprove the submission and require a resubmission, or, in the case of minor deficiencies,
Lancaster Township may accept submission of revisions.
§ 229-27. Compliance with Zoning Ordinance and Zoning
Hearing Board decisions.
Whenever the Zoning Ordinance provides that the use proposed by the applicant for a subdivision or
land development approval shall constitute a use by special exception or conditional use, or when a
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 168/520
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
variance from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance is required to develop in accordance with the plan,
the applicant shall obtain such special exception, variance or conditional use approval from the
Township Zoning Hearing Board or Supervisors, as applicable, prior to the submission of the plan. The
plan shall be designed and developed in accordance with any conditions which have been imposed
upon the grant of such special exception, variance or conditional use by the Township Zoning Hearing
Board or Supervisors, as applicable.
§ 229-28. Application and processing requirements.
All applications shall follow these application and processing requirements:
Formal application/submission deadlines. All applications for approval of a stormwater
management site plan shall be made by the applicant filing an application form, to be supplied by
the Township, together with the appropriate plans. The plan shall include studies, reports,
supporting data (including all plans, reports, and correspondence with the Lancaster County
Conservation District), and required filing fee. Applications may be filed with the Township on any
business day; however, the Township Planning Commission or Supervisors will review a plan at a
particular meeting only if the plan was filed at least 15 business days prior to that meeting.
Application requirements.
All plan applications shall include the following:
Two copies of the plan(s). All plans shall be either black on white or blue on white paper
prints and prepared in conformance with the provisions of Article IV of this chapter.
Two copies of all reports, notifications, and certifications which are not provided on the
plan.
Two copies of the application form as provided by the Township.
Filing and review escrow fees in the amounts as specified on the fee schedule adopted
by resolution of the Supervisors and available at the Township Office.
Plans which require access to a highway under the jurisdiction of PennDOT shall include two
copies of the plans prepared to support the application for a highway occupancy permit.
The applicant shall provide the Township with five copies of the most-current plan at least five
business days before the plan is scheduled to be reviewed by the Planning Commission or
the Supervisors.
Applicants are encouraged to schedule a preapplication meeting to review the overall
stormwater management concept with Township staff/engineer. The preapplication meeting is
not mandatory and shall not constitute formal filing of a plan with the Township.
Distribution. The applicant shall submit one copy of the above-required information to the
Township and one copy to the Township Engineer for their respective reviews. The applicant is
responsible for submitting plans to any other agencies such as the Lancaster County
Conservation District, PennDOT, PADEP, etc., when permits from these agencies are required.
Initial application. The Township staff shall have seven business days from the date of submission
of an application to check the plans and documents to determine if on their face they are in proper
form and contain all information required by this chapter. If defective, the application shall be
returned to the applicant with a statement explaining the reason(s) of rejection, within 12 business
days following the date of submission by the applicant; otherwise, it shall be deemed accepted for
filing as of the date of submission. Acceptance for filing shall not, however, constitute a waiver of
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 169/520
E.
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
F.
any deficiencies or irregularities. Under this section, the applicant may appeal a decision by the
Township staff to the Supervisors.
Amendments or corrections to an application. The Township staff shall have seven business days
from the date of submission of an amended or corrected application or plan to determine whether
such amended or corrected application results in a substantial amendment to the plan or if the
application or plan filed is/was/has changed so as to be considered a new plan. If the Township
staff determines that the amended or corrected application constitutes a substantial amendment,
the applicant shall be informed of the determination within 12 business days from the date of the
submission of the amended or corrected application, and the Township staff shall further inform
the applicant that the Township shall consider the ninety-day review procedure to have been
restarted as of the date of the filing of the substantial amendment. If the Township staff determines
that the amended or corrected application constitutes a new plan, the Township staff shall so
inform the applicant and shall inform the applicant that a new application and new fees are
required. Under this section, the applicant may appeal a decision by the Township staff to the
Supervisors.
Plan review process.
All complete applications for approval of a stormwater management site plan consisting of a
major land disturbance shall be processed as follows:
At the first meeting of the Planning Commission after the Township has determined that
the plans and documents contain all information required by this chapter, and the plan
has been reviewed by the Township Engineer, the Planning Commission will receive a
briefing of the project, which will be limited to:
A brief introduction to the Planning Commission;
Consideration of any modifications which are deemed ready for action; and
Any special requests.
After discussion of the plan by the Planning Commission, the plan will be acted upon by
the Supervisors, which shall render its decision and communicate it to the applicant no
later than 90 days following the date the completed application is filed.
All complete applications for approval of a stormwater management site plan consisting of a
minor land disturbance may be reviewed by the Code Enforcement Officer, along with the
Township Engineer, the Township Solicitor, the Lancaster County Conservation District, and
other municipal officials, in order to determine approval, conditional approval, or disapproval
of the application, within 90 days from the municipal receipt of an application.
The decision of the Supervisors or Code Enforcement Officer, as specified above (the
Township), shall be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed
to him at his last known address not later than 15 days following the decision.
When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall specify the defects
found in the application and describe the requirements which have not been met and shall, in
each case, cite the provisions of the chapter(s) relied upon.
Failure of the Township to render a decision and communicate it to the applicant within the
time and in the manner required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time or
change in prescribed manner of presentation or communication of the decision, in which
case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation or
communication shall have like effect.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 170/520
(6)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
G.
Approval of a stormwater management site plan by the Township shall be obtained by the
applicant prior to the issuance of a zoning permit by the Township. No regulated activity may
begin until proof of recording of the required operation and maintenance program is presented
and a zoning permit is obtained by the applicant in accordance with the Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended.
Modification of chapter provisions.
Application requirements. A request for a modification may be submitted to the Township at
any time. All requests shall be in writing and be accompanied by a plan prepared to the
minimum standards of a minor land disturbance plan (see § 229-35). The written request shall
identify:
The specific section of this chapter sought to be modified.
The provisions proposed as an alternate to the requirements. The alternate provisions
must be equal to or better than the requirements of, and consistent with, the intent of this
chapter and shall not be contrary to the general public interest.
Township action.
A modification request that is submitted as part of an application for a stormwater
management site plan shall be processed along with the application of which it is a part.
The plan processing procedures outlined in this section shall apply.
If a modification request is not submitted with an application for subdivision, land
development, lot add-on, or improvement construction plan, then the processing
procedures outlined in this section shall apply.
Justification for the modification. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of
unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based.
The provisions of this chapter not related to state water quality requirements are intended as
minimum standards for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. The Township
reserves the right to modify or to extend them conditionally in individual cases as may be
necessary in the public interest; provided, however, that such modification or extension shall
not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter and that the applicant
shows to the satisfaction of the Township that the applicable regulation is unreasonable, or
will cause undue hardship, or that an alternate proposal will allow for equal or better results.
The list of such modifications shall be included on the plan.
In granting waivers/modifications from provisions of this chapter, the Township may impose
such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards
and requirements of this chapter.
The Township may, after consultation between the applicant and PADEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in this chapter, provided that
they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law, including, but not
limited to, the Clean Streams Law. The applicant shall provide the Township with a record of
consultations with PADEP pursuant to this subsection.
Where a written erosion and sedimentation control plan associated with earth
disturbance of 5,000 square feet to one acre is required, review of the written erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall constitute satisfaction of consultation with PADEP.
Where an NPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction
activities is required, issuance of an NPDES permit shall constitute satisfaction of
consultation with PADEP.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 171/520
H.
I.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
A.
A disapproved stormwater management site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Township's concerns, to the Township in accordance with this article. The
applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved stormwater management
site plan.
All stormwater management permits or approvals shall expire 12 months from the date of
issuance unless an extension of time is approved. An extension of an unexpired stormwater
management permit or approval shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer following the
submission of a written request if, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, the subject
property or affected surrounding area has not been altered in a manner which requires alteration
of the stormwater management site plan.
§ 229-29. through § 229-32. (Reserved)
Article IV. Stormwater Management Site Plan Requirements
§ 229-33. Exemptions.
Any regulated activity that meets one of the following exemption criteria is exempt from the provisions
of this chapter. These criteria shall apply to the total development even if development is to take place
in phases. The date of the adoption of this chapter shall be the starting point from which to consider
tracts as "parent tracts" in which respective impervious area computations shall be cumulatively
considered. Exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing such measures as are
necessary to protect health, safety, and property.
Regulated activities that create additional impervious areas less than or equal to 1,000 square feet
are exempt from the requirements of this chapter, except as provided for in § 229-33F, provided
that the activities meet the following criteria. This exemption will be applied on a cumulative basis
for the subject property as measured from April 14, 2014.
Any applicant desiring exemption from design, plan submission, and plan processing
requirements shall complete an application for exemption in the form provided by the
Township and pay any applicable filing fee.
The applicant for exemption shall provide the Township with all information necessary for the
Township to determine that:
There shall be no disturbance of land within floodplains, wetlands, environmentally
sensitive areas, riparian forest buffers, or slopes greater than 15%.
No impervious surface coverage shall be installed and no earth disturbance activity shall
be conducted within any existing drainage or stormwater easement created by or shown
on any recorded plan.
The applicant shall minimize soil disturbance, take steps to minimize erosion and
sedimentation during construction activity, and promptly reclaim all disturbed areas with
topsoil and vegetation.
The applicant shall take steps to ensure that runoff is directed to pervious areas on the
subject property. No runoff shall be directed onto an abutting street or neighboring
property.
The proposed impervious surface shall not adversely impact any existing known problem
areas or downstream landowners or the quality of runoff entering any storm sewer.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 172/520
(f)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
The proposed impervious surface and/or grading shall not create accelerated erosion
and sedimentation.
If the proposed activity does not meet all of the criteria set forth in § 229-33A(2) above, the
applicant may consider the minor land disturbance processing procedure in § 229-35.
No applicant and no activity is exempt from complying with any state or federal requirements
applicable if the subject property is located in a high-quality (HQ) or exceptional-value (EV)
watershed.
No applicant and no activity shall violate or cause to be violated: the Federal Clean Water Act
or any regulation issued thereunder, an NPDES permit, any recorded stormwater
management or operations and maintenance agreement, or any requirement applicable to a
municipal separate storm sewer system.
Activities on lands which have a prior approved stormwater management plan, which was
approved prior to the adoption of this chapter and which, in the opinion of the Township following
consultation with the Township Engineer, adequately manages stormwater resulting from the
proposed activities, are exempt from the requirements of this chapter that may conflict with the
requirements of the Stormwater Management Ordinance in effect at the time of the approval of the
prior approved stormwater management plan.
Use of the land for gardening and landscaping of property, when performed as an accessory use
of the property, is exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
Except as provided for in § 229-33F, agricultural activity is exempt when operated in accordance
with a conservation plan or an erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan found to be
adequate by the Lancaster County Conservation District and performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102. The agricultural activities such as growing crops,
rotating crops, tilling of soil and grazing animals and other such activities are specifically exempt
from the requirements of this chapter.
Except as provided for in § 229-33F, forest management and timber operations, when they are
following the Department of Environmental Protections' management practices contained in its
publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry" and are operating
under an erosion and sedimentation control plan according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102, are specifically exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
The Township may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this section at any time for any
project that the Township believes may pose a threat to public health, safety, property or the
environment.
§ 229-34. General requirements.
The following general standards shall be applied to all regulated activities to promote flow attenuation,
erosion and sediment control and flood control, unless the otherwise-regulated activity is specifically
exempted in § 229-33:
The stormwater management site plan shall include a note on the plan informing the owner that
the Township shall have the right of entry for the purposes of inspecting all stormwater
conveyance, treatment, or storage facilities.
All landowners of land included in the stormwater management site plan shall be required to
execute all applications and final documents.
All stormwater management site plans shall be prepared by a qualified person.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 173/520
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
G.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(2)
(3)
H.
A set of stormwater management site plans approved by the Township shall be on file at the
development site throughout the duration of the regulated activity. Periodic inspections may be
made by the Township or designee during construction.
Stormwater management site plans shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for
recording with the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster County.
For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities
(e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this chapter and to meet all
requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm
Water Management Act.
Impervious areas:
The measurement of impervious area shall apply to the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages or phases.
For development taking place in stages or phases, the entire development plan must be used
in determining conformance with this chapter.
Any areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious.
Existing impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed regulated activity shall
not be subject to the volume controls in § 229-48 and the peak rate controls of § 229-43S.
All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
Protect health, safety, and property.
Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing measures to:
Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes, existing native vegetation
and woodlands.
Create, maintain, or extend riparian buffers and protect existing forested buffers.
Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas whenever feasible.
Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the degradation of waters of the
commonwealth and promote groundwater recharge.
Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways, vegetation, soils, and sensitive
areas) and maintain, as much as possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors, mature forests) as design
elements.
Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious areas wherever possible
and decentralize and manage stormwater at its source.
To the maximum extent practicable, the techniques for low-impact development (LID)
practices described in the BMP Manual and Appendix A[1] shall be incorporated. The
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 174/520
[1]
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
A.
B.
C.
D.
proposed LID practices shall be noted on the stormwater management site plan.
Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
The design of all stormwater management facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects.
Infiltration BMPs, to the extent practicable, shall be spread out, made as shallow as practicable
when located above grade, and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features
while still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
Normally dry, open-top, storage facilities shall completely drain the volume control storage over a
period of time not less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design
storm. However, any infiltration at such facilities is exempt from the minimum twenty-four-hour
standard, i.e., may infiltrate in a shorter period of time, provided that none of this water will be
discharged into waters of this commonwealth.
Normally dry, open-top, storage facilities shall completely drain the rate control storage over a
period of time less than or equal to 24 hours from the peak one-hundred-year water surface
design elevation.
The design storm volumes and precipitation intensities to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge shall be as required in § 229-45.
The applicant shall refer to the BMP Manual for various BMPs and their design standards.
For any activities that are regulated under PADEP Chapter 105 or PADEP Chapter 106 or require
any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, the permit(s) shall be part of the
stormwater management site plan and must be obtained prior to final plan approval.
§ 229-35. Minor land disturbance.
The minor land disturbance plan shall include a completed application (available at the Township
Office), a general plan of the lot configuration, existing and proposed building locations, location
and square footage of proposed impervious area or land disturbance, grading, stormwater
management facilities, and erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
The plan need not demonstrate literal compliance with all the provisions of this chapter; however
the plan shall demonstrate that the proposed activity will comply with the intent of this chapter as
provided for in § 229-2.
The minor land disturbance plan shall provide for volume control but shall not be required to
provide for rate control. Additional guidance is available from the Township.
The Township may require additional information, or invoke any section of this chapter, as deemed
necessary to adequately demonstrate compliance with the intent of this chapter. These
requirements may be appealed to the Supervisors.
§ 229-36. Major land disturbance.
The stormwater management site plan shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps and plans,
including simultaneous copies of all plans, reports, and correspondence with the Lancaster County
Conservation District. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and erosion and
sediment pollution control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations and erosion and
sediment pollution control plan shall refer to the associated maps by title and date. All stormwater
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 175/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
B.
management site plan materials shall be submitted to the Township in a format that is clear, concise,
legible, neat and well organized.
Drafting standards. All stormwater management site plans shall be prepared in accordance with
the following drafting standards:
The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a horizontal scale of 10 feet, 20 feet, 30 feet, 40
feet, or 50 feet to the inch.
All profiles of stormwater management facilities, streets, sanitary sewer facilities, and water
supply facilities shall be drawn at a horizontal scale of 1" = 50' and at a vertical scale of 1" =
10' or 1" = 5'.
A North arrow, graphic scale and written scale shall be provided.
Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals. Bearings shall be in degrees, minutes and
seconds. Lot line descriptions shall read in a clockwise direction.
The survey shall not have an error of closure greater than one foot in 10,000 feet.
The sheet size shall be no smaller than 18 x 22 inches and no larger than 24 x 36 inches. If
the plan is prepared in two or more sections, a key map showing the location of the sections
shall be placed on each sheet. If more than one sheet is necessary, each sheet shall be the
same size and numbered to show the relationship to the total number of sheets in the plan
(e.g., Sheet 1 of 5).
Project location and identification. The following location and identification shall be included on all
subdivision and land development plans:
The proposed project name or identifying title.
The name of the Township or municipalities in which the project is located, including the
location of any municipal boundaries if located within 200 feet of the subject tract.
The name and address of the owner of the tract (or his authorized agent), the applicant, and
the firm that prepared the plans.
The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the plan, the plan date and the
date(s) of all plan revisions.
The entire existing tract boundary, with bearing and distances. If the lot area is in excess of 10
acres, the boundary of that lot may be identified as a deed-plotting and may be drawn at any
legible scale.
The total acreage of the entire existing tract.
The location of existing lot line markers along the perimeter of the entire existing tract.
The zoning district, lot size, and/or density requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
A statement on the plan indicating the grant of a prior zoning amendment, special exception
or variance, if applicable, along with any prior modifications granted by the Supervisors to
sections of this chapter.
The names of all adjacent landowners, both adjoining and across existing rights-of-way, along
with the plan book record numbers of all previously recorded plans for adjacent properties.
A location map, drawn to scale, relating the subdivision or land development to at least two
intersections of street center lines, including the approximate distance to the intersection of
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 176/520
(12)
(13)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
C.
center lines of the nearest improved street intersection.
Source of title, deed, book, page, plan book (if applicable), and Tax Map, block, and parcel
number.
A note indicating existing and proposed land use(s).
Existing features. The following features shall be shown on all stormwater management site plans
and shall be shown on a separate sheet titled "Existing Features." No proposed features shall be
included on this sheet.
Existing contours shall be shown at the following minimum vertical intervals:
Average Natural Slope Required Contour Interval
0 to 3% 1-foot contour interval
4 to 20% 2-foot contour interval
21% and greater 5-foot contour interval
The contour interval may be adjusted based upon horizontal scale with concurrence of
the Township Engineer.
Contours shall be accompanied by the location of the benchmark and a notation
indicating the datum used. The datum used by an authority shall be used in all plans
indicating connection to an authority's public sewer system or public water system.
Contours plotted by interpolation of Lancaster County GIS mapping or LiDAR will only be
accepted when there is no new construction or earth disturbance proposed by the plan.
Contours plotted by interpolation of the United States Geodetic Survey 7.5-foot mapping
will not be accepted.
The following items when located upon or within 200 feet of the tract:
The location and name of existing rights-of-way and cartways for private or public streets,
alleys and driveways.
The location and size of the following features and any related right-of-way: sanitary
sewer mains, water supply mains, fire hydrants, buildings, and stormwater collection,
conveyance and management facilities.
The location and size of existing on-lot sewage systems and wells.
The location of existing rights-of-way and easements for electric, gas and oil transmission
lines, and railroads.
Significant environmental or topographic features such as floodplains, wetlands, quarry
sites, solid waste disposal areas, historic structures, cemetery or burial sites,
archaeological sites, highly erosive soils, or wooded areas.
The soil names and boundaries.
The following items when located within the subject tract:
The size, capacity and condition of the existing stormwater management system and any
other facility that may be used to convey storm flows.
The location and size of existing on-lot sewage systems and wells.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 177/520
(c)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
D.
The location and use of existing buildings and other man-made features.
Significant environmental or topographic features as identified in the Lancaster Township
Comprehensive Plan, including, but not limited to:
Prime agricultural soils;
Underlying geology with any hazardous geology noted;
Floodplains;
Quarry sites;
Solid waste disposal areas;
Historic structures;
Cemetery or burial sites;
Archaeological sites;
Highly erosive soils;
Wooded areas;
Natural habitat; and
PNDI sites.
The location of wetlands and supporting data.
Proposed features and plan information. The following proposed features and plan information
shall be shown on all stormwater management site plans and shall be shown on a separate sheet
entitled "Proposed Features." The proposed features and plan information shall be overlaid upon a
copy of the existing features plan. The existing features shall be "screened" or "shaded" on the
proposed features plan.
The location and configuration of proposed buildings, parking compounds, driveways, and all
other significant planned facilities.
The total number of lots, units of occupancy, density, and proposed land use. If a multiple land
use is proposed, the location of each land use shall be indicated.
Easements and rights-of-way, including:
A minimum twenty-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater management
facilities that would provide ingress from and egress to a public right-of-way. Easements
shall be provided to allow for the collection and discharge of water, the inspection,
maintenance, repair and reconstruction of the drainage facilities, and the passage of
machinery for work.
Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all existing and
proposed physical stormwater management facilities, such as ponds and infiltration
structures, as necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan. All
such agreements shall be duly recorded in the office of the Recorder Deeds and shall
constitute a binding permanent covenant upon the property, superior to all liens of record
and not subordinate to any easement or restriction that would interfere with its provisions
and the implementation thereof.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 178/520
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Building setback line and building envelope.
Identification of buildings to be demolished and all other features to be removed.
Stormwater management data and plans designed in accordance with this chapter. This
information may be provided on a sheet with other data or on separate sheets and need not
necessarily be recorded with the final plan. In the case of any dispute in the methodology
used in the design of any stormwater management site plan and/or in the presentation of
such information, the Supervisors shall make the final determination on the design criteria,
methodology and form of presentation. The following information shall be included:
All calculations, assumptions, criteria, and references used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities, the establishment of existing facilities' capacities, and
the pre- and post-development discharges.
All plans and profiles of the proposed stormwater management facilities, including the
horizontal and vertical location, size, and type of material.
For all basins, a plotting or tabulation of the storage volumes and discharge curves with
corresponding water surface elevations, inflow hydrographs, and outflow hydrographs.
The guidelines for lot grading within the subdivisions. This information shall identify the
direction of stormwater runoff flow within each lot and the areas where stormwater runoff
flows will be concentrated. This information shall be shown by flow arrows or
topographical data.
A statement identifying the number of square feet of impervious coverage for which
stormwater management facilities have been designed for each lot.
A statement on the plan indicating the granting of a zoning amendment, special exception or
variance, if applicable, along with modifications granted by the Supervisors to sections of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance or this chapter.
Where the proposed regulated activity is located partially or wholly within an area prone to
frequent flooding (either by impoundment or conveyance), as indicated by the Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map, profiles, and supporting data, soil type or local historical record,
the applicant shall supply the location and elevation of all proposed roads, fills, utilities,
buildings, stormwater management, and erosion control facilities.
Location of all percolation test holes, deep probe holes and proposed well locations.
Easements for the on-lot sewage replacement locations.
The location of all trees and/or woodlands on the site and location of trees and/or woodland to
be removed and trees and/or woodlands to remain.
A detailed grading plan. The grading plan shall include finished grades and ground-floor
elevations. This information may be provided on separate sheets and is not subject to
recording with the final plans.
The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
Identification of any lands to be dedicated or reserved for public, semipublic or community
use.
In the case of a plan which requires access to a highway under the jurisdiction of the
Department of Transportation, the inclusion of the following plan note:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 179/520
(17)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(b)
(c)
(18)
(19)
"A highway occupancy permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945
(P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the "State Highway Law," before access to a state highway is
permitted. Access to the state highway shall be as authorized by a highway occupancy
permit, and the Supervisors' approval of this plan in no way implies that such a permit can be
acquired."
A complete landscape plan showing the location, size and type of all plant material required
by provisions of this chapter or any other applicable Township regulations, including, but not
limited to, all vegetated stormwater BMPs. The landscape plan should be provided on
separate sheets and must include the signature and seal of the registered landscape architect
responsible for preparation of the plan. Native or naturalized/noninvasive vegetation suitable
to the soil and hydrologic conditions of the development site shall be used unless otherwise
specified in the BMP Manual. The limit of existing, native vegetation to remain shall be
delineated on the plan along with proposed construction protection measures.
A detailed schedule of inspections during construction, as generally outlined as follows, which
is tailored for the site under consideration.
The Township shall inspect all phases of the installation of any temporary or permanent
stormwater management facilities during construction. The applicant shall pay the cost of
any such inspection. The applicant shall provide at least 24 hours' notice prior to the start
of construction of any improvements that are subject to inspection. All inspections of
completed items shall be requested, in writing, at least 48 hours in advance of the
inspection time and date.
It is generally required that the following phases of site construction have mandatory
inspection. This general list of phases may be amended by mutual agreement of the
Township and applicant when the site requires special construction procedures. The
inspection schedule must be shown on the approved stormwater management site plan.
Upon completion of preliminary site preparation, including stripping of vegetation,
stockpiling of topsoil and construction of temporary erosion and sedimentation
control devices.
Upon completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil, permanent drainage,
or other site development improvements and ground covers.
During the construction of permanent stormwater management and BMP facilities.
Upon the final completion of permanent stormwater management and BMP facilities,
including the establishment of ground covers and plantings.
After review of the as-built drawings, required by § 229-61, but prior to final release
of the financial security for completion of final grading, vegetative controls required
by the BMP standards, or other site restoration work.
In addition to the above-outlined observations, additional observations will be made at
the request of the applicant for reduction of financial securities. Random observations
should be made at the frequency desired by the Township. At the time of any of the
above-listed observations, all ongoing construction (i.e., storm drainage, sanitary sewer,
water, erosion control, etc.) should also be checked for compliance with the approved
plans and the findings reported. Since the above inspections are mandatory, it is
recommended that requests for reduction of financial security be submitted to coincide
with the above inspections.
A note indicating that as-built plans will be provided for all stormwater management facilities
prior to occupancy or the release of financial security.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 180/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
[1]
A.
[2]
B.
C.
§ 229-37. Notifications.
The applicant shall provide the following notifications as part of the application:
Notice from the Lancaster County Conservation District of the approval of the erosion and
sediment pollution control plan.
Written notice from the Township that all proposed improvements have been designed to the
standards of the Township and that financial security and a completed improvement guarantee
agreement in a form suitable to the Supervisors has been received.
Such written notices of approval as may be required by this chapter, including, but not limited to,
stormwater runoff to adjacent properties.
Notification from the appropriate state and federal agencies that permits have been issued, or are
not required, for any proposed activities within streams, wetlands or any other state or federally
regulated body of water. These permits include, but are not limited to, floodplain encroachment
permits, dam safety permits, earth disturbance permits, stream encroachment permits, and
general permits.
Public utility lines.
Where the tract described in the application includes any public utility, electric transmission
line, gas pipeline, or petroleum product transmission line located within the tract, the applicant
shall notify, in writing, the owner or lessee of the right-of-way of his intentions.
A note stating any conditions regarding the use of the land, minimum building setback or
right-of-way lines shall be included on the plan.
This requirement may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the recorded agreement.
Natural resource easement.
Where the land included in the subject application has an agricultural, woodland or other
natural resource easement located within the tract, the application shall be accompanied by a
letter from the party holding the easement stating any conditions on the use of the land.
This requirement may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the recorded easement.
§ 229-38. Certificates.
The applicant shall provide the following certifications as part of the application:
A certificate for approval by the Township's authorized staff representative. See form of certificate
in Appendix D.[1]
Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the stormwater BMPs are fixtures that
cannot be altered or removed without prior approval by the Township. See form of certificate in
Appendix E.[2]
Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
A statement, signed by the landowner, referencing the operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement and stating that the operation and maintenance agreement is part of the stormwater
management site plan.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 181/520
D.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
A.
The following signature block for the qualified professional preparing the stormwater management
site plan: "I ____________________, hereby certify that the stormwater management site plan
meets all design standards and criteria of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management
Ordinance."
§ 229-39. through § 229-42. (Reserved)
Article V. Stormwater Management Standards
§ 229-43. General requirements.
All stormwater management, collection, conveyance, erosion control, and floodplain considerations
shall be accomplished in accordance with the following provisions:
Prior to the final approval of any subdivision or land development plan within the jurisdiction of this
chapter, or the commencement of any regulated activity within the jurisdiction of this chapter, the
applicant shall submit a stormwater management site plan to the Township for approval.
When plan applications, whether preliminary or final, are submitted in sections, a generalized
stormwater management site plan for the entire project site shall be submitted in addition to
the detailed stormwater management site plan for the proposed section. This generalized
plan shall demonstrate how the stormwater of the proposed section will relate to the entire
development. The amount and velocity at the discharge point of the section shall be included
in the data submitted. If temporary facilities are required for construction of a section, such
facilities shall be included in the submitted plans.
The type, location and extent of all erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
shown on an erosion and sedimentation control plan that conforms to the requirements of the
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Manual of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and the design standards of § 229-44 of this chapter.
An operation and maintenance program, in recordable form acceptable to the Township, that
clearly sets forth the operation and maintenance responsibility of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities and erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
The intent of these regulations is to provide private operation and maintenance of stormwater
management and erosion and sedimentation control facilities, including:
Description of temporary and permanent maintenance requirements.
Identification of a responsible individual, corporation, association or other entity for
operation and maintenance of both temporary and permanent stormwater management
and erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all existing and
proposed stormwater management facilities, as necessary to implement the operation
and maintenance (O&M) plan discussed in § 229-56. All such agreements shall be duly
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds and shall constitute a binding permanent
covenant upon the property, superior to all liens of record and not subordinate to any
easement or restriction that would interfere with its provisions and the implementation
thereof.
Where the Supervisors accept dedication of stormwater management facilities, the
Supervisors may require the applicant to establish, at the time of dedication, a
maintenance fund, in an amount determined by the Township, adequate for the perpetual
care of such facilities.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 182/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A written report shall be submitted that includes the following information:
Stormwater runoff calculations for both predevelopment and post-development
conditions.
An erosion and sedimentation control plan narrative that conforms to the requirements of
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Manual of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and provides a description of all erosion and sedimentation
control measures, temporary as well as permanent, including the staging of earthmoving
activities, sufficient in detail to clearly indicate their function.
General description of the development site, including a description of existing natural
and hydrologic features and any environmentally sensitive areas.
General description of the overall stormwater management concept for the project,
including a description of permanent stormwater management techniques, nonstructural
BMPs to be employed and construction specifications of the materials to be used for
structural stormwater management facilities.
For all proposed detention basins and retention basins, except temporary sedimentation
basins, the documentation shall include a plotting or tabulation of storage volumes with
corresponding water surface elevations and the outflow rates for those water surfaces.
For all proposed detention basins and retention basins, except temporary sediment
basins, documentation shall set forth the design hydrograph, the routing method or a
method of equal caliber acceptable to the Township Engineer, utilized to determine the
function of the basin.
Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit unimpeded flow along natural
watercourses, except as modified by stormwater management facilities or open channels
consistent with this chapter.
Where a development site is traversed by watercourses other than permanent streams, a
drainage easement shall be provided conforming substantially to the line of such watercourses.
The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any
alterations that may affect adversely the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement.
Also, maintenance of vegetation within the easement shall be required.
The PADEP Chapter 105 rules and regulations apply to the construction, modification, operation
or maintenance of both existing and proposed water obstructions and encroachments throughout
the watershed, including work in wetlands. Inquiries on permit requirements or other concerns
shall be addressed to PADEP's regional office.
When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural drainageways on the
development site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open channels may be constructed
conforming substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural
drainageways shall be subject to approval by PADEP.
Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g.,
culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this chapter, that will be
located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (including wetlands), shall be subject to
approval by PADEP. When there is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the
responsibility of the applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be classified as
wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area must be obtained from PADEP.
Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety permit under PADEP Chapter
105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with PADEP Chapter 105 and meet the
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 183/520
H.
I.
J.
[1]
K.
L.
M.
N.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
O.
regulations of PADEP Chapter 105 concerning dam safety which may be required to pass storms
larger than the one-hundred-year event.
Roof drains shall not be connected to sanitary sewers or public storm sewers.
No outlet structure from a detention basin, storm pipe, or swale shall discharge directly onto any
publicly used Township, state or private road but shall discharge into a culvert under or along the
road.
Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter which will be located on or which
will discharge onto state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to approval by PennDOT. If
PennDOT requires that the Township be the permittee for such drainage facilities, the applicant
shall enter into an agreement, in recordable form, assuming all of the obligations which PennDOT
may place upon the Township as permittee, including, but not limited to, long-term maintenance of
any such facilities, compliance with all conditions contained in the permit, and indemnification of
the Township for any costs or penalties which PennDOT may seek to impose on the Township.
The Township shall have no obligation to make any applications to PennDOT.
Stormwater management facilities located within or affecting the floodplain of any watercourse
shall comply with the requirements of the floodplain regulations provided in the Floodplain
Management Ordinance or any future ordinances regulating construction or development within
areas of the Township subject to flooding.[1]
[Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Floodplain Management.
The minimum floor elevations for all structures that would be affected by a basin, other temporary
impoundments, or open conveyance systems where ponding may occur shall be two feet above
the one-hundred-year water surface. If basement or underground facilities are proposed, detailed
calculations addressing the effects of the stormwater ponding on the structure and waterproofing
and/or floodproofing design information shall be provided for review and approval.
All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems and areas of surface water
concentration shall be maintained in their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the
appropriate regulatory agency.
No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility, or swale, shall discharge directly onto
a Township or state roadway.
Stormwater management facilities intended to receive and infiltrate runoff from regulated activities
shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions and shall be constructed on soils
that have the following characteristics:
Infiltration testing shall be conducted in accordance with the BMP Manual.
Acceptable soil will have a percolation rate of at least 0.1 inch per hour and not more than 10
inches per hour (after application of the appropriate safety factor from the BMP Manual).
A minimum separation of 24 inches of acceptable soil between the bottom of the facility and
the limiting zone, unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township that the
selected BMP has design criteria which allow for a smaller separation.
A stabilized infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional stormwater load and drain
completely as determined by field tests conducted by the applicant's professional designer.
The stabilized infiltration rate is to be determined in the same location and within the same
soil horizon as the bottom of the infiltration facility. The stabilized infiltration rate is to be
determined as specified in the BMP Manual.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 184/520
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
P.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
Q.
The Township shall be notified 24 hours prior to infiltration tests being conducted so as to
provide an opportunity for the Township to witness the tests.
Stormwater discharge points onto an adjacent property shall comply with the following:
Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created, increased, relocated, or
otherwise altered without written notification of the adjacent landowner(s) by the applicant,
including the establishment of an easement. Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the
requirements of this chapter. If, in the opinion of the Township, a decrease in stormwater flow
rate or volume will cause adverse impacts to downstream properties, the applicant shall
mitigate such impacts.
Stormwater runoff from a project site shall flow directly into a natural watercourse or into an
existing storm sewer system. If neither of these is available, the applicant shall obtain an
easement from the downstream landowner(s) to allow the site's runoff discharge to reach a
natural watercourse or an existing storm sewer system through the easement. If an easement
is obtained, post-development flow characteristics must be similar to or better than the runoff
characteristics (spread, velocity, and peak rate) of the predevelopment flows. The easement
from the downstream landowner(s) shall permit a piped storm sewer system, an overland flow
system, or a combination of the two. The downstream system design shall conform to the
design requirements of this chapter.
When the applicant provides verification that the downstream landowner(s) refuses to grant
an easement at reasonable terms in the sole opinion of the Township, the site shall be
designed such that the discharge from the applicant's site shall be in a nonerosive sheet flow
condition. For all design-year storms, including the one-hundred-year storm, runoff from the
applicant's site shall flow onto the adjacent property in a manner similar to the runoff
characteristics (spread, velocity, and peak rate) of the predeveloped flow. The use of level
spreaders is prohibited.
Stormwater runoff shall not be transferred from one watershed to another unless the
watersheds are subwatersheds of a common watershed which join together within the
perimeter of the property, or both of the following apply:
The effect of the transfer does not alter the peak discharge (in conformance with the
requirements of the Act 167 Plan) onto adjacent lands; and
Drainage easements from the affected landowners are provided.
Unless an alternate design is submitted to the Township for review, and said design is prepared by
a licensed (in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania) geologist or geotechnical engineer:
No stormwater facilities shall be placed in, over or within a distance that will impact the
following features:
Sinkholes.
Closed depressions.
Lineaments in carbonate areas.
Fracture traces.
Caverns.
Intermittent streams.
Ephemeral streams.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 185/520
(h)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(3)
[2]
(4)
(5)
(6)
R.
(1)
(2)
(3)
S.
Bedrock pinnacles (surface or subsurface).
The minimum isolation distance from stormwater management facilities to the listed geologic
features shall be as follows:
One hundred feet from the rim of sinkholes or closed depressions.
One hundred feet from disappearing streams.
Fifty feet from lineaments or fracture traces.
Twenty-five feet from surface or identified subsurface pinnacles.
Stormwater runoff from any regulated activity shall not be discharged into sinkholes.
It shall be the applicant's responsibility to verify if the development is underlain by carbonate
geology. The certificate in Appendix C shall be attached to all stormwater management site
plans and signed and sealed by the applicant's qualified professional.[2]
Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Whenever a stormwater facility will be located in an area underlain by carbonate geology, a
geological evaluation of the proposed location by a registered professional geologist shall be
conducted to determine subsurface conditions, including soil permeability, depth to bedrock,
subgrade stability, and susceptibility to sinkhole formation.
Impermeable liners may be used to reduce or eliminate the separation distances listed in
Subsection Q(1) and (2) above.
All stormwater runoff flowing over the project site shall be considered in the design of the
stormwater management facilities.
The calculated peak rates of runoff for stormwater originating on the project site must meet one of
the following conditions, for all watersheds flowing from the project site:
Match predevelopment hydrograph. Applicants and/or landowners are encouraged to provide
infiltration facilities or utilize other techniques which will allow the post-development onehundred-
year hydrograph to match the predevelopment one-hundred-year hydrograph, along
all parts of the hydrograph, for the development site. To match the predevelopment
hydrograph, the post-development peak rate must be less than or equal to the
predevelopment peak rate, and the post-development runoff volume must be less than or
equal to the predevelopment volume for the same storm event. A shift in hydrograph peak
time of up to five minutes and a rate variation of up to 5% at a given time may be allowable to
account for the timing effect of BMPs used to manage the peak rate and runoff volume.
Incorporating the volume control requirements as given in § 229-48 can be used as part of
this option.
Where the predevelopment hydrograph cannot be matched, the calculated peak rate of
stormwater runoff from the project site after development shall not exceed 50% of the peak
rate of runoff from the project site prior to development activities. Both the predevelopment
condition and post-development condition shall be calculated on all design storms (two-, five-,
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year storm events).
Applicants have the option to propose a regional stormwater management plan or participate
in a regional stormwater management plan developed by others. A regional stormwater
management plan may include off-site volume and rate control, as appropriate and supported
by a detailed design approved by the Township. A regional stormwater management plan
must meet all of the volume and rate control standards required by this chapter for the area
defined by the regional stormwater management plan, but not necessarily for each individual
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 186/520
T.
U.
V.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
F.
development site. Appropriate agreements must be established to ensure the requirements of
this chapter and the requirements of the regional stormwater management plan are met.
Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from sedimentation and compaction during
the construction phase to maintain maximum infiltration capacity. Staging of earthmoving activities
and selection of construction equipment should consider this protection.
Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff from disturbed areas until the entire
contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has achieved final stabilization.
If structure foundations, basements, or other underground facilities (whether on-site or off-site)
would be affected by saturated soil due to a nearby stormwater management facility, detailed
calculations addressing the impact of the saturated soil, and waterproofing design information,
where applicable, shall be submitted for approval.
§ 229-44. Design standards — erosion and sediment control.
The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa. Code, Chapters 92 and 102, as
required and applicable, as follows:
The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment control BMPs.
Development of written plans.
Submission of plans for approval.
Obtaining erosion and sediment control and NPDES permits.
Maintaining plans and permits on site.
Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for earth disturbance activities from PADEP or
the Lancaster County Conservation District must be provided to the Township.
The Township shall receive simultaneous copies of plans, reports, applications, and other
documents submitted for review by the Lancaster County Conservation District.
A copy of the notice of termination for NPDES permits shall be provided to the Township once
accepted by the Lancaster County Conservation District.
Construction of temporary roadways (e.g., for utility construction, timber harvesting, etc.) shall
comply with all applicable standards for erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing
regulations under 25 Pa. Code, Chapters 102 and 105.
The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the Lancaster County
Conservation District for approval and shall address the following, as applicable:
Design of the roadway system, including haul roads, skid roads, landing areas, trails, and
storage and staging areas.
Runoff control structures (e.g., diversions, culverts, detention ponds, etc.).
Stream crossings for both perennial and intermittent streams.
Access to public roadways, including design of rock construction entrance for mud and debris
control.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 187/520
(5)
(1)
(2)
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
H.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
(1)
E.
A remediation plan for restoring the disturbed area through regrading, topsoil placement,
reseeding, and other stabilization techniques, as required.
The following principles shall be applied to the design plan and construction schedule to minimize
soil erosion and sedimentation:
Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be done in a manner that will
minimize soil erosion.
Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
In accordance with PADEP Chapter 102, temporary facilities shall be included in the submitted
plans for a phased section where the following conditions are met:
A regulated activity constitutes a subdivision or land development.
The final plan applications are submitted in sections.
Temporary facilities are required for construction of a section.
§ 229-45. Methods of calculation of runoff.
Methods shall be selected by the qualified person based on the individual limitations and suitability of
each method for a particular site. The methods of computation used to determine peak discharge and
runoff shall be:
The Soil-Cover-Complex Method (as set forth in the latest edition of Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55, as published by NRCS, formerly SCS) may be used for all
detention facilities with a drainage area greater than or equal to 60 acres. This method is
recommended for design of stormwater management facilities and where stormwater runoff
volume must be taken into consideration.
The Rational Method may be used for drainage areas up to 60 acres. Extreme caution should be
used by the qualified person if the watershed has more than one main drainage channel, if the
watershed is divided so that hydrologic properties are significantly different in one watershed
versus the other, if the time of concentration exceeds 60 minutes, or if stormwater runoff volume is
an important factor. The combination of Rational Method hydrographs based on timing shall be
prohibited.
The Rational Method shall be used for all:
Collection facilities;
Conveyance facilities.
Any other method approved by the Township Engineer.
If the NRCS/SCS Method (also known as the "Soil-Cover-Complex Method") is used, the design
storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of discharge shall be obtained from the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, United States
Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National
Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland. NOAA's
Atlas 14 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/orb/pa pfds.html.
Provide the rainfall used for the two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twentyfour-
hour storm events. Rainfall values vary throughout the county depending on location.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 188/520
(2)
(3)
F.
G.
H.
[1]
I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
J.
K.
L.
M.
Provide the location (longitude and latitude) or a description of the location for which the
rainfall applies.
If rainfalls from more than one location are used, provide the methodology by which the
design rainfall was calculated.
If the SCS Method is used, Antecedent Moisture Condition 1 is to be used in areas of carbonate
geology, and Antecedent Moisture Condition 2 is to be used in all other areas. A Type II
distribution shall be used in all areas.
If the Rational Method is used, the NOAA Atlas 14 data (see § 229-45E) shall be used to
determine the rainfall intensity in inches per hour based on the information for the five- through
sixty-minute duration storm events.
Hydrographs may be obtained from NRCS methods such as TR-55, TR20, or from use of the
"modified" or "unit hydrograph" rational methods. If "modified" or "unit hydrograph" rational
methods are used, the ascending leg of the hydrograph shall have a time of three times the time
of concentration (3xTc), and the descending leg shall have a time of seven times the time of
concentration (7xTc) to approximate an NRCS/SCS Type 2 hydrograph.
Runoff coefficients "C" and curve numbers "CN" shall be based on the charts contained in
Appendix B.[1]
Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Times of concentration shall be based on the following design parameters:
Sheet flow: The maximum length for each reach of sheet or overland flow before shallow
concentrated or open channel flow develops is 150 feet. Flow lengths greater than 100 feet
shall be justified based on the actual conditions at each development site. Sheet flow may be
determined using the nomograph in Appendix B-4, or Manning's kinematic solution shown in
the sheet flow section of Worksheet No. 1 in Appendix B-5.
Shallow concentrated flow: Travel time for shallow concentrated flow shall be determined
using Appendix B-6 from TR-55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds.
Open channel flows: At points where sheet and shallow concentrated flows concentrate in
field depressions, swales, gutters, curbs, or pipe collection systems, the travel times and
downstream end of the development site between these design points shall be based upon
Manning's Equation and/or acceptable engineering design standards as determined by the
Township Engineer.
For the purpose of calculating predevelopment peak discharges, all runoff coefficients, both onsite
and off-site, shall be based on actual land use assuming summer or good land conditions.
Post-development runoff coefficients for off-site discharges used to design conveyance facilities
shall be based on actual land use assuming winter or poor land conditions.
Design of on-site conveyance system calculations may use the Rational Method of Q=CIA, where
Q is the peak discharge of the watershed in cubic feet per second, C is the coefficient of runoff, I is
the intensity of rainfall in inches per hour, and A is the area of the watershed in acres; or any other
method approved by the Township.
Runoff calculations shall include a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis indicating volume and
velocities of flow and the grades, sizes, and capacities of water-carrying structures, sediment
basins, and retention and detention structures and sufficient design information to construct such
facilities. Runoff calculations shall also indicate both predevelopment and post-development rates
for peak discharge of stormwater runoff from the project site.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 189/520
N.
O.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Runoff calculations will also be made to ensure that the runoff from the upstream watershed area
can be accommodated by the pipes, drainage easements, watercourses, etc., on the site.
Peak rate control is not required for off-site runoff. Off-site runoff may be bypassed around the
site, provided all other discharge requirements are met. If off-site runoff is routed through rate
control facilities, runoff coefficients for off-site discharges used to design those rate control
facilities shall be based on actual land use assuming winter or poor land conditions.
§ 229-46. Design standards — water-carrying facilities.
All storm sewer pipes, grass waterways, open channels, swales and other water-carrying facilities
that service drainage areas within the site shall be designed to convey the twenty-five-year storm
event unless, in the opinion of the Township or Township Engineer, the character of development
and potential for damage warrant design for the fifty- or one-hundred-year storm.
Stormwater management facilities that convey off-site water through the site shall be designed to
convey the fifty-year storm event.
All developments shall include provisions that allow for the overland conveyance and flow of the
post-developed one-hundred-year storm event without damage to public or private property.
Conveyance facilities shall comply with the design criteria in the following table:
Conveyance Facility Design Criteria
Location
Within Public Street
Right-of-Way Outside Public Street Right-of-Way
Loading All Vehicular Loading
Nonvehicular
Loading
Pipe Design
Material SLHDPE, RCP PVC, SLHDPE, RCP PVC, SLHDPE, RCP
Slope (minimum) 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
Cover 1 foot to bottom of
paving
1 foot to bottom of
paving
1 foot to surface
Diameter (minimum) 15 inches 15 inches 8 inches
Street crossing angle 75° to 90° N/A N/A
Access/
maintenance port
frequency
(maximum)
400 feet 400 feet 600 feet
Inlet Design
Material Concrete Concrete N/A
Grate depression N/A N/A N/A
Manhole Design
Material Concrete Concrete Concrete
Swale Design
Freeboard
(minimum)
6 inches N/A 6 inches
Velocity (maximum) Stability check N/A Stability check
Slope (minimum) 1% 1% 1%
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 190/520
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
Conveyance Facility Design Criteria
Location
Within Public Street
Right-of-Way Outside Public Street Right-of-Way
Loading All Vehicular Loading
Nonvehicular
Loading
Side slopes
(residential area)
4:1 max N/A 4:1 max
Side slopes
(nonresidential area)
4:1 max N/A 3:1 max
Bottom width to flow
depth ratio
12:1 N/A 12:1
Pipe Inlet/Outlet Design
End treatment Concrete
headwall/endwall
Headwall/endwall or
flared end section
Headwall/endwall or
flared end section
Energy dissipater Required N/A Required
All storm sewer pipes, culverts, manholes, inlets, endwalls and end sections shall be constructed
in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408, as amended.
Storm sewer pipes, culverts, manholes, inlets, endwalls, and end sections proposed for dedication
or located along streets shall conform to the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Design, Standards for Roadway Construction, Publication No. 72, in
effect at the time the design is submitted.
The roughness coefficient (Manning "n" values) used for conveyance capacity calculations shall
be determined in accordance with Appendix B-3, or per the manufacturer's specifications.
Inlets shall be placed on both sides of the street at low spots, at changes in the horizontal or
vertical directions of storm sewers, and at points where the flow in gutters exceeds three inches.
Inlets shall normally be along the curbline at or beyond the curb radius points. For the purpose of
inlet location at corners, the depth of flow shall be considered for each gutter. At intersections, the
depth of flow for the twenty-five-year storm across the through streets shall not exceed one inch.
An access/maintenance port may either be an inlet or manhole. Manholes may be substituted for
inlets at locations where inlets are not required to collect surface runoff.
Material consistency and placement depths for storm sewer pipe backfill shall be (at a minimum)
per all applicable pipe manufacturer's recommendations, further providing it should be free of
large (not exceeding six inches in any dimension) stone, rock, or other objectionable or detritus
material.
Within the public street right-of-way, the gutter spread based on the twenty-five-year storm shall
be no greater than 1/2 of the travel lane and have a maximum depth of three inches at the
curbline. A parking lane shall not be considered as part of the travel lane.
Inlets or manholes shall be placed at all points of change in the horizontal or vertical directions of
conveyance pipes. Curved pipe sections are prohibited.
All inlets placed in paved areas shall have heavy-duty bicycle-safe grating consistent with
PennDOT Publication 72M, latest edition. A note to this effect shall be added to the stormwater
management site plan or inlet details therein.
Inlets, junction boxes, or manholes greater than five feet in depth shall be equipped with
nonaluminum ladder rungs and shall be detailed on the stormwater management site plan.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 191/520
N.
O.
P.
Q.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
R.
A.
B.
C.
Where the connecting pipe has a diameter 18 inches or greater, headwalls and endwalls shall be
provided with a protective barrier device to prevent entry of the storm sewer pipe by unauthorized
persons. Such protection devices shall be designed to be removable for cleaning.
In addition to the material requirements in this section, culverts designed to convey waters of the
commonwealth may be constructed with either a corrugated metal arch or a precast concrete
culvert.
Flow velocities from any storm sewer shall not result in a degradation of the receiving channel.
Energy dissipaters shall be placed at the outlets of all storm sewer pipes where flow velocities
exceed maximum permitted channel velocities.
The capacities of swales shall be computed from the Manning Equation using the following design
parameters: Permissible open channel velocities and design standards shall be in accordance
with good engineering practice as documented in the Engineering Field Manual for Conservation
Practices, USDA, SCS, or in Design Charts for Open-Channel Flow, Hydraulic Design Series No.
3, United States Department of Transportation.
Vegetated swales:
The first condition shall consider swale stability based upon a low degree of retardance
("n" = 0.03); and
The second condition shall consider swale capacity based upon a higher degree of
retardance ("n" = 0.05).
The "n" factors to be used for paved or riprap swales or gutters shall be based upon accepted
engineering design practices, as approved by the Township Engineer.
All swales shall be designed to maximize infiltration and concentrate low flows to minimize
siltation and meandering, unless geotechnical conditions do not permit infiltration.
§ 229-47. Design standards — aboveground storage facilities.
Aboveground storage facilities shall consist of all stormwater facilities which store,
infiltrate/evaporate/transpire, clean, release, or otherwise affect stormwater runoff and the top of
which is exposed to the natural environment. Aboveground storage facilities shall be located
above the finished ground elevation. Aboveground storage facilities do not include stormwater
management facilities designed for conveyance, or cisterns.
Facilities with a facility depth greater than eight feet shall not be permitted in residential areas.
Aboveground storage facilities shall comply with the design criteria in the following table:
Aboveground Storage Facility Design Criteria
Facility Depth
Less Than 2 Feet 2 Feet to 8 Feet Greater Than 8 Feet
Embankment Geometry
Top width (minimum) 2 feet 5 feet 8 feet
Interior side slope
(maximum)
2:1 3:1 5:1
Exterior side slope
(maximum)
2:1 3:1 3:1
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 192/520
D.
E.
Aboveground Storage Facility Design Criteria
Facility Depth
Less Than 2 Feet 2 Feet to 8 Feet Greater Than 8 Feet
Embankment
Construction
Key trench Not required Required Required
Pipe collar Not required Required Required
Compaction density Not required Required Required
Internal Construction
Dewatering feature N/A Required Required
Pretreatment
elements*
Not required Required Required
Outlet Structure
Pipe size (minimum) 6 inches 12 inches 15 inches
Pipe material SLHDPE, PVC, RCP SLHDPE, RCP RCP
Anticlogging devices Required Required Required
Antivortex design Not required Required Required
Watertight joints in
piping
No Yes Yes
Spillway Requirements
Spillway freeboard
(minimum)
3 inches 6 inches 12 inches
Width (minimum) 5 feet 10 feet 20 feet
Width (maximum) 20 feet 50 feet 50 feet
Spillway channel
design
Required Required Required
Routing of 100-year
storm
Permitted Permitted Permitted
NOTES:
* Pretreatment is required for infiltration BMPs unless shown to be
unnecessary.
N/A = Not applicable.
SLHDPE = Smooth lined high-density polyethylene pipe.
PVC = Polyvinyl chloride.
RCP = Reinforced concrete pipe.
If required, pretreatment elements shall be designed according to the BMP Manual.
All aboveground storage facilities shall be structurally sound and shall be constructed of sound
and durable materials. All discharge control devices and anticlogging devices with appurtenances
shall be made of reinforced concrete and stainless steel. Bolts/fasteners shall be stainless steel.
The maximum opening dimensions of all anticlogging devices shall be no greater than 1/2 of the
smallest orifice opening size on which it is protecting. A separation distance of at least 1/2 of the
opening size shall be maintained between the anticlogging device and the orifice being protected.
The completed structure and the foundation of all basins shall be stable under all probable
conditions of operation. Spillways shall be capable of discharging the peak discharge of a postdevelopment
one-hundred-year storm event through the emergency spillway facilities, in a
condition that assumes the primary outlet(s) are blocked, which will not damage the integrity of the
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 193/520
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
facility or the downstream drainage areas. Use of the spillway to convey flows greater than the
fifty-year design storm shall be permitted.
The effect on downstream areas if the aboveground storage facility embankment fails shall be
considered in the design of all basins. The basin shall be designed to minimize the potential
damage caused by such failure of the embankment.
An easement shall be provided from the spillway outfall to a natural or artificial watercourse.
The maximum depth of water for aboveground storage facilities without restricted access shall not
exceed six feet unless approved by modification by the Supervisors. Access to basins with a
maximum depth of water greater than six feet shall be restricted by fencing that will discourage
access.
Aboveground storage facilities without restricted access shall have impoundment areas with side
slopes no greater than the horizontal to vertical ratios in the design chart. Access to basins with
steeper side slopes than those shown in the chart shall be restricted by fencing that will
discourage access.
All detention basins shall include an outlet structure to permit draining the rate control volume
within 24 hours, exclusive of BMP storage.
All outlet structures and emergency spillways shall include a satisfactory means of dissipating the
energy of flow at its outlet to assure conveyance of flow without endangering the safety and
integrity of the basin and the downstream drainage area.
An impervious core/key trench, if required, shall consist of a cutoff trench (below existing grade)
and a core trench (above existing grade). A key trench may not be required wherever the facility
depth is less than two feet or where it can be shown that another design feature, such as the use
of an impermeable liner, accomplishes the same purpose. Materials used for the core shall
conform to the Unified Soil Classification GC, SC, CH, or CL and must have at least 30% passing
the No. 200 sieve.
The dimensions of the core shall provide a minimum trench depth of two feet below existing
grade, minimum width of four feet and side slope of 1H:1V or flatter.
The core should extend up to the twenty-five-year water surface elevation or six inches below
the emergency spillway elevation, whichever is lower.
The core shall extend four feet below any pipe penetrations through the impervious core. The
core shall be installed along or parallel to the center line of the embankment.
Compaction requirements shall be the same as those for the embankment to assure
maximum density and minimum permeability.
All pipe collars, if required, shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 7 of the PADEP Erosion
and Sediment Control Manual. The material shall consist of concrete or otherwise nondegradable
material around the outfall barrel and shall be watertight.
The embankment fill material shall be free of roots, stumps, wood, rubbish, stones greater than six
inches, and frozen or other objectionable materials.
The minimum freeboard for spillways shall be provided above the one-hundred-year design
elevation of the water surface at the emergency spillway in a condition that assumes the primary
outlet(s) are blocked.
Wherever possible, basins shall have a nonuniform (naturalistic) shape, rather than a geometric
design in the form of a square or rectangle.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 194/520
Q.
R.
S.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
The minimum bottom slope of facilities not designed for infiltration shall be 1%. A flatter slope may
be used if an equivalent dewatering mechanism is provided.
If required, dewatering shall be provided through the use of underdrain, surface device, or an
alternate approved by the Township Engineer. If the facility is to be used for infiltration, the
dewatering device should be capable of being disconnected and only being made operational if
the basin is not dewatering within the required time frame.
Within basins designed for infiltration, existing native vegetation shall be preserved, if possible.
For existing unvegetated areas or for infiltration basins that require excavation, a planting plan
shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter and the BMP Manual.
§ 229-48. Design standards — volume control.
Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method in Subsection
A below.
The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable to any size of regulated
activity. This method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions.
The post-development total runoff volume shall not increase for all storms equal to or less
than the two-year, twenty-four-hour storm event.
For modeling purposes:
Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be considered meadow in
good condition.
Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present, shall be considered meadow
in good condition in the model for existing conditions.
The maximum loading ratio for volume control facilities in karst areas shall be 3:1
impervious drainage area to infiltration area and 5:1 total drainage area to infiltration
area. The maximum loading ratio for volume control facilities in non-karst areas shall be
5:1 impervious drainage area to infiltration area and 8:1 total drainage area to infiltration
area. A higher ratio would be acceptable if proper justification is submitted and approved.
Any portion of the volume control storage that meets the following conditions may also be used as
rate control storage:
Volume control storage that depends on infiltration and is designed according to the infiltration
standards in this chapter and the BMP Manual.
The volume control storage which will be used for rate control is that storage which is
available within 24 hours from the end of the design storm based on the stabilized infiltration
rate and/or the evapotranspiration rate.
Volume control BMPs and pretreatment elements shall be designed in accordance with the BMP
Manual and the soil and infiltration testing requirements of § 229-43.
All applicable worksheets from Chapter 8 of the BMP Manual must be used when establishing
volume controls.
§ 229-49. Design standards — subsurface storage facilities.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 195/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
Subsurface storage facilities shall consist of all stormwater facilities which store,
infiltrate/evaporate/transpire, clean, release, or otherwise affect stormwater runoff and the top of
which is not exposed to the natural environment. Subsurface facilities shall be located below the
finished ground elevation. Subsurface facilities shall not include stormwater management facilities
designed for conveyance.
Subsurface storage facilities shall comply with the design criteria in the following table:
Subsurface Storage Facility Design Criteria
Facility Type
Infiltration and Storage Storage Without Infiltration
Facility Geometry
Depth from surface
(maximum)
2 feet less than limiting zone N/A
Loading ratio (maximum) Per BMP Manual* N/A
Distribution System
Requirements
Pipe size (minimum) 4 inches 4 inches
Loading/balancing Required Not required
Observation/access ports Required Required
NOTES:
* Unless otherwise determined by professional geologic evaluation.
The facility shall be designed according to the BMP Manual to provide pretreatment to eliminate
solids, sediment, and other debris from entering the subsurface facility.
The facility shall be designed to provide a means of evenly balancing the flow across the surface
of the facility to be used for infiltration.
For facilities with the bottom less than five feet below the average grade of the ground surface, a
cleanout shall be an acceptable observation port. For facilities with the bottom five feet or more
below the average grade of the ground surface, a manhole or other means acceptable to the
Township shall be provided for access to and monitoring of the facility. The number of access
points shall be sufficient to flush or otherwise clean out the system.
Storage and distribution system piping shall be PVC, SLHDPE, or RCP.
The stone used for infiltration beds shall be clean washed, uniformly graded coarse aggregate.
The void ratio for design shall be assumed to be 40%.
Material consistency and placement depths for backfill shall be (at a minimum) per all applicable
pipe manufacturer's recommendations, further providing it should be free of large (not exceeding
six inches in any dimension) stone, rock, or other objectionable or detritus material. Select
nonaggregate material should be indigenous to the surrounding soil material for nonvehicular
areas. Backfill within vehicular areas shall comply with this section unless otherwise specified in
governing municipal road/street or subdivision and land development ordinances. Furthermore, if
the design concept includes the migration of runoff through the backfill to reach the infiltration
facility, the material shall be well-drained, free of excess clay or clay-like materials and generally
uniform in gradation.
Nonwoven geotextiles shall be placed on all sides of subsurface infiltration facilities.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 196/520
J.
K.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
When located under pavement, the top of the subsurface facility shall be a minimum of three
inches below the bottom of the pavement subbase. Where located under vegetative cover, the top
of the subsurface facility shall be a minimum of 12 inches below the surface elevation or as
required to establish vegetation.
Subsurface facilities shall be designed to safely convey and/or bypass flows from storms
exceeding the design storm.
§ 229-50. through § 229-54. (Reserved)
Article VI. Administration
§ 229-55. Responsibilities of applicants and landowners.
The Township shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities
prior to final approval of the stormwater management site plan. The Township may require a
dedication of such facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the stormwater
management site plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the Township will accept the
facilities. The Township reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and operating
responsibility for any portion of the stormwater management controls.
Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management BMPs shall be enumerated as
permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions or conservation
easements that run with the land.
The operation and maintenance plans and agreements shall be recorded as a restrictive deed
covenant that runs with the land.
§ 229-56. Operation and maintenance agreements.
Prior to final approval of the development site's stormwater management site plan, the record owner of
the development site shall sign and record an operation and maintenance agreement covering all
stormwater control facilities that are to be privately owned. Said agreement, as provided in Appendix
F, is attached and made part hereto. The agreement shall stipulate that:
The landowner, successor and assignees shall maintain all facilities in good working order in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule and shall keep all facilities in a safe manner.
The landowner shall convey to the Township easements and/or rights-of-way to assure access for
periodic inspections by the Township and maintenance, if required.
The owner shall keep on file with the Township the name, address and telephone number of the
person or company responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new
information will be submitted to the Township within 10 days of the change.
In the case of condominium and planned communities, separate agreements will be entered and
be in a legal form capable of being enforced against the common elements and the ownership
interests of the individual units or properties, as the case may be, so that the Township has the
ability to force compliance with the provisions of such agreements and to assess the cost (as set
forth in this chapter) against all owners so that the Township does not incur out-of-pocket
expenses.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 197/520
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the stormwater management
BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and maintenance agreement, the Township
may perform the services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees
may result in a lien against the property.
Where drainage facilities are approved within a state highway, a perpetual agreement or bond
shall be required of the applicant for maintenance of said facilities.
Where the NPDES permit for the project requires that BMPs be installed, annual written reporting
of the inspection and maintenance of those BMPs shall be included in the program.
§ 229-57. Performance guarantee.
A financial security (bond, restricted account or letter of credit) for stormwater-related
improvements shall be supplied by the applicant in conjunction with the subdivision/land
development approval, or in conjunction with the stormwater management site plan approval if no
subdivision/land development plan is required.
The applicant shall provide a financial security to the Township for the timely installation and
proper construction of all stormwater management facilities, as required by the approved
stormwater management site plan and this chapter and, as applicable, in accordance with the
provisions of Article 5 of the MPC.
As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial
security may request the Township to release or authorize the release of, from time to time, such
portions of the financial security necessary for the payment to the contractor or contractors
performing the work. Any such request shall be in writing and addressed to the Supervisors, and
the Supervisors shall have 45 days from the receipt of such request to allow the Township
Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Supervisors that such portion of the work has been completed
in accordance with the approved plan. Upon such certification, the Supervisors shall authorize
release from the required financial security of an amount as estimated by the Township Engineer
as representing the value of the work completed.
In the event that any stormwater management facilities which may be required have not been
installed as provided in the approved stormwater management site plan, the Supervisors are
hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and
equitable remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of
installing or making repairs or corrections to all the stormwater management facilities covered by
said security, the Supervisors may, at their option, install part of such stormwater management
facilities and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the monies necessary to
complete the remainder of the stormwater management facilities. All of the proceeds, whether
resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought against the applicant, or
both, shall be used solely for the installation of the stormwater management facilities covered by
such security and not for any other municipal purpose.
For stormwater management site plans that are required to have an NPDES permit and a financial
security to the Township is required, evidence of the NPDES permit's executed "notice of
termination" shall be provided to the Township prior to the release of the financial security.
Financial security shall not be finally released until an as-built plan, as described in § 229-61, has
been submitted to the Township and approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 229-58. Maintenance responsibilities.
Maintenance of stormwater management facilities shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 198/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
Regular inspection of the stormwater management facilities to assure proper implementation
of BMPs, maintenance and care, as per Subsection B below.
All pipes, swales and detention facilities shall be kept free of any debris or other obstruction
and in original design condition.
Removal of silt from all permanent structures which trap silt or sediment in order to keep the
material from building up in stormwater management facilities and thus reducing their
capacity to convey or store water.
Mowing grass areas as necessary to maintain adequate growth and to control weeds.
Chemical weed control may be used to maintain the specified planting (i.e., grass, wetlands
plants, etc.) if federal, state and local laws and regulations are met.
Liming and fertilizing vegetated channels and other areas according to the specifications in
the PADEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual.
Reestablishment of vegetation by seeding and mulching or sodding of scoured areas or areas
where vegetation has not been successfully established. Selection of seed mixtures shall be
subject to approval by the Township.
Where the NPDES permit for the project requires that BMPs be installed, annual written
reporting of the inspection and maintenance of those BMPs shall be provided to the
Township. LID practices shall be included in the annual written report. A form for reporting
shall be available at the Township Office. Failure to provide such reports may result in
enforcement and penalties by the Township.
Stormwater management BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the landowner's designee
(including the Township for dedicated and owned facilities), according to the following list of
minimum frequencies:
Annually for the first five years.
Once every three years thereafter.
During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater storm (equating to at least
4.5 inches of rainfall in a twenty-four-hour period).
The Township reserves the right to accept or reject any proposal to dedicate ownership and
operating responsibility of any stormwater management facilities to the Township.
§ 229-59. Maintenance of existing facilities/BMPs.
Stormwater management facilities existing on the effective date of this chapter, which have not been
accepted by the Township or for which maintenance responsibility has not been assumed by a private
entity such as a homeowners' association, shall be maintained by the individual landowners. Such
maintenance shall include, at a minimum, those items set forth in § 229-58 above. If the Township
determines at any time that any permanent stormwater management facility has been eliminated,
altered, blocked through the erection of structures or the deposit of materials, or improperly
maintained, the condition constitutes a nuisance; and the Township shall notify the landowner of
corrective measures that are required and provide for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30
days, within which the landowner shall take such corrective action. If the landowner does not take the
required corrective action, the Township may either perform the work or contract for the performance of
the work and bill the landowner for the cost of the work plus a penalty of 10% of the cost of the work. If
such bill is not paid by the landowner within 30 days, the Township may file a municipal claim against
the property upon which the work was performed in accordance with the applicable laws. The
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 199/520
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
E.
F.
A.
Township shall have the right to choose among the remedies and may use one or more remedies
concurrently.
§ 229-60. Modification of approved plans and facilities.
Any modification which involves a change in stormwater management control methods or
techniques, or which involves the relocation or redesign of control measures, or which is
necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the approved plan, shall require
the submission of a revised plan by the applicant in accordance with the plan requirements as set
forth in Article III of this chapter.
Any replatting, revision, or resubdivision of recorded plans or any replatting, revision, or
resubdivision of any approved final plan which has not been recorded, including lot grading plans
in subdivisions, shall be considered as a new application and shall comply with all the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 229-61. As-built plan.
Prior to the final release of the financial security, the applicant shall provide the Township with one
Mylar, two paper copies, and a portable document format (PDF) file of the final as-built plan showing
the following:
Actual location of the floodplain by elevation and dimensions from property lines.
Actual location and cross section of swales and accompanying easements.
Actual horizontal and vertical location of stormwater management facilities, including type and size
of storm drainage pipes.
Aboveground (as defined in § 229-47A) storage facilities:
Actual contours of the stormwater management facility.
Actual outlet structure details, including type, size and inverts of outlet pipes.
Actual elevation of the embankment and emergency spillway.
A table showing the stage/storage/discharge curve for the constructed conditions.
A table providing a comparison of the approved design vs. the as-built discharge rates from
all stormwater management facilities.
When a digital submission of an as-built plan is required, all coordinates as depicted on the plan
shall be based on the PA South Zone State Plane Coordinate System (NAD83 for horizontal and
NAVD88 for vertical).
The as-built plan submission shall include a certification of completion signed by the applicant's
qualified professional verifying that all permanent stormwater management BMPs have been
constructed according to the approved plans and specifications. If any qualified licensed
professionals contributed to the construction plans, then a qualified licensed professional must
sign the completion certificate.
§ 229-62. Prohibited discharges and connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 229-62C below:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 200/520
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
C.
D.
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows any
nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to enter a
separate storm sewer system (if applicable) or waters of this commonwealth and any
connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks; and
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the separate
storm sewer system (if applicable) which has not been documented in plans, maps, or
equivalent records and approved by the Township.
No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters of this commonwealth
which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
As provided in § 229-62C below; and
Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined by the Township or PADEP to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this commonwealth:
Discharges from firefighting activities.
Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
Springs.
Air-conditioning condensate.
Water from crawl space pumps.
Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, diverted stream flows.
Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not
occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and where detergents are not used.
Irrigation and landscape irrigation drainage.
Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
Lawn watering.
Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
Uncontaminated pumped groundwater, rising groundwater, and groundwater infiltration.
Water from individual residential car washing.
Routine external building wash down (which does not use detergents or other compounds).
In the event that the Township or PADEP determines that any of the discharges identified in § 229-
62C above significantly contribute to pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the Township
or PADEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
§ 229-63. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge, to the maximum extent practicable, to infiltration or
vegetative BMPs.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 201/520
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
§ 229-64. Right of entry.
As required in § 229-34A, the stormwater management site plan shall include a note on the plan
informing the owner that the Township shall have the right of entry for the purposes of inspecting all
stormwater conveyance, treatment, or storage facilities.
§ 229-65. Notification.
In the event that any person fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or fails to conform to
the requirements of any permit issued hereunder, the Township shall provide written notification of the
violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a reasonable time
limit for correction of the violation(s). Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and
shall not preclude the Township from pursuing any and all other remedies.
§ 229-66. Enforcement/violations.
The Supervisors are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter.
All inspections regarding compliance with the stormwater management site plan shall be the
responsibility of the Township Engineer or other qualified persons designated by the Township.
The Township may provide a limited time period for the owner to correct any violation. In
these cases, the Township will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written
notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner to correct the violation. If the
owner does not correct the violation within the allowed time period, the Township may revoke
or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision of this
chapter.
Any approval or permit issued by the Township pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or
revoked for:
Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the approved stormwater
management site plan or operation and maintenance agreement.
A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or
regulation relating to the regulated activity.
The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during the regulated activity
which constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance, or pollution, or endangers the life or
property of others.
A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Township when the Township has inspected
and approved the corrections to the violations that caused the suspension.
An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be reinstated. The applicant may
apply for a new approval under the provisions of this chapter.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to commit any of the following acts:
To commence regulated activities prior to obtaining unconditional approval of a stormwater
management site plan or in violation of the terms or conditions of a stormwater management
site plan approved under this chapter.
To install, repair, modify or alter stormwater management facilities prior to obtaining approvals
under this chapter or in a manner which violates the terms and conditions of any approval
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 202/520
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
issued under this chapter.
To misuse or fail to maintain any stormwater management facility installed upon a property.
To construct any improvements upon, grade, fill, place any structure, landscaping or
vegetation, or take any other action which will impair the proper functioning of any stormwater
management facility without the written approval of the Township.
To place false information on, or omit relevant information from, an application for approval
under this chapter.
To fail to comply with any other provisions of this chapter.
§ 229-67. Violations and penalties; remedies.
For each violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner, agent, lessee, or contractor or any
other person who commits, takes part in, or assists in any such violation shall be liable, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, to pay a fine of not less than $200 nor more than
$1,000 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution. Each day or portion thereof on
which a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation of this chapter, and each section
of this chapter which is violated shall be considered a separate violation.
The Township may also institute suits to restrain, prevent, or abate a violation of this chapter in
equity or at law. Such proceedings in equity or at law may be initiated before any court of
competent jurisdiction. In cases of emergency where, in the opinion of the court, the
circumstances of the case require immediate abatement of the unlawful conduct, the court may, in
its decree, fix a reasonable time during which the person responsible for the unlawful conduct
shall correct or abate the same. The expense of such proceedings shall be recoverable from the
person responsible for the unlawful conduct in such manner as may now or hereafter be provided
by law.
The Supervisors may also take actions relating to suspension or revocation of permits set forth in
§ 229-66.
The Supervisors may, by resolution, appoint a Code Enforcement Officer to enforce this chapter
and may authorize such Code Enforcement Officer to institute summary criminal proceedings
without prior action by the Supervisors.
§ 229-68. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee may appeal to Supervisors
within 30 days of that action. Any such appeal shall be governed by the procedures of Article V of
the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa. C.S.A. § 401 et seq.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of Supervisors may appeal to the Lancaster County Court
of Common Pleas within 30 days of that decision, in accordance with Article VII of Local Agency
Law, 2 Pa. C.S.A § 701 et seq.
§ 229-69. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect and be in force five days after its enactment by the Supervisors of the
Township of Lancaster, as provided by law.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 203/520
[1]
Chapter 231. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 204.
Sewers — See Ch. 209.
Skateboards, scooters and rollerblades — See Ch. 215.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 229.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 236.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 263.
231a Appendix 1 Arterial and Collector Streets
Article I. Approval of Public Streets
[Adopted 3-5-1954 by Ord. No. 1954-2]
§ 231-1. Approval required.
From and after the passage of this article, no person, partnership, association or corporation shall
construct, open or dedicate any building development, any road, street, lane or alley, or any sewer or
drainage facilities in connection therewith, for public use or travel in the Township of Lancaster, without
first submitting plans and specifications therefor to the Township Supervisors for their approval; and no
building development, road, street, lane or alley, nor sewer or drainage facilities in connection
therewith, shall be opened, laid or constructed except in strict accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Township Supervisors.
§ 231-2. Plan specifications and requirements.
Such plans, prepared in duplicate, shall show the profiles of such building development, roads, streets,
lanes or alleys; the course, structure and capacity of any sewage or drainage facilities; the method of
drainage of the adjacent or contiguous territory and drainage profile of the streets and a plan showing
drainage of the whole property; and the size of the lots, which shall conform with the Zoning Ordinance
of the Township.[1] All roads and streets shall be of a width of not less than 50 feet, the cartway shall
be not less than 36 feet, and all roads and streets connecting with existing streets so as to form a
continuation or extension thereof shall be not less in width than such existing roads and street. All
roads and streets, where possible, shall connect with existing roads and streets, or proposed roads
and streets, so as to form as nearly as possible through roads and streets and a harmonious and
systematic development of the Township. The names of the roads and streets shall not conflict with the
names of existing roads and streets, and all roads and streets shall be designated by the names of
existing roads and streets with which they connect as extensions thereof.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 231-3. Filing of plan for approval; hearing.
All such plans, in duplicate, shall be filed with the Township Secretary at least 10 days prior to the
regular meeting of the Township Supervisors at which it is desired to seek approval thereof. Before
acting upon any such plans, the Township Supervisors may, in their discretion, arrange for a public
hearing, after giving such notice as they may deem desirable in each case.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 204/520
§ 231-4. Plan alterations and modifications.
The Township Supervisors reserve the right to alter such plans, and to specify any changes or
modifications of any kind which they may deem necessary with respect thereto, and to make their
approval of such plans subject to any such alterations, changes or modifications. The approval of such
plans shall not, however, be capriciously or unreasonably withheld.
§ 231-5. Approval and filing of plans.
Any and all plans when so approved shall be signed by the Supervisors and shall be filed in the office
of the Secretary of the Township, where the same shall be available to public inspection.
§ 231-6. Record of plans.
The action of the Township Supervisors in approving any such plans, and such plans, shall be
recorded by the person applying for such approval.
§ 231-7. Street improvements.
All roads and streets shown on the said plan shall be improved in accordance with the plans and
specifications prescribed by the Township Supervisors, and as such specifications may be changed
from time to time.
§ 231-8. Sewer connections.
All sewers, sewer laterals, and sewer connections shall be laid on all improved streets before paving
where connection with the Township sewers is practicable and shall be required by the Township
Supervisors; and all gas and water mains and all service connections shall be laid before the paving of
the streets where water and gas is available; and all other mains, pipes and conduits and the like shall
be installed before paving of the cartway where it is proposed to install any such service mains in the
streets.
§ 231-9. Dedication.
No action by the Township Supervisors shall be construed to require the Township to accept dedication
of any road, street, lane or alley.
§ 231-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, copartnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding two years, or both, in the discretion of the court.
Article II. Clear Sight Triangles
[Adopted 8-24-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-5]
§ 231-11. Definitions.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 205/520
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings herein indicated:
BUILDING
Any structure constructed or used for a residence, business, industry, or other public or private
purpose, or accessory thereto, and including porches, swimming pools, greenhouses, stables,
garages, roadside stands, mobile homes, and similar structures, whether stationary or movable.
OBSTRUCTION
Any opaque, transparent or semitransparent object or structure which can cause a reduction of
visibility.
PERSON
Any individual, association, public or private corporation, partnership, firm, trust, estate or any
legal entity.
PLANTING
Any vegetative growth, whether planted as part of the landscaping or left to grow in a natural state.
STREET
A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way, intended as a means of vehicular circulation.
STRUCTURE
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether
or not affixed to the land.
§ 231-12. Sight obstructions prohibited.
No building, structure, planting, or other obstruction shall be permitted which would endanger
public safety along any street or public roadway by obscuring sight visibility along said street.
Intersections.
No building, structure, planting or other obstruction shall be permitted which would endanger
public safety by obscuring sight visibility at public street intersections.
A one-hundred-foot clear sight triangle shall be maintained at all street intersections. The
clear sight triangle shall be established by measuring 100 feet from the intersection of the
street center line along said center lines. Said clear sight lines shall be measured at a height
of three feet above the surface of the street.
§ 231-13. Enforcement; removal of obstruction; collection of
costs.
The Manager of the Township, or, if there is no Township Manager, then the Township Zoning Officer,
who shall be deemed to have police powers in the enforcement of this article, shall serve written
notice, either personally or by certified or first-class mail, on any person violating the provisions of this
article to remove the vision obstruction along any public street or at the intersection of any public
street. Upon failure of said person to comply with such notice within one year for buildings and other
structures or within 90 days for plantings and other obstructions or to request a hearing within 90 days
in any case before the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the Act of December 2, 1968, P.L. 1133,
known as the "Local Agency Law,"[1] the Board of Supervisors of the Township may remove or cause
to be removed the vision obstruction and collect the cost of such removal, together with a penalty of
25% of the cost of the removal, from the person failing to comply with such notice by summary
proceedings or in the manner provided for collection of municipal claims or by an action of assumpsit
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 206/520
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
without the filing of a claim. The Board of Supervisors may also institute proceedings in equity to enjoin
violations of this article.
Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
§ 231-13.1. Dumpsters and portable storage devices in public
rights-of-way.
[Added 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
Purpose. The primary purpose of public streets is for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
Reasonable regulation of obstruction in public streets and sidewalks is necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the general public.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DUMPSTER
A metal storage receptacle used to temporarily store debris or garbage and which is then
emptied of its contents or removed with its contents to a dumpsite.
PORTABLE STORAGE DEVICE
Any item placed in a street that is not a motor vehicle, as defined by the Pennsylvania Vehicle
Code, or a temporary dumpster, including, but not limited to, containers commonly known as
"portable storage devices" or "PODS®."
TEMPORARY DUMPSTER
Any dumpster used or intended as a disposal facility for construction, renovation, or
demolition projects, special events, seasonal use, or other purposes not permanent in nature.
Prior to the issuance of any permit for any dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage
device, its location and usage shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
A permit for a dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device shall be for an initial term
of not more than 14 days. Provided the applicant is in compliance with all provisions of this article
and all other applicable Township regulations, a renewal permit may be approved and issued for
an additional fourteen-day period upon application and payment of the permit renewal fee. Not
more than one renewal permit shall be issued by the Township for any dumpster, temporary
dumpster, or portable storage device placed upon any Township street. The dumpster, temporary
dumpster, or portable storage device shall be removed prior to the expiration of the permit.
The following requirements shall apply to any dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage
device placed upon public streets or pedestrian ways in the Township: No dumpster, temporary
dumpster, or portable storage device may be placed on any arterial or collector roads in the
Township; within 40 feet of an intersection; or within any prohibited or restricted areas.
Sufficient reflective tape shall be placed upon all four sides of the dumpster, temporary dumpster,
or portable storage device in such a manner as to make it visible at night.
Each of the dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device rollers or wheels (if any)
must be placed upon a wooden pad of at least six inches by six inches and at least 3/4 of an inch
in thickness, or on a similarly protective device, in order to prevent damage to the road surface.
No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device shall be placed nearer than 15 feet
to any fire hydrant within the cartway or other area intended for firefighting equipment.
The name, address and telephone number of the dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable
storage device owner/operator shall be conspicuously placed on at least two sides of the device.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 207/520
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
[1]
No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device shall be placed within the cartway of
any street extending a distance of more than nine feet from the curbline or edge of the cartway.
The location of any dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device upon any public
street shall not interfere with any required clear sight distance across any intersection.
The location of any dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device upon any public
street shall not obstruct any pedestrian way or the travel lane of any public street.
No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device shall be loaded in such a manner as
to cause its contents to spill onto any street, sidewalk, or other area intended for pedestrian travel.
No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device shall contain any hazardous waste
unless pursuant to a permit for such waste issued by the appropriate governmental entity.
No materials contained in a dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device shall emit
any noxious or offensive odor or otherwise create any hazard or risk to public health.
No dumpster, temporary dumpster, or portable storage device shall be placed in such a manner as
to interfere with the operation or maintenance of any public utility.
The permit shall be conspicuously placed in a location that permits it to be identified from a public
street.
The placement of any dumpster shall be in accordance with all requirements of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
If any damage or injury to the cartway, curb or sidewalk shall be caused or done by the use or
occupancy of any street or road hereunder, the party to whom such permit shall have been issued
shall be responsible and liable for the same and shall restore the cartway, curb and/or sidewalk to
its original condition. If the permittee refuses to properly restore the cartway, curb and/or sidewalk
to its original condition, the Township may do so and collect the cost of the same from the
permittee.
§ 231-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof by
summary proceeding before any District Justice having jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300. If a defendant, sentenced to pay a fine or costs after a finding of guilt in a summary
case, defaults in such payments, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the Lancaster
County Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days. Such fine and costs shall be in addition to the
remedies provided in § 231-13 of this article and shall be enforceable and recoverable in the manner
provided by applicable law. All fines collected for the violation of this article shall be paid to the
Treasurer of the Township for the general use of the Township.
Article III. Management of Rights-of-Way
[Adopted 7-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04[1]]
Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. III, Street Openings and Excavations,
adopted 3-13-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-3.
§ 231-15. Interpretation; definitions.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 208/520
Terms used in this article shall have the following meanings, whether or not the terms are capitalized.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, terms not defined in this article shall be construed consistent with
Title 47 of the United States Code and, if not defined therein, with their common and ordinary meaning.
AERIAL FACILITIES
Poles, wires, cables, equipment, and other facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including their underground supports and foundations. Such term does not include aerial facilities
located in private driveways, newspaper vending machines or street banners, canopies or other
minor obstructions located in the rights-of-way.
AFFILIATE
A person that directly or indirectly owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common
ownership with or control by another person.
APPLICANT
Any public utility, including any cable franchise, regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission, seeking to obtain from Township a permit for work to be performed within the rightof-
way pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to this article. The applicant shall be the public utility
and not any contractor or subcontractor engaged to perform the work which is the subject of the
permit.
CABLE ACT
The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended by the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as hereafter
amended (47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as hereafter amended).
CABLE FRANCHISE AGREEMENT
Right-of-way use agreement required pursuant to the Cable Act and the Township Code for any
cable franchise issued by the Township.
CABLE FRANCHISE FEE
A fee paid by a cable operator pursuant to a cable franchise agreement for the cable operator's
use of the Township's rights-of-way. The fee is calculated as a percentage of the cable operator's
gross revenues from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services in the Township.
CABLE FRANCHISE or FRANCHISE
Right-of-way use authorization pursuant to this article authorizing a person to own, construct,
operate and maintain a cable system to provide cable service or an OVS system to provide OVS
service within the Township.
CABLE OPERATOR
A person providing or offering to provide cable service over a cable system within the Township as
that term is defined in the Cable Act.
CABLE SERVICE
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service and
subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming
or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM
Facilities consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the Township, but such term
does not include i) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more
television broadcast stations; ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any right-of-way; iii)
a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable
system [other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)] to the extent such facility is used in the
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 209/520
A.
B.
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely
to provide interactive on-demand services; iv) an open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C.
§ 573; or v) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. A
reference to a cable system refers to any part thereof. This definition of "cable system" shall in no
way be deemed to circumscribe or limit the valid authority of the Township to regulate or authorize
the facilities and/or services of any other telecommunications provider or other person that owns,
constructs, operates, or maintains facilities in the right-of-way.
CARTWAY
That portion of a street or alley right-of-way that is intended for vehicular movement.
CERTIFICATE
A certificate of public convenience issued by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission to a
public utility.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT
The Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq., as amended and as hereafter
amended.
DEPARTMENT
The Public Works Department of the Township of Lancaster.
EMERGENCY
A condition that:
Constitutes a clear and immediate danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public; or
Has caused or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be unusable and result in loss
of the services provided.
FACILITY(IES)
Conduit, pipes, cables, wires, lines, towers, optic fiber, antennas, poles, associated equipment and
appurtenances, and any other facilities located in the right-of-way and designed, constructed,
and/or used by telecommunications providers, public utilities, or other persons for transmitting,
transporting, or distributing communications, telecommunications, electricity, natural gas or
manufactured gas, oil, gasoline, steam, or any other form of energy, signal or substance.
FRANCHISE
A right-of-way use authorization pursuant to this article that authorizes a person to own, construct,
operate and maintain a cable system to provide cable service or an OVS system to provide OVS
service within the Township.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT
A cable franchise agreement or OVS agreement.
FRANCHISEE
A person that is issued a franchise by the Township.
INFORMATION SERVICE
The offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving,
utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications (whether over a cable system,
telecommunications system, open video system, or any other type of facilities), and includes
electronic publishing, but does not include any use of any such capability for the management,
control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a telecommunications
service.
NON-PUC-REGULATED ENTITY or ENTITY
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 210/520
Any corporation, company, association, joint-stock company, firm, partnership, limited liability
company, or other entity; municipal, industrial development, housing, redevelopment, and other
authority or corporation established pursuant to statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
and any individual not regulated as a public utility by the Public Utility Commission.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM or OVS
Facilities consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception,
and control equipment that is designed to provide video programming services, cable service,
and/or services similar to cable service to multiple subscribers within the Township and which the
Federal Communications Commission or its successor has certified as compliant with Part 76 of
its rules, 47 CFR 76.1500 et seq., as amended from time to time, provided that an open video
system is not a system of telecommunications facilities and does not provide telecommunications
service to the extent that it provides only video services; and provided, further, that an open video
system means only those facilities that are operated by a person authorized to provide video
services pursuant to Section 653 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C.
§ 573, where such person is properly certificated to provide such services pursuant to applicable
Federal Communications Commission regulations.
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEM SERVICE or OVS SERVICE
Video programming services that are provided over an open video system.
PERMITTEE
The recipient of a right-of-way use permit or cable franchise that is issued by the Township
pursuant to this article, and persons holding existing franchises, special ordinances, or other
authorizations that are subject to the transitional provisions set forth in this article, including the
Township, its departments, agencies, and authorities.
PERSON
Corporations, companies, associations, joint-stock companies, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies, and other entities; municipal, industrial development, housing, redevelopment, and
other authorities and corporations established pursuant to statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania; and individuals.
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
The written regulations, standards, operations and/or courses of action established by the
Township to implement the provisions of this article. The preparation and promulgation of policies
and procedures are solely the function of the Public Works Superintendent, with the Township
adopting the same by resolution.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSION or PUC
The state administrative agency, or lawful successor thereto, authorized to regulate and oversee
public utilities and telecommunications providers and telecommunications services in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to the extent provided by law.
PUBLIC UTILITY or UTILITY
Shall be defined as that term is defined in the Pennsylvania Public Utility Code as of the effective
date of this article, and as hereafter amended.
PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT
The Superintendent of the Public Works Department. Except for the preparation and promulgation
of policies and procedures, which is solely the function of the Superintendent, such term shall
include the employees, agents and assignees of the Director.
PUC-REGULATED UTILITY
Any entity which is operating as a public utility as defined under the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Code and is subject to regulation by the PUC, regardless of whether or not the entity has been
issued a certificate of public convenience by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 211/520
RIGHT-OF-WAY USE AUTHORIZATION or ROW USE AUTHORIZATION
A license, right-of-way use permit, cable franchise, or OVS franchise issued pursuant to this
article.
RIGHT-OF-WAY USE PERMIT or ROW USE PERMIT
A right-of-way use permit issued pursuant to this article.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, RIGHTS-OF-WAY or ROW
The surface of and space above and below any real property in the Township in which the
Township has a regulatory interest, or interest as a trustee for the public, as such interests now or
hereafter exist, including, but not limited to, all streets, highways, avenues, roads, alleys,
sidewalks, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways, or any other public place, area or property under
the control of the Township, and any unrestricted public or utility easements established,
dedicated, platted, improved or devoted for utility purposes, but excluding lands other than streets
that are owned by the Township. The phrase "in the right(s)-of-way" means "in, on, over, along,
above and/or under the right(s)-of-way."
SERVICE(S)
Any telecommunications service, cable service, OVS service, video programming service,
information service, utility service (including, but not limited to, electric, gas, water, or steam
service), or other form of service provided by means of facilities located in the right-of-way.
STREET
A strip of land or part thereof within the right-of-way, whether dedicated or not, that is intended or
used for vehicular and pedestrian traffic. The phrase "in the(a) street(s)" means "in, on, over,
along, above and/or under the(a) street(s)."
STREET OPENING PERMIT
A permit for excavation of a street for the construction or installation of facilities in any right-of-way
in the Township.
SYSTEM
Any cable system, OVS system, telecommunications system, or integral part thereof.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's
choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
The plant, equipment and property within the Township used to transmit, receive, distribute,
provide or offer telecommunications service.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER
A person who provides telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE
The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to
be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
A system that offers telecommunications service.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Lancaster, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP CODE
The Code of the Township of Lancaster, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 212/520
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
TOWNSHIP PROPERTY
All real property now or hereafter owned by the Township whether in fee ownership or other
interest.
TOWNSHIP WORK
All construction work performed by the Township or any of its Departments, either with its own
personnel or under contract, including repair, alteration, replacement, or maintenance of facilities
owned, operated, maintained, or controlled by the Township or for which the Township is
responsible.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES
Utility and telecommunications facilities located under the surface of the ground, excluding the
underground foundations or supports for aerial facilities.
§ 231-16. Public Utility Commission-regulated activities.
All public utilities regulated by the Public Utility Commission owning or operating facilities in the
Township's rights-of-way shall comply with the following requirements:
License. All public utilities shall be deemed to have a license from the Township under this article
to occupy the rights-of-way.
As-built maps. Within 30 days of enactment of this Ordinance, each public utility shall submit to
the Department two paper copies and one electronic copy of an as-built map or maps and
engineering specifications as set forth in the Township policies and procedures pertaining to
management of rights-of-way to be promulgated by the Public Works Superintendent and adopted
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors from time to time, depicting and certifying the location of
all its existing facilities within Township rights-of-way. Such electronic and paper maps and
engineering specifications shall be submitted in a format and include the information required by
the Township by/in the policies and procedures. If the maps are not provided electronically in the
required format, then the utility shall reimburse the Township for the cost of converting paper maps
into electronic form or the cost of converting electronic maps in another format into the required
format. Such maps are, and shall remain, confidential documents and are exempt from public
disclosure under Pennsylvania's Right to Know Law, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 708; the Public Utility
Confidential Security Information Disclosure Protection Act, 35 P.S. §§ 2141.1 through 2141.3;
and the Public Utility Commission Regulations relating to confidential security information, 52 Pa.
Code § 102.1 After submission of the as-built maps required under this section, each public utility
having facilities in the Township rights-of-way shall update such maps as required under this
article.
Right to inspect. The Township may conduct inspections of the Township rights-of-way in order to
ensure that utility facilities located within such rights-of-way do not constitute a public safety
hazard and remain in compliance with the standards set forth by the Public Utility Commission.
Such inspections shall be limited to establishing whether such facilities meet relevant PUC
standards and comply with such Township construction standards as relate to the opening and
closing of Township streets, curbs, and sidewalks, as provided under 15 Pa.C.S.A. § 1511(e). In
the event that the Township determines that any facilities of a utility are not in compliance with
such standards, then the Township may bring a complaint against such utility before the Public
Utility Commission, in accordance with established PUC procedures. The Township may also
elect, in its discretion, to notify the utility of the existence of any noncompliant facilities, in order to
abate such violations without the need for the filing of a formal PUC complaint.
Construction in rights-of-way.
Street opening permits. Except in the case of an emergency, no utility shall perform any street
excavation in the rights-of-way without first obtaining a street opening permit and paying a
permit fee in accordance with the provisions of this article. No utility shall perform curb and
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 213/520
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
sidewalk construction replacement or repair without first obtaining a curb and sidewalk permit
and paying a fee pursuant to this article. The procurement of a street opening permit shall
only be necessary when the proposed street excavation and/or construction impacts
Township streets; it shall not apply to any construction or excavation activities on state roads.
Construction standards. Construction standards shall include those determined by the Public
Utility Commission for the installation of facilities in Township rights-of-way, as well as such
Township construction standards adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the
Township as relate to the opening and closing of Township streets, curbs, and sidewalks, as
provided under 15 Pa.C.S.A. § 1511(e). Compliance with construction requirements pursuant
to PUC-related standards shall remain within the sole and exclusive jurisdiction of the PUC.
Compliance with construction requirements pursuant to Township standards shall remain
within the jurisdiction of the Township. The Township shall retain the right to file formal
complaints pursuant to PUC-related construction as set forth under Subsection D.
Security. Each utility opening, closing, or excavating Township streets, curbs, and sidewalks
as provided under 15 Pa.C.S.A. § 1511(e) in conjunction with the utility's construction or
maintenance activities in the ROW shall furnish to the Township, at the utility's expense, a
letter of credit or other form of financial security, in such form and in the amount as required
by the Township consistent with the Policies and Procedures and regulations of the Township
to guarantee the proper closing and restoration of the Township's streets, sidewalks, or ROW.
The security shall be a continuing obligation until the completion of the construction or
maintenance as confirmed in writing by the Township. Utilities that are performing ongoing
projects or are pursuing multiple projects under one permit shall post security as provided by
this section, which shall be held by the Township until final completion of all construction or
maintenance activities to guarantee the proper closing and restoration of Township streets,
sidewalks or ROW.
Insurance. The applicant shall maintain insurance, with a reputable insurance company
authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, indemnifying the Township
from and against any and all claims for injury or damage to persons or property, both real and
personal, caused by the construction requiring the opening or closing of Township streets,
sidewalks, or ROW in accordance with 15 Pa.C.S.A. § 1511(e). The amounts of such
coverage shall be as determined by the Township by regulation. The Township shall be
designated as an additional insured under each of the insurance policies. The utility shall not
cancel any required insurance policy without first obtaining alternative insurance in
conformance with this section. Utilities undertaking work in the Township rights-of-way shall
provide the Township with at least 30 days' advance written notice of any material changes or
cancellation of any required insurance policy.
Recently constructed streets. No street opening permit shall be issued to cut any Township
street that was constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced, including all streets offered and
accepted for dedication, fewer than three years prior to application for a street opening permit,
unless the applicant agrees in writing to overlay or pave the surface of the street, from curb to
curb and intersection to intersection, in accordance with applicable Township standards. The
Township may grant an exception to this section in the case of an emergency. The applicant
shall pay all street degradation fees and comply with all related requirements as prescribed in
the policies and procedures promulgated by the Public Works Superintendent and adopted by
the Board of Supervisors or as set by resolution from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors.
Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written notice from the Township,
or such longer period as the Township determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, a utility shall temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any facilities within the right-of-way, excluding those
underground, whenever the Township, consistent with applicable PUC regulations, shall have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 214/520
(7)
[1]
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
(2)
E.
the following circumstances: the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way; the operations of the Township or
other governmental entity in the right-of-way; vacation of a street or the release of a utility
easement; or an emergency as determined by the Township. Utilities must relocate and
remove facilities consistent with the regulations and standards of the PUC.
Coordination of construction activities. By March 1 of each year, or at such other time as the
Township and utilities may agree, each public utility shall provide the Department with a
schedule (including plans and projected start and finish dates for each project) of its planned
construction activities for the following year which may affect the rights-of-way. The schedule
shall depict all planned construction activities the utility is planning to perform within the year.
Damage to facilities or property. A utility, including any contractor working for a utility, shall
avoid damage to any facilities and/or public or private property. If any facilities and/or public or
private property is damaged by the utility, including by any contractor working for the utility,
the utility shall promptly repair and restore such property within 10 business days. The utility
shall utilize the Pennsylvania One-Call System prior to any disturbance of the rights-of-way
and shall adhere to all other requirements of the Pennsylvania Underground Utility Line
Protection Act.[1]
Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
Facilities maps. Each utility issued a street opening permit shall submit to the Township, not
later than 30 days after completion of the permitted construction (or any part thereof, if
required by the Township), two paper copies and one electronic copy of updated as-built map
or maps and engineering specifications as set forth in the Policies and Procedures
promulgated by the Public Works Superintendent and adopted by the Board of Supervisors
from time to time, depicting and certifying the location of the new facilities constructed or
updated. Such documents shall be submitted in a format and include the information required
by the Township Policies and Procedures. If the maps are not provided electronically in the
required format, then the utility shall reimburse the Township for the cost of converting paper
maps into electronic form or the cost of converting electronic maps in another format into the
required format.
Field marking. Each utility shall field-mark the locations of its underground facilities upon
request by other utilities or the Township, consistent with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Underground Utility Line Protection Act and at no cost to the Township.
Right-of-way maintenance fee.
Compensation for right-of-way use. Occupancy of Township rights-of-way by any utility is
subject to the Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable compensation, which shall
be directly related to the Township's actual right-of-way maintenance costs.
Annual right-of-way maintenance fee. Each utility with facilities in the Township's rights-of-way
shall pay an annual fee to compensate the Township for its costs incurred in connection with
the ongoing use and occupancy of Township rights-of-way. The annual right-of-way
maintenance fee shall be determined by the Township and authorized by resolution of
Township Board of Supervisors and shall be based on the Township's actual ROW
maintenance costs. The annual right-of-way maintenance fee shall be fixed on a per-linearfoot
basis for underground facilities and on a per-linear-foot basis for aerial facilities. If subject
to a cable franchise agreement, the utility shall not be required to remit both a cable franchise
fee amount and an annual right-of-way maintenance fee to the Township; such utility shall pay
the higher of the two fees to the Township. The annual right-of-way maintenance fee shall
apply also to abandoned lines not removed from Township rights-of-way.
§ 231-17. Non-Public-Utility-Commission-regulated entities.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 215/520
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
Right-of-way use authorization required.
Right-of-way use authorization. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no non-PUCregulated
entity shall own, construct, operate and/or maintain facilities in any right-of-way of
the Township to provide or to enable others to provide services to persons or areas in the
Township or outside the Township without a right-of-way use authorization. The types of rightof-
way use authorization are a right-of-way use permit and a cable franchise. Public utilities
regulated by the PUC shall not be subject to this section and shall comply with the provisions
of this article.
Permit required. Pursuant to this article, all non-PUC-regulated entities that own, construct
and/or maintain facilities in any public right-of-way shall obtain a right-of-way use permit. If
any such entity is subject to a cable franchise agreement, the permittee shall not be required
to remit both a cable franchise fee and an annual right-of-way maintenance fee to the
Township. Such permittee shall pay the higher amount of the two fees to the Township.
Right-of-way use permit.
Permit required; term and scope of permit. No non-PUC-regulated entity, other than a
franchisee, may own, construct, operate and/or maintain facilities that occupy the right-of-way
without first obtaining a ROW use permit. Any ROW use permit shall be subject to such
conditions as the Township may from time to time establish and shall otherwise conform to
the requirements of this article and applicable law. A ROW use permit shall be for a term of
five years. A ROW use permit and the rights, benefits and permissions conferred thereby
shall apply to the entire geographic area of the Township.
Approval by Township. A ROW use permit shall be authorized only by the Township and shall
not become effective unless or until so authorized. In addition to the other requirements
contained herein, the applicant shall demonstrate:
That it has a history of compliance with applicable laws and regulations relating to the
management, construction and maintenance of facilities in streets and rights-of-way,
wherever located; and
That it possesses all licenses, permits, authorizations, and other permissions required by
the Federal Communications Commission, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
Township as a condition of its using the right-of-way and furnishing the services and
operating the facilities proposed by the applicant.
Insurance. Each permittee shall, at all times during the entire term of the right-of-way use
permit, maintain and require its contractors and subcontractors to maintain insurance with a
reputable insurance company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and which has an A.M. Best rating (or equivalent) and no less than an "A"
rating, indemnifying the Township from and against any and all claims for injury or damage to
persons or property, both real and personal, caused by the construction, installation,
operation, maintenance or removal of permittee's system or facilities in the rights-of-way. The
amounts of such coverage shall be as determined by the Township by regulation. The
Township shall be designated as an additional insured under each of the insurance policies
required by this section. The permittee shall not cancel any required insurance policy without
obtaining alternative insurance in conformance with this section. The permittee shall provide
the Township with at least 30 days' advance written notice of any material changes or
cancellation of any required insurance policy.
Indemnification. Each permittee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the Township, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents, at all
times against any and all claims for personal injury, including death, and property damage
arising in whole or in part from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of the
permittee, its officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not limited to, the
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 216/520
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of permittee's system or facilities
in the rights-of-way. Each permittee shall defend any actions or proceedings against the
Township in which it is claimed that personal injury, including death, or property damage was
caused by the permit holder's construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal of
permittee's system or facilities in the rights-of-way. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless
and defend shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay judgments, injuries,
liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all
other costs of indemnification.
Application for right-of-way use permit. Application for a ROW use permit shall be in such
form and shall include such information as the Township determines by regulation. Within a
reasonable period of time not to exceed 60 days after receiving a complete application
hereunder, the Township shall make a determination approving or denying the application.
Determinations to grant or deny an application shall be made on a nondiscriminatory and
competitively neutral basis. If the application is denied, the written determination shall include
the reasons for denial. The application fee, which shall be paid at the time of the filing of the
application, shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of Township Board of
Supervisors. The application fee shall be sufficient to reimburse the Township for the actual
costs of Township staff time and other resources that are required and may be adjusted by
resolution of Township Board of Supervisors.
Renewal of right-of-way use permit.
A person desiring to renew a ROW use permit prior to the expiration of the permit shall
file an application with the Township for renewal of its authorization, which shall include
the information and documents required for an initial application and other material
information required by the Township by regulation.
The Township shall make a determination accepting or denying the renewal application. If
the renewal application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for
nonrenewal. Determinations to grant or deny a renewal application shall be made on a
nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral basis. The Township shall not unreasonably
delay or deny the issuance of a renewal permit.
As-built maps. Each person applying for a ROW use permit shall submit to the Department
two paper copies and one electronic copy of an as-built map or maps and engineering
specifications as set forth in the Policies and Procedures depicting and certifying the location
of all its existing facilities within the right-of-way. Such electronic and paper maps and
engineering specifications shall be submitted in a format and include the information required
by the Township by/in the policies and procedures and shall be submitted with the application.
If the maps are not provided electronically in the required format, then the person shall
reimburse the Township for the cost of converting paper maps into electronic form or the cost
of converting electronic maps in another format into the required format. After submission of
the as-built maps required under this section, each permittee having facilities in the Township
rights-of-way shall update such maps as required under this article.
Right to inspect. The Department shall have the right to inspect all of the facilities of the
permittee, including aerial facilities and underground facilities, to ensure health and safety
with respect to such facilities, other facilities, the rights-of-way and any other public or private
property and to determine compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable laws
and regulations. Permittees are required to cooperate with all such inspections and to provide
information requested by the Township as part of the inspection.
Use authorized. No ROW use permit shall confer any exclusive right or privilege to occupy or
use the right-of-way for any purpose; or explicitly or impliedly preclude or affect the
Township's right to authorize use of the right-of-way by other persons to own, construct,
operate, maintain, and/or provide the same or different facilities or services, or for any other
purposes as the Township determines appropriate; or affect the Township's right to construct,
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 217/520
(10)
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(a)
(1)
D.
operate or maintain any type of facilities itself or offer any type of services in the right-of-way;
or authorize or excuse any person from securing such further easements, leases, permits or
other approvals as may be required by applicable law or regulation to occupy and use the
right-of-way; or convey any right, title or interest in any right-of-way greater or other than an
agreement only to use and occupy the right-of-way for the limited purposes and terms
provided in the ROW use permit; or be construed as any warranty of title.
Owner's consent. No ROW use permit expressly or impliedly authorizes a permittee to
provide any services to, or install any facilities on, any private property without the owner's
consent or to use publicly or privately owned poles, ducts or conduits without a separate
agreement with the owners thereof for such use.
Substantially similar terms. ROW use permits and renewals entered into after the effective
date of this article shall contain substantially similar terms which, taken as a whole upon
consideration of all of its material terms and upon consideration of the nature of the services
to be authorized and other relevant characteristics of applicants, do not provide substantially
more or less favorable terms and conditions than those required of other permittees.
Transitional provisions.
Persons already authorized to use the right-of-way. Any non-PUC-regulated entity holding a
permit or other authorization from the Township to own, construct, operate, and/or maintain
facilities in the right-of-way to provide services may continue to conduct those activities
expressly authorized until the earlier of the following: i) the conclusion of the present term of
its existing authorization, or ii) 180 days after the date on which this article is amended,
provided that in the case of a cable franchise, such authorization shall continue until the
expiration of the current term of the cable franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such
persons (with the exception of cable franchisees) shall apply for a superseding ROW use
permit pursuant to this article within 90 days after the effective date of the Chapter and shall
be subject to the terms and conditions of this article.
Pending applications. Applications for an authorization to occupy or use the right-of-way that
are pending on the date on which this article is amended shall be subject to this article. A
person with a pending application shall submit additional information to comply with the
requirements of this article and applicable regulations of the Township governing applications
within 30 days from the effective date of this article.
Operating without right-of-way use authorization. Any non-PUC-regulated entity that owns or
operates any of the facilities currently located in the right-of-way, the construction, operation,
or maintenance of which is not currently authorized but is required to be authorized under this
article, shall have 90 days from the date on which this article is amended to file one or more
applications for a ROW use authorization. Any entity timely filing such an application shall not
be subject to penalties for failure to hold such a ROW use authorization, provided that said
application remains pending. Nothing herein shall relieve any person of any liability for its
failure to obtain any permit or other authorization required under other provisions of this article
or Township ordinances or regulations, and nothing herein shall prevent the Township from
requiring removal of any facilities installed in violation of this article or Township ordinances or
regulations.
Cable franchise or open video system franchise.
Franchise required.
No person may own, construct, operate or maintain a cable system or open video system
within the Township, provide cable service over a cable system, or provide OVS service
over an OVS without a cable franchise or OVS franchise, whichever is applicable, issued
by the Township.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 218/520
(b)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(1)
(2)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
To the extent permitted by law, facilities used to provide telecommunications service,
information service or any form of services similar to cable service or OVS service that
are also used to provide cable service or OVS service, shall be subject to this article and
shall also require a right-of-way use permit pursuant to this article.
Effect of authorization.
A cable franchise or an OVS franchise shall not confer any authority to provide any form
or type of telecommunications service or information service in addition to the cable
service or OVS service authorized by the franchise. To the extent permitted by law, a
separate right-of-way use permit pursuant to this article, in addition to the cable franchise
or OVS franchise, shall be required before any franchisee is permitted to use facilities in
the right-of-way to furnish any form or type of telecommunications service or information
service.
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and a cable franchise
agreement or OVS agreement in effect on the effective date of this article, the provisions
of the cable franchise agreement or OVS agreement shall govern.
Alteration or modification of existing facilities.
Alteration or modification of existing facilities. The permittee must notify the Township upon
alteration or modification of existing facilities within the rights-of-way. The permittee must
additionally provide an updated facilities map if facilities have been removed from or added to
the rights-of-way.
Change in information. If there are any changes in information provided in the original permit
application, the permit holder has an obligation to notify the Township within 60 days of such
changes.
Construction in the rights-of-way.
Street opening permits. Except in the case of an emergency, no non-PUC-regulated entity
shall perform any street excavation in the rights-of-way without first obtaining a street opening
permit and paying a permit fee pursuant to Chapter 231 of the Township of Lancaster Code.
No person shall perform curb and sidewalk construction replacement or repair without first
obtaining a curb and sidewalk permit and paying a permit fee pursuant to Chapter 231 of the
Code. The procurement of a street opening permit shall only be necessary when the
proposed street excavation and/or construction affects Township streets; it shall not apply to
any construction or excavation activities on state roads.
Construction standards. All construction, installation, maintenance, and operation of facilities
in the ROW by non-PUC-regulated entities shall conform to the requirements of the following
publications, as from time to time amended: the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publication Form 408, the National Electrical Code, and the National Electrical Safety Code.
In the event of conflict between the ROW Construction Standards and this section, this
section shall govern as of the effective date of this article.
Security. Each non-PUC-regulated entity performing construction in the ROW shall furnish to
the Township, at the person's expense, a letter of credit or other form of financial security, in
such form and in the amount as required by the Township consistent with the Policies and
Procedures and regulations of the Township. The security shall be a continuing obligation until
the completion of the construction as confirmed in writing by the Township. Non-PUC
regulated utilities that are performing ongoing projects or are pursuing multiple projects under
one permit shall post security as provided by this section, which shall be held by the Township
until final completion of all construction or maintenance activities to guarantee the proper
closing and restoration of Township streets, sidewalks or ROW.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 219/520
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
G.
Right to inspect facilities. The Township may inspect the construction or installation of the
facilities of any non-PUC-regulated entity, including both aerial and underground facilities, and
any construction or repair activity to ensure health and safety with respect to such facilities,
other facilities, the rights-of-way and any other public or private property, and determine
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable laws and regulations. Entities
are required to cooperate with all such inspections and to provide information requested by
the Township as part of the inspection.
Recently constructed streets. No street opening permit shall be issued to cut any Township
street that was constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced fewer than three years prior to
application for a street opening permit, unless the applicant agrees in writing to overlay or
pave the surface of the street, from curb to curb and intersection to intersection, to the
satisfaction of the Department. The applicant shall pay all street degradation fees and comply
with all related requirements as prescribed in this article.
Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written notice from the Township,
or such longer period as the Township determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, a permittee shall temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any facilities within the right-of-way, excluding those
underground, whenever the Department, consistent with applicable PUC regulations, shall
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary
under the following circumstances: the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way; the operations of the Township or
other governmental entity in the right-of-way; vacation of a street or the release of a utility
easement; or an emergency as determined by the Township.
Coordination of construction activities. By March 1 of each year, or at such other time as the
Township and permittees may agree, each right-of-way use permittee shall provide the
Department with a schedule (including plans and projected start and finish dates for each
project) of its planned construction activities for the following year which may affect the rightsof-
way. The schedule shall depict all planned construction activities the permittee is
committed to perform within the year.
Damage to facilities or property. A permittee, including any contractor working for a permittee,
shall avoid damage to any facilities and/or public or private property. If any facilities and/or
public or private property are damaged by permittee, including any contractor working for the
permittee, the permittee shall promptly repair and restore such property within 10 business
days. The permittee shall utilize the Pennsylvania One-Call System prior to any disturbance
of the rights-of-way and shall adhere to all other requirements of the Pennsylvania
Underground Utility Line Protection Act.
Facilities maps. Each non-PUC-regulated entity issued a street opening permit shall submit to
the Township, not later than 30 days after completion of the permitted construction (or any
part thereof, if required by the Township) two paper copies and one electronic copy of as-built
map or maps and engineering specifications as set forth in the Policies and Procedures
depicting and certifying the location of the facilities constructed. Such engineering
specifications and electronic and paper maps shall be submitted in a format and include the
information required by the Township in the Policies and Procedures. If the maps are not
provided electronically in the required format, then the person shall reimburse the Township
for the cost of converting paper maps into electronic form or the cost of converting electronic
maps in another format into the required format. Such maps are exempt from public
disclosure under Pennsylvania's Right to Know Law, 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 708.
Field marking. Each permittee shall field-mark the locations of its underground facilities upon
request by other permittees, public utilities or the Township, consistent with the requirements
of the Pennsylvania Underground Utility Line Protection Act and at no cost to the Township.
Right-of-way maintenance fee.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 220/520
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
Compensation for right-of-way use. Occupancy of Township rights-of-way by any utility is
subject to the Township's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable compensation, which shall
be directly related to the Township's actual right-of-way maintenance costs.
Annual right-of-way maintenance fee. Each permittee that is not a franchisee, including
Township ROW permittees, shall pay an annual fee to the Township to compensate the
Township for its costs incurred in connection with the ongoing use and occupancy of the rightof-
way. The annual right-of-way maintenance fee shall be determined by the Township and
authorized by resolution of Township Board of Supervisors and shall be based on the
Township's actual ROW maintenance costs. The annual right-of-way maintenance fee shall
be fixed on a per-linear-foot basis for underground facilities and on a per-linear-foot basis for
aerial facilities. If subject to a cable franchise agreement, the permittee shall not be required
to remit both a cable franchise fee amount and an annual right-of-way maintenance fee to the
Township; such permittee shall pay the higher of the two fees to the Township.
§ 231-18. Remedies; violations and penalties.
Penalties.
PUC-regulated utilities.
In the event a public utility is found by the Township to have violated a PUC regulation,
standard, or order, then the Township may bring a complaint against such public utility
before the Public Utility Commission for violation of such regulation, standard, or order.
The Township may also notify the utility of the existence of any suspected violation of
PUC standards, regulations or order in order to obtain compliance by the utility.
In the event a public utility is found to have violated any other provision of this article that
is not within the exclusive jurisdiction of the PUC, then such public utility shall be subject,
upon conviction thereof, to a fine not exceeding $300, for each and every offense,
together with attorneys' fees and costs, and, in default of the payment thereof,
imprisonment for not more than 90 days. A separate and distinct violation shall be
deemed to be committed each day on which a violation occurs or continues to occur. In
addition to an action to enforce any penalty imposed by this article and any other remedy
at law or in equity under this title, the Township may apply to a Court of Common Pleas
for an injunction or other appropriate relief at law or in equity to enforce compliance with
or restrain violation of any provision of this article which is not subject to the exclusive
jurisdiction of the PUC.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the Township to commence or attempt
to commence prosecution of any PUC-regulated utility for a violation of any regulation,
standard or order of the PUC.
Non-PUC-regulated entities. Any entity not regulated by the PUC that is found by the
Township to have violated any provision of this article shall be subject, upon conviction
thereof, to a fine not exceeding $300, for each and every offense, together with attorneys'
fees and costs, and, in default of the payment thereof, imprisonment for not more than 90
days. A separate and distinct violation shall be deemed to be committed each day on which a
violation occurs or continues to occur. In addition to an action to enforce any penalty imposed
by this article and any other remedy at law or in equity under this title, the Township may
apply to a Court of Common Pleas for an injunction or other appropriate relief at law or in
equity to enforce compliance with or restrain violation of any provision of this article.
Determination of violation. In the event a determination is made that a person has violated any
provision of this article or right-of-way use permit, such person shall be provided written notice of
the determination and the reasons therefor. Except in the case of an emergency, the person shall
have 30 days to cure the violation. If the nature of the violation is such that it cannot be fully cured
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 221/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
A.
within such time period, the Township may, in its reasonable judgment, extend the time period to
cure, provided that the person has commenced to cure and is diligently pursuing its efforts to cure.
If the violation has not been cured within the time allowed, the Township may take any and all
actions authorized by this article and/or Pennsylvania law and regulations.
§ 231-19. Revocation of permits.
Substantial breach. The Township reserves the right to revoke any right-of-way use permit without
a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial breach by a permittee
includes but is not limited to the following:
The violation of any material provision of the right-of-way permit;
An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right-of-way permit, or the
perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the Township or its citizens;
Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right-of-way permit;
The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a permit extension is obtained or
unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control; or
The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition indicated
on an order issued in accordance with the Township's inspection of the work.
Written notice of breach. If the Township determines that the permittee has committed a
substantial breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule or any condition of the
permit, the Township shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation.
The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for renovation of the permit. The
Township, at its discretion, may place additional or revised conditions on the permit in the event of
a breach of the terms and conditions of the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.
Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving modification of the breach, the
permittee shall provide the Township with a plan, acceptable to the Township, to cure the breach.
Permittee's failure to timely submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably
implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further,
permittee's failure to so contact the Township, or permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan,
or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan shall automatically place the
permittee on probation for one full year.
Reimbursement of Township costs. When a permit is revoked by the Township, the permittee shall
reimburse the Township for the Township's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the
costs of collection and reasonable attorney's fees, incurred in connection with such revocation.
§ 231-20. Work done without permit.
Emergency situations.
Each permittee shall immediately notify the Public Works Superintendent for the Township of
any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The permittee may
proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency without first
obtaining a permit. Excavators' notification to Pennsylvania One-Call regarding an emergency
situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two business days after the occurrence of the
emergency, the permittee shall apply for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated
therewith, and complete the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this
article for the actions it took in response to the emergency.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 222/520
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
If the Township becomes aware of an emergency regarding a permittee's facilities, the
Township will attempt to contact the local representative of each permittee affected, or
potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the Township may take whatever action
it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
permittee whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
Nonemergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person who, without first having obtained
the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit
and, as a penalty, pay twice the fee for said permit, pay twice all the other fees required by the
Township, deposit with the Township the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way,
and comply with all of the requirements of this article.
§ 231-21. General provisions.
Proprietary information.
If a person considers information it is obligated to provide to the Township under this article to
be a business or trade secret or otherwise proprietary or confidential in nature and desires to
protect the information from disclosure, then the person shall mark such information as
proprietary and confidential. Subject to the requirements of the Right-to-Know Act of 2009, 65
P.S. § 67.101 et seq., as amended, and other applicable law, the Township shall exercise
reasonable good faith efforts to protect such proprietary and confidential information that is so
marked from disclosure. The Township shall provide notice to the person in the following
circumstances: i) if the Township receives a request for disclosure of such proprietary and
confidential information and the Township Solicitor determines that the information is or may
be subject to disclosure under applicable law or ii) if the Township Solicitor determines that
the information should be disclosed in relation to its enforcement of this article or the exercise
of its police or regulatory powers. In the event the person does not obtain a protective order
barring disclosure of the information from a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days
following receipt of the Township's notice, then the Township may disclose the information
without further notice to the person.
The Township may, but is not required to, waive or grant an exception to any of the provisions
of this article in the event of emergency or for other cause shown by the applicant which
would support such a waiver or exception.
Leased facilities. Subject to the provisions of this article and with prior written approval of the
Township, a non-PUC-regulated entity shall have the right to furnish any facilities for which it has
the applicable authorization to own, construct, operate and/or maintain in the right-of-way to
another person for the latter's use in constructing or operating its own facilities in the right-of-way,
provided that:
The entity furnishing its facilities to another shall first deliver to the Township notice that there
is a fully signed and executed lease, rental agreement, or other agreement with such other
person pursuant to which the facilities are to be furnished; and
The person to which the facilities are furnished shall comply with all of the requirements of
this article and other applicable policies and procedures.
Duty to provide information. Within 10 days of a written request from the Township, each permittee
shall furnish the Township with information sufficient to demonstrate the following: that the
permittee has complied with all requirements of this article; that all fees and taxes due the
Township in connection with the services and facilities provided by the permittee have been
properly paid by the permittee; and any other information reasonably related to the permittee's
obligations pursuant to this article.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 223/520
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
Right to inspect records. The Township shall have the right, upon 30 days' written notice and
during normal business hours, to inspect all documents, records, maps and other pertinent
information maintained by the permittee that relate directly to the terms and conditions of this
article.
No substitute for other required permissions. No ROW use authorization or ROW use permit
includes, means, or is in whole or part a substitute for any other permit or authorization required
by the laws and regulations of the Township for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a
business within the Township or any permit or agreement for occupying any other property of the
Township.
No waiver. The failure of the Township to insist on timely performance or compliance by any
permittee holding a right-of-way use authorization shall not constitute a waiver of the Township's
right to later insist on timely performance or compliance by that permittee or any other permittee
holding such a right-of-way use authorization. The failure of the Township to enforce any provision
of this article on any occasion shall not operate as a waiver or estoppel of its right to enforce any
provision of this article on any other occasion, nor shall the failure to enforce any prior ordinance
or Township Code provision affecting the right-of-way, any facilities, or any user or occupant of the
right-of-way act as a waiver or estoppel against enforcement of this article or any other provision
of applicable law.
Policies and procedures. The Township is authorized to prepare such written policies and
procedures consistent with this article as the Township deems necessary for the implementation of
this article. Such policies and procedures shall be prepared and promulgated by the Public Works
Superintendent and adopted by the Township.
Lancaster Township, its employees, authorized agents and representatives, shall be exempt from
the provisions of this Ordinance and the Policies and Procedures adopted and promulgated
hereunder.
Police powers. The Township, by granting any permit or taking any other action pursuant to this
article, does not waive, reduce, lessen or impair the lawful police powers vested in the Township
under applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article is for any
reason held illegal or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provision shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not render the
remainder of this article invalid.
When effective. This Ordinance shall take effect five days after enactment by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as provided by law.
Article IV. Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 3-23-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-3]
§ 231-22. Title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Road Ordinance of Lancaster Township."
§ 231-23. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to Section 1140.1 of the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S.
§ 66140.1.[1]
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 224/520
[1] Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 66140.1 was repealed 11-9-1995 by P.L. 350, No. 60, § 1. See now 53
P.S. §§ 67316 to 67319.
§ 231-24. Definitions.
All terms used or implied in this article shall have the meanings defined in Chapter 236, Subdivision
and Land Development, as amended from time to time. Additionally, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth as follows:
BOARD
The Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
ROAD
Any existing or proposed road, street, alley or public thoroughfare, including, but not limited to,
roads shown on a subdivision and land development plan to be offered or dedicated to Lancaster
Township in the future as part of its road system.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER
The Engineer appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township.
§ 231-25. Submission of plans; compliance with prescribed
regulations.
Prior to any construction or reconstruction, building, opening or dedication thereof, all plans for said
road and/or drainage facilities shall be submitted to the Board and shall comply with the requirements
and reflect the information required by those applicable provisions of Chapter 236, Subdivision and
Land Development, as amended from time to time, and shall comply with the requirements and reflect
the information required by this article and any other ordinance of Lancaster Township. In the event of
a conflict between the provisions of this article and those of Chapter 236, Subdivision and Land
Development, or of any other ordinance of Lancaster Township, the more-restrictive provisions shall
control. All such plans shall show the typical street cross-section in accordance with the specifications
attached to this article for reconstruction and the typical street cross-section of Chapter 236,
Subdivision and Land Development, for all new construction in subdivisions and/or land developments.
§ 231-26. Preparation and processing of plans.
Plans shall be prepared and processed in accordance with Chapter 236, Subdivision and Land
Development.
§ 231-27. Engineer designated to review and approve plans.
The Board may designate the Township Engineer to act on its behalf in the approval of all plans, the
making of all inspections and the granting of all approvals required by this article; provided, however,
that the formal acceptance of any street, and the execution of any documents related thereto, is
reserved for the Board.
§ 231-28. Design standards.
All roads shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance with the following standards and
specifications:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 225/520
A.
B.
C.
(1)
[2]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[1]
(a)
(b)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
All proposed right-of-way and cartway widths shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 236,
Subdivision and Land Development, and any applicable ordinance of Lancaster Township, each
as amended from time to time.
In the case of reconstruction, adequate right-of-way shall be provided commensurate with the
proposed improvements and to the satisfaction of the Board.
All roads shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance with these specifications unless a
waiver is granted by the Board of Supervisors as adopted by resolution by the Board. Said
specifications shall control the method of construction or reconstruction and types of materials
used.
Curb improvements. All concrete curb shall be constructed or reconstructed in accordance with
the specifications provided in this article.
All construction in proposed subdivision and land developments shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 236, Subdivision and Land Development.
Curb requirements.
All existing roads within the Township have been classified in Appendix 1 of this article as
arterial or collector roads.[1] Curbing requirements for all reconstruction shall comply with
one of the following:
Arterial and collector roads: vertical curbs in accordance with applicable PennDOT
roadway construction standards in the case of state roads and in accordance with
Appendix 2 of this article in the case of Township roads.[2]
Editor's Note: Appendix 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Local roads: vertical curb or slant curb in accordance with Appendix 2 of this article.
Any classification of road which currently has curb: replace curb in like kind. The
Supervisors of Lancaster Township reserve the right to specify curb type where one
or more types of curb exist along a road segment or if other conditions exist which
make one type of curb more desirable than another.
Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
A list of streets which are classified as arterial or collector streets is attached to this
article. All other streets are considered to be local streets.
Street and road widening standards. Where a proposed subdivision or land development (or the
expansion of an existing subdivision or land development, including a mobile home park) borders
or has direct access to an existing Township road, or where, because of the nature of the
proposed subdivision or land development, an existing Township road will be overburdened or
exposed to such increased traffic that the same may, in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors,
cause the existing Township road to be damaged beyond normal wear and tear or create a
dangerous condition, the Board reserves the right to require the landowner to improve (or to pay
the cost of improving) the existing Township road, including widening and curbing the same, so as
to enable said Township road to accommodate prospective increased traffic and facilitate fire
protection without causing damage beyond normal wear and tear and without creating a
dangerous condition. The Board of Supervisors also reserves the right to require the landowner to
dedicate additional right-of-way to the Township where such additional right-of-way is deemed
necessary for safety, storm drainage, road maintenance or utilities.
Material certification.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 226/520
(1)
(2)
G.
H.
(1)
[1]
(2)
A.
B.
All materials shall conform to PennDOT Specification Publication 408, as amended or
replaced from time to time.
Prior to the release of the financial security provided for in this article or in Chapter 236,
Subdivision and Land Development, the Township may require the developer to provide a
statement of certification from the contractor responsible for constructing or reconstructing the
streets and drainage facilities that all construction conforms to Lancaster Township
specifications. In addition, the developer or contractor shall submit written verification that all
improvements permitted by PennDOT have been accepted by them.
Street signs. Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections, and their design shall be
approved by the Township. All signing shall identify both intersecting streets. Regulatory and traffic
control signs shall be installed, at the sole expense of the developer, at all locations identified by a
traffic circulation study prepared by the developer and deemed appropriate by the Board and shall
conform to Township specifications. In the event an ordinance is required in order to impose
speed, stop, parking or other traffic controls, the developer shall pay all the reasonable costs
associated therewith, including, without limitation, attorneys' and consultants' expenses.
State highways. All streets intersecting a state highway shall be subject to the approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
§ 231-29. Special provisions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 231-28 of this article, the Board may require and may alter the
method of construction or reconstruction, type of construction or reconstruction and/or require the
utilization of any specific alternate where the physical characteristics of the land indicate that an
alternative method is preferable, where the roads or drainage facilities are to be constructed in a
commercial or industrial area, or where an existing Township road is being relocated at the request and
expense of the developer.
§ 231-30. Completion of improvements or guarantee thereof.
No plan application shall be finally approved unless:
The streets, bikeways, sidewalks, walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, storm drains and
other improvements as required by the Board have been installed in accordance with this
article in the case of reconstruction or in accordance with Chapter 236, Subdivision and Land
Development, in the case of all construction proposed within a subdivision or land
development; or
Financial guarantees are submitted to the Board in accordance with the Municipalities
Planning Code[1] and Chapter 236, Subdivision and Land Development.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
During construction, the surface of all areas, including, but not limited to, Township roads, streets,
and driveways, shall be maintained on a daily basis to produce a safe and desirable condition.
Streets shall be kept free of dust, mud, stones, asphalt, and debris caused by or related to the
work. The contractor, in the case of reconstruction, and the developer, in the case of work
associated with a subdivision or land development, shall be responsible for ensuring that all
streets are kept clean of debris caused by or related to the work. The Township or its
representative may use funds held as financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the
cleanup activity if this work is not performed by the contractor or developer in a manner
reasonably satisfactory to the Township.
§ 231-31. Inspections.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 227/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
This section describes the minimum construction inspection required for all projects. The level of
construction inspection shall be commensurate with the type of improvements which are
proposed.
At the time of initiation of construction or reconstruction, the developer shall notify Township
officials so that they may schedule the appropriate road, street or drainage facility inspections
during construction. The Township shall be notified, in writing, at least three days in advance of the
intended date of construction or reconstruction of the base so that the subgrade may be
inspected. At the time of this inspection, the subgrade should be proof-rolled and the proposed
crown and grade should be checked. It is recommended that a developer's/contractor's
representative accompany the observer when crown and grade are checked. Proof-rolling should
be performed with a fully loaded, tandem-axle dump truck. This inspection must occur prior to any
stone subbase being placed. In the event that more than seven days elapses between the time of
preparation of the subgrade and the installation of the base, or if weather conditions occur
between the time of preparation of the subgrade or any inspection thereof and the installation of
the base, even if less than seven days, which might reasonably affect the subgrade, the Township
shall inspect or reinspect prior to installation of the base. The Township shall be notified at least
two days in advance of the intended date of construction or reconstruction of the paved surface so
that the base course may be inspected. At the time of this inspection, the depth of subbase should
be checked after compaction, the subbase should be proof-rolled in the same manner as the
subgrade and the crown and grade should be checked again. This inspection must occur prior to
any binder or base course being placed. If more than six weeks elapses between the date of
inspection of the constructed base course and the construction or reconstruction of the paved
surface, a reinspection shall be required prior to the construction of the paved surface. At the time
of this inspection, the depth of the binder/base course should be checked, ambient temperature
should be monitored (this is important in early spring and late fall days when the temperature can
go below acceptable limits), the temperature of the bituminous materials should be checked (if
possible), and it is recommended that copies of the weight slips for each truckload be obtained.
The crown and grade shall also be checked again. This inspection must occur prior to the wearing
course being placed. At the time of this inspection, the guidelines for the placement and
compaction of the binder/base course shall be followed. Upon completion of construction or
reconstruction, the Township shall be notified so that the finished road may be inspected.
Following any inspection made, the Township shall provide a report of inspection to the developer
in writing within 48 hours. Irrespective of the results of inspection, any road or drainage facility
shall not be deemed accepted for dedication until compliance with the provisions of § 231-35.
If, after final inspection is made, deficiencies in the method of construction or reconstruction are
determined, the deficient work shall immediately be corrected by the developer. Lancaster
Township, at the developer's expense, may require tests of the road to determine whether the
road complies in all respects with the approved plans, as modified, if applicable.
The undertaking of periodic inspections by the Township shall not be construed as an acceptance
of the work during construction or reconstruction or as a final inspection of the construction or
reconstruction.
§ 231-32. Construction or reconstruction in accordance with
plans.
All roads and drainage facilities shall be constructed or reconstructed in strict accordance with the
approved plans, and no changes shall be effectuated unless the same receive the written authorization
of the Board. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Board may require changes during the
construction or reconstruction stage where on-site conditions, in the opinion of the Board, or its duly
designated representative, reasonably indicate that the adverse effect of stormwater runoff and/or the
adverse effect to the roadbed and/or road surface may be minimized by such changes. The Township
may limit the time or times within which construction may occur if the temperature or weather
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 228/520
A.
B.
conditions create the reasonable probability that the construction or installation of the facilities will be
adversely affected thereby.
§ 231-33. As-built plan.
At such time as the construction or reconstruction of the road is found to meet all requirements of this
article and the approved plans, as modified, if applicable, the developer, prior to offering the road for
dedication, shall submit to the Board a Mylar as-built plan of the road and any stormwater drainage
facilities, which shall form a part of the permanent records of the Township. The plan shall be prepared
by using the approved final plan as a base plan and shall be made available to the Township prior to
the final inspection of the project.
§ 231-34. Maintenance of sidewalks.
[Amended 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
In accordance with Article XXIV of the Second Class Township Code, landowners are responsible
for keeping all public sidewalks in repair within the lands of such owner. In this article, "repair"
means patching broken sidewalk panels and replacing sidewalk panels which are vertically or
horizontally displaced and includes removal of snow, ice, and debris.
It shall be the duty of all tenants or occupants of occupied properties, and the landowners or
agents in charge of unoccupied properties abutting on public streets in Lancaster Township, not
later than 48 hours after snow or sleet has ceased to fall, to clear, or cause to be cleared, a
pathway in the sidewalk in front of their respective properties in the event of snow and to cover the
sidewalk with cinders, sawdust, or similar snow and ice control materials in the event of ice and
sleet. Such pathway shall not be less than 24 inches in width and shall be thoroughly cleared of
snow and ice or covered with cinders, sawdust, or similar snow and ice control materials. Where
snow and ice are removed from the pathway, they may be placed or piled on the curb side of the
sidewalk, but they shall not be piled or placed in the gutter or the cartway.
§ 231-35. Dedication.
Refer to Chapter 236, Subdivision and Land Development, for dedication requirements.
§ 231-36. Reimbursement of plan review and inspection
expenses.
The Township shall be reimbursed by the landowner or developer for all reasonable expenses incurred
by the Township for review of the plan and any reports, supporting plans, supporting data, proposed
agreements relating to the maintenance of improvements or open space, deeds of dedication, plans for
roads and similar documents and for inspection of the road, street, drainage or other facility intended
for the benefit of the public. Such expenses shall include any actual fees charged by the Township
Engineer, the Township Solicitor and other professional consultants for the services performed and the
actual cost to the Township. In some circumstances, the review of plans or other documents and
inspection of improvements may be performed by personnel employed by the Township instead of by
the Township Engineer, Township Solicitor or other professional consultants. If those reviews or
inspections are performed by Township personnel, the developer or landowner shall reimburse the
Township for all reasonable and necessary charges incurred by the Township for work specifically
involving such land development plan or other project. When those reviews or inspections are
performed by Township personnel, the fee shall be $25 per hour. A minimum charge of $25 per hour
per person will be billed for the first hour or any portion thereof. Any time in excess of one hour shall be
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 229/520
A.
B.
C.
billed at the same rate on a proportional basis. This charge shall be revised to reflect changes in the
cost to the Township of utilizing Township personnel to perform such reviews or inspections.
§ 231-37. Resolution of fee disputes.
If the developer or landowner disputes the amount of any review or inspection fee, the developer or
landowner shall, within 10 working days of the billing date, notify the Township Secretary in writing that
such fees are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the Township shall not delay or
disapprove any approval or permit relating to the land development due to the developer's or
landowner's dispute of the fees. Disputes shall be resolved as follows:
If, within 20 days of the date of billing, the Township and the landowner or developer cannot agree
on the amount of the expenses which are reasonable and necessary, then the Township and the
developer or landowner shall jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional engineer,
if the fee involves the engineer's fees, or another consultant, if the fee involves another
consultant's fees, to review such charges and expenses and make a determination as to the
amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
The professional engineer or other consultants so appointed shall hear such evidence and review
such documentation as to the professional engineer or other consultant, in his or her discretion, is
deemed necessary and render a decision within 50 days of the billing date. The developer or
landowner shall pay the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
The fee of the professional engineer or professional consultant for determining the reasonable and
necessary expenses shall be paid by the developer or landowner if the amount of payment
required in the decision is equal to or greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment
required is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the Township shall pay the fee of the
professional engineer or other consultant. In all other situations, the Township and developer or
landowner shall each pay 1/2 the fee of the professional engineer or other consultants.
§ 231-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation, or the members of such firm or the officers of such corporation, who
or which shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $600 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. All fines collected
for the violation of this article shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Township for the general use of the
Township. The Township need not accept any roads or drainage facility from any developer who has
been found guilty of violation of this article by a court of this commonwealth, whether of record or not of
record, as to whom there remains unpaid any penalty or costs for such violation.
§ 231-39. Equitable remedies.
In addition to all other remedies, any continued violation of this article may be abated by proceeding
against the violator in a court of equity for relief.
Chapter 236. Subdivision and Land Development
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 11-9-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-07.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 48.
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 230/520
[1]
[1]
A.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 160.
Sewers — See Ch. 209.
Solid waste — See Ch. 222.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 229.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 231.
Water — See Ch. 276.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
Attachment 1 - Appendix No. 1 Certification of Plan Accuracy
Attachment 2 - Appendix No. 2 Certification of Survey Accuracy
Attachment 3 - Appendix No. 3 Certificate of Ownership, Acknowledgement of Plan, and
Offer of Dedication
Attachment 4 - Appendix No. 4 Lancaster Township Board of Supervisors Preliminary
Plan Approval Certificate
Attachment 5 - Appendix No. 5 Improvement Construction Plan Approval Certificate
Attachment 6 - Appendix No. 6 Lancaster Township Planning Commission's Review
Certificate
Attachment 7 - Appendix No. 7 Lancaster Township Board of Supervisors Final Plan
Approval Certificate
Attachment 8 - Appendix No. 8 Lancaster County Planning Commission's Review
Certificate
Attachment 9 - Appendix No. 9 Application for Consideration of a Subdivision and/or
Land Development Plan
Attachment 10 - Appendix No. 10 Application For Consideration of an Improvement
Construction Plan
Attachment 11 - Appendix No. 11 Street Tree and Landscaping Maintenance Notes
Attachment 12 - Appendix No. 12 Minimum Safe Sight Stopping Distance Table
Attachment 13 - Appendix No. 13 Street, Curb, Trench and Sidewalk Details
Attachment 14 - Appendix No. 14 T-Shaped Turnaround
Attachment 15 - Appendix No. 15 Parking Space
Attachment 16 - Appendix No. 16 Typical Flag Lot Detail
Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 236, Subdivision and Land Development,
adopted 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2.
Article I. Enactment, Authority and Jurisdiction; Title
§ 236-101. Enactment; authority.
The Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247 of 1968, as reenacted and amended (MPC),[1] hereby enacts and ordains the following
chapter governing subdivisions and land developments within the limits of Lancaster Township.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 236-102. Jurisdiction; conflicts with other legislation; construal
of provisions.
The standards and requirements contained in this chapter shall apply as minimum standards for
subdivisions and land developments located within Lancaster Township. However, when the
Township, in its most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended;
Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended; or other ordinance, code, resolution, or
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 231/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
regulation other than this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, imposes more restrictive
standards and requirements than contained herein, such other standards and requirements shall
prevail. These other Township standards and requirements shall be subject to enforcement by the
agency assigned such jurisdiction by said ordinance, code, resolution, or regulation. Approval of a
plan by the Township shall not be construed as an indication that the plan complies with the other
Township standards or requirements.
In order that the actions of the Board of Supervisors under this chapter may be correlated with all
relevant data and procedures, the Board of Supervisors hereby designates the Lancaster
Township Planning Commission as the agency of the Board of Supervisors:
To which all applications relating to either preliminary or final approval of subdivision and land
development plans shall be initially submitted;
With which applicants shall hold all preliminary consultations relating to the plans;
Which shall make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning approval,
disapproval, modification and conditions of approval of such plans; and
Which shall make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning the interpretation
of and the granting of modifications to provisions and standards of this chapter.
With the exception of § 236-102D and E of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall apply
to and control all subdivisions and land developments whose plans have not been recorded with
the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds, prior to the effective date of these regulations.
The provisions of this chapter shall not adversely affect an application for approval of a preliminary
or final plan which is duly and properly filed with the Township and the Lancaster County Planning
Commission (LCPC) and is pending action at the time of the effective date of this chapter, and in
which case the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the
governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application had been duly filed. When
a preliminary plan has been duly approved, the applicant shall be entitled to final plan approval in
accordance with the terms of the approved preliminary plan; however, if an application is properly
and finally denied, any subsequent application shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
If an applicant has received approval of a preliminary plan or final plan prior to the effective date of
this chapter, no provision of this chapter shall be applied to adversely affect the right of the
applicant to commence and complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance with
the terms of such approval within five years from the date of such approval. If there is any doubt
as to the terms of approval, the terms shall be construed in light of the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time when the application for such approval was duly
filed.
In accordance with the provisions of the MPC, regulations governing mobile/manufactured home
parks (and campgrounds) are set forth in Article VII of this chapter.
Municipal liability. The making of any administrative decision by the Township or any of its officials
or employees shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind of the
Township of the practicability or safety of any proposed or existing subdivision or land
development and shall create no liability upon or give rise to any cause of action against the
Township and its officials and employees. The Board of Supervisors, by enacting and amending
this chapter, does not waive or limit any immunity granted to the Township and its officials and
employees by the Governmental Immunity Act, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8541 et seq., and does not assume
any liabilities or obligations.
§ 236-103. Title.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 232/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Lancaster Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of 2014."
Article II. Interpretation; Definitions
§ 236-201. General interpretations.
The standards and provisions of this article include the definitions and terms used in this chapter and
shall apply to all lands in Lancaster Township unless application to specific instances is expressly
stated. In this chapter the following rules of interpretation shall be used:
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
Words in the present tense may imply the future tense.
Words used as singular imply the plural.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
The word "person" includes a partnership, corporation, association, trust, estate, or any other
legally recognized entity as well as an individual.
The word "shall" is to be interpreted as mandatory, the word "may" as directory.
References to any document, official, or entity (i.e., codes, ordinances, resolutions, plans, maps,
governmental bodies, commissions, agencies, or officials) are references to Lancaster Township
documents, officials, or entities in effect at the time, unless the text indicates that another
reference is intended.
§ 236-202. Terms defined.
Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meaning
herein indicated. All terms not otherwise defined in this article or elsewhere in this chapter; the most
recent version of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), as amended; and/or most
recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II), shall have their
common and ordinary meaning:
ACCESS DRIVE
A private drive providing pedestrian and/or vehicular access between a public or private street and
a parking compound within a land development (see also "street").
ACCESSORY BUILDING
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
APPLICANT
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).[2]
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
AS-BUILT PLAN
See "plan, as-built plan."
AUTHORITY (SEWER)
The entities responsible for providing public sewage disposal facilities within Lancaster Township.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 233/520
AUTHORITY (WATER)
The entities responsible for providing public water facilities within Lancaster Township.
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT)
Computed by application of a day of the week by month factor to an average twenty-four-hour
traffic count. Such information is available in the most recent version of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) Traffic Data Collection and Factor Development Report.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP)
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).
BICYCLE PARKING FACILITIES
A common, paved (improved and stabilized) area (other than a public or private street, access
drive, or driveway) used exclusively for the parking of bicycles.
BLOCK
A unit of land bounded by streets or a combination of streets, public land, public parks,
cemeteries, railroad (rights-of-way), major watercourses (Conestoga River and the Little
Conestoga Creek only), or any other barrier to the continuity of development.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
The Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township.
BUILDING
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
BUILDING SETBACK LINE
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
CAMPGROUNDS
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
CARTWAY
The surface of a street, alley, or access drive, available for vehicular traffic.
CHAIRMAN
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
An area of unobstructed vision at a street intersection defined by a line of sight between points at
a given distance from the intersection of the street center lines.
COMMON OPEN SPACE
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).[3]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I). The most
recent version of the Lancaster Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
CONDOMINIUM
See the most recent version of the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101
et seq. (Chapter 31).
CONTIGUOUS
Lots are contiguous when at least one boundary line of one lot touches a boundary line of another
lot.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 234/520
CUL-DE-SAC
See "street, cul-de-sac."
DEDICATION
The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for general public use.
DEED
A written instrument whereby an estate in real property is conveyed.
DEED RESTRICTION
A restriction upon the use of a property placed in a deed.
DENSITY
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
DETENTION BASIN
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).
DEVELOPER
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).[4]
DEVELOPMENT
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
DEVELOPMENT PLAN
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I). (See also
"plan.")
DRAINAGE EASEMENT
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).
DRIVEWAY
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance (Article II). (See also
"street.")
EASEMENT
A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing for limited use of private land for a public or
quasi-public or private purpose and within which the landowner of the property shall not have the
right to make use of the land in a manner that violates the right of the grantee.
ENGINEER
A professional engineer registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL COVENANT
A servitude arising under an environmental response project which imposes activity and use
limitation.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance, as
amended (Article II).
EROSION
The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other geological agents.
EXISTING WOODED AREA
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 235/520
A.
B.
C.
A biological community dominated by trees and other woody plants covering a land area of 1/4
acre or more. Existing wooded areas includes areas that have at least 25 trees per 1/4 acre, with
at least 50% of those trees having a trunk caliper of least two inches measured at a height of 4 1/2
feet above finished grade.
FINAL PLAN
See "plan, final plan."
FLOOR ELEVATION
The elevation of the lowest level of a particular building, including the basement.
GEOLOGIST
A professional geologist registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
HALF STREET
A street of less than the required right-of-way and/or cartway width. (See also "Street.")
HISTORIC FEATURE
Any district, site, structure, or object that meets one or more of the following criteria:
Is listed or may be determined to be eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic
Places either individually or as a contributing resource.
Is listed on the Lancaster County Historic Sites Survey or on any officially adopted municipal
inventory of historic resources and is determined by a qualified historic preservation
professional to retain the historic characteristics that qualified it for said list.
Is determined by a qualified historic preservation professional to be historically or
architecturally significant.
IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION ASSURANCE
The procedures specified in Article V by which a developer assures the construction of
improvements required by this chapter.
IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION GUARANTEE
Financial security filed by the developer with the Township to assure the construction of all
required improvements at a specified time in the future.
IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION PLAN
See "plan, improvement construction plan."
IMPROVEMENTS
Those physical additions and changes to the land that may be necessary to produce usable and
desirable developments.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).
INVASIVE SPECIES
Plants which grow quickly and aggressively, spreading, and displacing other plants. Invasive
plants typically are introduced into a region far from their native habitat. A list of invasive plants is
available from the Pennsylvania Department of Cultural and Natural Resources (DCNR) at
http://www.dcnr.state.pa.us/cs/groups/public/documents/document/dcnr_20026634.pdf.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).[5] Land
development shall not include the following:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 236/520
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or single-family semidetached
dwelling into not more than three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on a lot or lots subordinate to
an existing principal building;
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of an enterprise which
would be considered an amusement park.
For purposes of this subclause, an "amusement park" is defined as a tract or area used
principally as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides;
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until
initial plans for the expanded area have been approved by proper authorities; or
Building addition to existing nonresidential principal structure.
A building addition to an existing nonresidential principal structure, provided that:
The addition does not create a need for any additional parking or loading area, per
the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended
(Article XIII); and
The addition does not, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act,
Act 537 of 1966, as amended,[6] create the need for a sewer facility's plan revision
(plan revision module for land development), or supplement; and
The addition is not for the creation of additional units of occupancy; and
The addition does not require approval from the Zoning Hearing Board; and
The addition complies with all provisions of applicable Township ordinances.
For the purpose of this subsection, the building addition exemption shall be limited
cumulatively from May 8, 2000.
LANDOWNER
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT
A landscape architect registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LOCAL STREET
See "street, local street."
LOT
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
LOT, CORNER
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended
(Article II).
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended
(Article II).
LOT, FLAG
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended
(Article II).
LOT, INTERIOR
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 237/520
E.
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended
(Article II).
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE
A lot which is not a corner lot and abuts two or more streets, where vehicular access is
permitted solely from one street.
LOT ADD-ON PLAN
See "plan, lot add-on plan."
LOT AREA
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
LOT FRONTAGE
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
LOT LINE
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
LOT LINE MARKER
A metal pin used to identify lot line intersections.
LOT WIDTH
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE
Financial security filed by the developer with the Township to secure structural integrity of all
required improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements for an initial period of time.
MAJOR STREET
See "street, major street."
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET
See "Street, special-purpose street, marginal access street."
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended ("mobile home,"
Article I).[7]
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME LOT
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended ("mobile home lot,"
Article I).
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended ("mobile home
park," Article I).
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OWNER AND/OR OPERATOR
The holder of the legal title or the holder of the equitable title or any person in charge of or
responsible for the operation of the mobile/manufactured home park.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME STAND
That part of a mobile/manufactured home lot which is being reserved for the placement of the
mobile/manufactured home.
MODIFICATION
A process for alleviating specific requirements imposed by this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 238/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
MONUMENT
A concrete marker used to identify street right-of-way lines.
NATIVE PLANT
A plant which grew in a defined region prior to European settlement. Indigenous species and
naturalized non-native plants may be included as a native plant if it has been brought into the
region and has become established into the wild and is not considered invasive or displaces
native plants. Naturally occurring hybrids and cultivars (cultivated varieties) of native genetic
parent species which may or may not have been present prior to European settlement are
considered native plants.
NON-NATIVE/INTRODUCED PLANT
Any plant species that has been introduced by humans and now grows independently of
cultivation. A subset of non-native/introduced species are the invasive species.
OPEN CHANNEL
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).
ORDINANCE
The most recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision and Land Development, as
amended.
PARCEL
See "lot."
PARKING COMPOUND
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
PLAN
The provisions for development, including a planned residential development, a plat of
subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open
space and public facilities. A plan shall be categorized as one of the following classifications:
AS-BUILT PLAN
A complete and exact set of engineering documents drawn to scale, showing dimensions,
locations, and materials of all streets and other public improvements as actually constructed.
FINAL PLAN
A complete and exact subdivision or land development plan, including all supplementary data,
prepared for official recording as required by this chapter.
IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION PLAN
A complete and exact subdivision and/or land development plan, the sole purpose of which is
to permit the construction of only those improvements required by this chapter, as an
alternative to guaranteeing the completion of those improvements by the filing of financial
security.
LOT ADD-ON PLAN
A complete and exact subdivision plan, including all supplementary data, for the sole purpose
of increasing the lot size of an adjacent contiguous lot.
PRELIMINARY PLAN
A tentative subdivision or land development plan, including all required supplementary data,
in lesser detail than the final plan, indicating the approximate proposed layout of a subdivision
or land development as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final plan.
RECORD PLAN
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 239/520
G.
A final plan which contains the original endorsement of the Board of Supervisors, the
Lancaster Township Planning Commission and the LCPC and which has been recorded with
the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
SKETCH PLAN
An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale, indicating salient existing features of a tract
and its surroundings, with the general layout of a proposal.
PLANNING COMMISSION
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).[8] The
Planning Commission of Lancaster Township.
PLAT
A map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or final.
PRELIMINARY PLAN
See "plan, preliminary plan."
PRINCIPAL BUILDING
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
RECORD PLAN
See "plan, record plan."
REDEVELOPMENT
Public and/or private investment made to re-create the character of an area by renovating
previously developed land. Replacing, remodeling, or reusing existing buildings and structures to
accommodate new development.
REFUSE COLLECTION STATION
A container, generally two or more cubic yards in capacity, used for the disposing and collection of
trash, garbage, and refuse.
RETENTION BASIN
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).
RIGHT-OF-WAY
A strip of publicly or privately owned land created by reservation or dedication and intended to be
occupied by a road, walkway, public or private utility, railroad, or other similar uses.
RUNOFF
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).
SECRETARY
The Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township.
SEDIMENT
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).
SIGHT DISTANCE
The length of road visible to the driver of a passenger vehicle at any given point in the road when
viewing is unobstructed by traffic.
SIGNIFICANT TREE
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 240/520
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
Noninvasive trees with an eighteen-inch minimum caliper measured five feet above grade located
outside an existing wooded area.
SKETCH PLAN
See "plan, sketch plan."
SPECIAL PURPOSE STREET
See "street, special purpose street."
STORM SEWER
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
A program of controls and measures designed to regulate the quantity and quality of stormwater
runoff from a development while promoting the protection and conservation of groundwaters and
groundwater recharge.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).
STREAM
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).
STREET
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).[9] A strip
of land, including the entire right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, serving primarily as a means
of vehicular and pedestrian travel, and furnishing access to abutting properties, which may also be
used to provide space for sewers, public utilities, shade trees, and sidewalks. Streets shall
conform to one of the following categories:
ALLEY
A strip of land over which there is a publicly or privately owned right-of-way, and on which no
parcel fronts, which provides the secondary means of access for two or more properties.
CUL-DE-SAC
A local street intersecting another street at one end and terminating at the other in a vehicular
turnaround.
LOCAL STREET (ROAD)
A road whose function is to provide for local traffic movement and direct access to abutting
properties.
MAJOR STREET
A street which provides for intercommunity travel, connecting population centers and carrying
large volumes of traffic at speeds higher than desirable on local or special purpose streets.
Major streets shall conform to one of the following categories:
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL
A street whose function is to provide for high volumes of traffic between communities.
MINOR ARTERIAL
A street whose function is to provide for moderate volumes of traffic between
communities.
COLLECTOR
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 241/520
(1)
E.
A street whose function is to provide for the movement of traffic to community facilities
and carry larger volumes of traffic to the arterial street system.
SPECIAL PURPOSE STREET
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET
A minor street, one side of which is parallel and in close proximity to a major street and
the other side of which provides access to abutting properties.
STREET CENTER LINE
The center of the surveyed street right-of-way, or where not surveyed, the center of the traveled
cartway.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
STREET, PRIVATE
A street not offered for dedication or whose dedication was not accepted by the Township.
STRUCTURE
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
SUBDIVISION
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).[10]
SURVEYOR
A professional land surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP
Lancaster Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER
An engineer employed by the Township or engaged as a consultant to the Township.
TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE
The most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
TRACT
See "lot."
TRANSPORTATION ENGINEER
A professional engineer or professional transportation operations engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with specific training in traffic and transportation engineering and
at least two years of experience related to preparing traffic impact studies for existing or proposed
developments.
TRANSPORTATION PLANNER
A professional transportation planner or certified transportation planner certified by the American
Institute of Certified Planners (AICP), with specific training in traffic and transportation planning
and at least two years of experience related to preparing traffic impact studies for existing or
proposed developments.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE
An area that is radial to the trunk of a tree in which no construction activity shall occur. The Tree
Protection Zone shall be the distance from the trunk to the dripline (a line marking the outer edges
of the branches of the tree).
UNIFORMITY RATIO
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 242/520
A.
B.
C.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
A measure of the dispersion of light on an area. The ratio is measured as maximum light level to
minimum light level. Example: 4:1 for the given area, the maximum level of illumination should be
no less than four times the minimum level of illumination (0.2 x 4 = 0.8 maximum light level).
UNIT OF OCCUPANCY
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
VARIANCE
See the most recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
WATERCOURSE
A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, run, creek, channel, swale, pond, lake, or other
body of surface water, carrying or holding surface water, whether natural or man-made.
WETLAND
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Stormwater Management Ordinance
(Article II).
WETLAND SCIENTIST
A professional wetland scientist certified by the Society of Wetland Scientists; individual
possessing a bachelor's degree in biology, botany, zoology, ecology, or environmental sciences; or
an engineer, landscape architect, surveyor, planner, or geologist with specific ecological training
and experience beyond his or her discipline and at least two years of experience related to
preparing wetlands delineations.
YARD
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
FRONT YARD
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended
(Article II).
REAR YARD
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended
(Article II).
SIDE YARD
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended
(Article II).
Editor's Note: For definitions that reference "the most recent version of the Lancaster Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance (Article II)," see Ch. 229, Stormwater Management, Art. II,
Definitions. For definitions that reference "the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended (Art. II)," see Ch. 280, Zoning, Art. II, Definitions and Terms.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101.
§ 236-203. Abbreviations.
AASHTO American Association of State and Highway Transportation Officials, or any
successor agency
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 243/520
[1]
A.
B.
ADT Average daily traffic
AICP American Institute of Certified Planners
BMP Best management practice
FHWA The Federal Highway Administration, or any successor agency
HOP Highway occupancy permit
ITE Institute of Transportation Engineers
LCPC The Lancaster County Planning Commission, or any successor agency
LIMC The Lancaster Inter-Municipal Committee, or any successor agency
LOS Level of service
MPC The most recent version of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,[1] as reenacted and amended
MUTCD The most recent version of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, FHWA
NPDES The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NWI The most recent version of the National Wetlands Inventory
PA DEP The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or any successor
agency
PennDOT The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, or any successor agency
SEO Sewage Enforcement Officer certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
SSSD Safe stopping sight distance
UGA Urban growth area as set forth in the most recent version of the Lancaster
Township Comprehensive Plan
USACE The United States Army Corps of Engineers, or any successor agency
USDA The United States Department of Agriculture, or any successor agency
USDOJ The United States Department of Justice, or any successor agency
USGS The United States Geological Survey, or any successor agency
VGA Village growth area as set forth in the most recent version of the Lancaster
Township Comprehensive Plan
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Article III. Plan Processing Procedures
§ 236-301. General provisions.
Purpose. This article of this chapter sets forth the application requirements for obtaining approval
of subdivisions and land developments. The forms of the various plans referred to in this article of
this chapter and information required to be forwarded with such plans shall be as specified in
Article IV of this chapter.
Zoning Ordinance compliance required. Whenever the most recent version of the Lancaster
Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended, provides that the use proposed by the applicant for
subdivision or land development approval shall constitute a use by special exception or conditional
use, or when a variance from the terms of the most recent version of the Lancaster Township
Zoning Ordinance, as amended, is required to develop in accordance with the plan, the applicant
shall obtain such special exception, variance, or conditional use approval from the Township
Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Supervisors, as applicable, prior to the submission of the
preliminary plan. The plan shall be designed and developed in accordance with any conditions
which have been imposed upon the grant of such special exception, variance, or conditional use
by the Township Zoning Hearing Board or Board of Supervisors, as applicable.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 244/520
A.
B.
[1]
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
§ 236-302. Preapplication review (sketch plan).
Applicants are strongly urged to discuss possible development sites and plan with the Township
staff, Township Engineer, and Lancaster Township Planning Commission prior to submission of
any plan. The purpose of the preapplication meeting or sketch plan review is to afford the
applicant an opportunity to receive the advice and assistance of the Township staff and Lancaster
Township Planning Commission. Submission of a sketch plan is optional and will not constitute
formal filing of a plan with the Township.
Preapplication plans and data procedure. Prior to the preparation and filing of a preliminary plan,
the applicant may submit plans and data, which shall be forwarded to the Lancaster Township
Planning Commission for consideration. The plans shall include those elements that should be
considered in the design of the subdivision or land development.
Submission of preapplication (sketch) plans. Prospective applicants submitting a preapplication
plan for review by the Lancaster Township Planning Commission shall include those items listed in
§ 236-401 of this chapter. Plans shall be considered for informal review and discussion and shall
not constitute formal filing of the plan with the Township. Plans shall be submitted at least 30 days
prior to the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the Lancaster Township Planning Commission
in order to be considered at the next regular meeting of the Lancaster Township Planning
Commission. All plan submittals shall be accompanied by a completed application (see Appendix
No. 9) and the corresponding fees.[1] The applicant may proceed to the preliminary plan process
following the meeting with the Lancaster Township Planning Commission.
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 236-303. Formal application.
All applications for approval of a subdivision plan, a land development plan, or an improvement
construction plan shall be made by the developer filing a completed application (see Appendix No. 9 or
10), together with the appropriate plans, studies, reports, supporting data, and required filing fee, with
the Township.
§ 236-304. Acceptance for filing.
Initial application. The Township shall have seven days from the date of submission of an
application to check the plans and documents to determine if, on their face, they are in proper
form and contain all information required by this chapter. If defective, the application will be
returned, within 15 days of the filing, to the applicant with a statement of rejection; otherwise, it
shall be deemed accepted for filing as of the date of submission. Acceptance for filing shall not,
however, constitute a waiver of any deficiencies or irregularities. The applicant may appeal a
decision by the Township under this section to the Board of Supervisors.
Amendments or corrections to an application.
The Township shall have seven days from the date of resubmission to check an amended or
corrected application's plans and documents refiled by the applicant to determine if, on its
face, the amended or corrected application is in proper form and contains all information
required by this chapter, whether such amended or corrected application results in a
substantial amendment, or whether such amended or corrected application constitutes a new
plan.
If the Township determines that the amended or corrected application constitutes a
substantial amendment, it shall so inform the applicant and shall inform the applicant that the
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 245/520
(3)
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(a)
(b)
(1)
C.
Township shall consider the ninety-day review procedure as outlined in § 236-305C(3) of this
chapter to have been restarted with the refiling of the substantial amendment.
If the Township determines that the amended or corrected application constitutes a new plan,
the Township shall so inform the applicant and shall inform the applicant that a new
application and new filing fees are required. The applicant may appeal a decision by the
Township under this section to the Board of Supervisors.
§ 236-305. Preliminary plan application.
Preliminary plan application. A preliminary plan is required for applications that propose new
streets, all land development plans, and subdivision plans of 10 or more lots. All other plans may
be submitted as final plans in accordance with § 236-306 of this chapter.
Preliminary plans may be filed with the Township on any business day; however, the
Lancaster Township Planning Commission may review a plan at a particular meeting only if
the plan was filed at least 30 days prior to that meeting.
In addition to submitting the required material in accordance with § 236-305B of this chapter,
the applicant shall file with the Township the required number of copies of plans, supporting
information and all filing fees as required by the Township plus documentation that plans have
been properly filed with the LCPC.
Application requirements. All preliminary plan applications shall include the following:
Five copies of the preliminary plan. All plans shall be either black on white or blue on white
paper prints.
Two copies of all reports, notifications and certifications which are not provided on the
preliminary plan.
Three copies of the application form (see Appendix No. 9).[1]
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
A filing fee in an amount as specified on the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors and available at the Township Office.
Two CDs, DVDs, or other digital recording media (format as specified by the Township), each
of which includes one computer-readable digital file copy of the complete preliminary plan set
(all sheets) and each report, notification, and certification (format as specified by the
Township).
Township action.
Review by the Township staff.
The Township Zoning Officer and any Township personnel as directed by the Board of
Supervisors shall review the application documents to determine if they are in
compliance with this chapter, the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended, the most recent version of the Lancaster Township
Comprehensive Plan, other Township ordinances, the Township's planning objectives
and accepted planning standards. These personnel shall provide comments and
recommendations, including written findings, when directed by the Board of Supervisors.
When requested by the Township, the Township Engineer shall review the application
documents to determine compliance with this chapter and any other applicable Township
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 246/520
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
D.
ordinances, Township standards and good engineering practices. He shall prepare a
written report of his findings and recommendations.
Lancaster Township Planning Commission review process.
At the first meeting of the Lancaster Township Planning Commission after the Township
has determined that the plans and documents contain all information required by this
chapter, no action will be taken on the plan. The plan will be considered a briefing item
for the Lancaster Township Planning Commission, which will receive a briefing of the
project limited to:
A brief introduction to the Lancaster Township Planning Commission;
Consideration of any modifications which are deemed ready for action; and
Any special requests.
The Lancaster Township Planning Commission may discuss the preliminary plan
application with the developer or his agent at the next regular meeting and will review the
application to determine if it meets the standards set forth in this chapter. The preliminary
plan shall then be submitted by the Lancaster Township Planning Commission, together
with its analysis and recommendations, including those of the Township staff and
Township Engineer, to the Board of Supervisors. Generally, the plan will not be forwarded
to the Board of Supervisors until it has been recommended for unconditional approval.
Board of Supervisors review process. All applications for approval of a plan shall be acted
upon by the Board of Supervisors. Unless a different schedule is required by the MPC, the
Board of Supervisors shall render its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later
than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the Lancaster Township Planning
Commission next following the date of application provided. However, if the said next regular
meeting of the Lancaster Township Planning Commission should occur more than 30 days
following the filing of the application, then the said ninety-day period shall be measured from
the 30th day following the day the application has been filed.
Notification of Board of Supervisors action. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be
in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last
known address not later than 15 days following the decision or such later date as may be
required by the MPC.
When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall specify the
defects found in the application and describe the requirements which have not been met
and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the statute or ordinance that are not
complied with or are unsatisfied.
Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and communicate it to the
applicant within the time and in the manner required herein, unless a greater period of
time has been authorized by the MPC, shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time or
change in the prescribed manner or presentation of communication of the decision, in
which case failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of presentation of
communication shall have like effect.
Compliance with the Board of Supervisors action. If the Board of Supervisors conditions its
preliminary plan approval upon receipt of additional information, changes and/or notifications, such
data shall be submitted and/or alterations noted on two copies of the plan to be submitted to the
Township for approval. Such data shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors within 90 days of
its conditional approval, unless the Board of Supervisors grants a modification by extending the
effective time period. Failure of the applicant to submit the data in the time prescribed shall render
any and all approvals null and void.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 247/520
E.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
(4)
C.
Board of Supervisors approval and certification. The Board of Supervisors will acknowledge the
satisfactory compliance with all conditions, if any, of the preliminary plan approval at a regularly
scheduled public meeting. Approval of a preliminary plan application shall constitute approval of
the proposed subdivision and/or land development as to the character and intensity of
development and the general arrangement of streets, lots, structures, and other planned facilities
but shall not constitute final plan approval. The preliminary plan may not be recorded with the
Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
§ 236-306. Final plan application.
Prerequisites to filing final plan application. An application for final plan approval can be submitted
only after the following, when required as noted, have been completed:
The receipt of an unconditional preliminary plan approval in accordance with § 236-305 of this
chapter, when a preliminary plan approval is required.
The completion of the improvements required by this chapter in accordance with the
improvement construction plan procedure stated in § 236-307 of the Ordinance, when the
improvements are not assured by the posting of financial security as provided in Article V of
this chapter.
Final plan applications.
Final plans may be filed with the Township on any business day; however, the Lancaster
Township Planning Commission will review a plan at a particular meeting only if the plan was
filed at least 30 days prior to that meeting.
In addition to submitting the required material in accordance with § 236-306C of this chapter,
the applicant shall file with the Township the required number of copies of plans, supporting
information and all filing fees required by the Township plus documentation that plans have
been properly filed with the LCPC.
The final plan may be submitted in sections/phases, each section/phase covering a portion of
the entire proposed subdivision/land development shown on the approved preliminary plan,
provided that each section/phase, except for the last section/phase, shall contain a minimum
of 25% of the total number of units of occupancy as depicted on the approved preliminary
plan.
The Township may accept a final plan modified to reflect a change to the site or its
surroundings that occurs after the preliminary plan review. The Board of Supervisors shall
determine whether a modified final plan will be accepted or whether a new preliminary plan
shall be submitted.
Application requirements. All final plan applications shall include the following:
Five copies of the final plan. All plans shall be either black on white or blue on white paper
prints.
Two copies of all reports, notifications, and certificates which are not provided on the final
plan.
Three copies of the application form (see Appendix No. 9).[1]
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
A filing fee in an amount as specified on the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors and available at the Township Office.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 248/520
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(1)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
D.
In the case of a plan which requires access to a highway under the jurisdiction of PennDOT,
two copies of the plans and studies submitted to support the application for an HOP.
Two CDs, DVDs, or other digital recording media (format as specified by the Township), each
of which includes one computer-readable digital file copy of the complete final plan set (all
sheets) and each report, notification, and certification (format as specified by the Township).
Township action.
Review by the Township staff.
The Township Zoning Officer and any Township personnel as directed by the Board of
Supervisors shall review the application documents to determine if they are in
compliance with this chapter, the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended, the most recent version of the Lancaster Township
Comprehensive Plan, other Township ordinances, the Township's planning objectives
and accepted planning standards. These personnel shall provide comments and
recommendations, including written findings, when directed by the Board of Supervisors.
When requested by the Township, the Township Engineer shall review the application
documents to determine compliance with this chapter and any other applicable Township
ordinances, Township standards and good engineering practices. He shall prepare a
written report of his findings and recommendations.
Lancaster Township Planning Commission review process.
At the first meeting of the Lancaster Township Planning Commission after the Township
has determined that the plans and documents contain all information required by this
chapter, no action will be taken on the plan. The plan will be considered a briefing item
for the Lancaster Township Planning Commission which will receive a briefing of the
project limited to:
A brief introduction to the Lancaster Township Planning Commission;
Consideration of any modifications which are deemed ready for action; and
For any special requests.
The Lancaster Township Planning Commission may discuss the final plan application
with the developer or his agent at the next regular meeting and will review the application
to determine if it meets the standards set forth in this chapter. The final plan shall then be
submitted by the Lancaster Township Planning Commission, together with its analysis
and recommendations, including those of the Township staff and Township Engineer, to
the Board of Supervisors. Generally, the plan will not be forwarded to the Board of
Supervisors until it has been recommended for unconditional approval.
Board of Supervisors review process.
All applications for approval of a plan shall be acted upon by the Board of Supervisors.
Unless a different schedule is required by the MPC, the Board of Supervisors shall
render its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days following
the date of the regular meeting of the Lancaster Township Planning Commission next
following the date of application provided. However, if the said next regular meeting of the
Lancaster Township Planning Commission should occur more than 30 days following the
filing of the application, then the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th
day following the day the application has been filed.
Final plan approval will be effective for 90 days from the date of the Board of Supervisors'
action on the final plan, unless the Board of Supervisors grants a modification by
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 249/520
(a)
(b)
(4)
E.
(a)
(b)
[2]
(1)
(a)
(2)
F.
extending the effective time period of the approval. Within this time period, the applicant
must meet all conditions of approval, if any; certify plans as specified in this chapter; and
record plans as specified in this chapter.
Notification of Board of Supervisors action. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be
in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last
known address not later than 15 days following the decision, or such later date as may be
allowed by the MPC.
When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall specify the
defects found in the application and describe the requirements which have not been met
and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of the statute or ordinance that are not
complied with or are unsatisfied.
Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and communicate it to the
applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall be deemed an approval
of the application in terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication
of the decision, in which case failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
Compliance with Board of Supervisors action. If the Board of Supervisors conditions its final plan
approval upon receipt of additional information, changes and/or notifications, such data shall be
submitted and/or alterations noted on two copies of the plan to be submitted to the Township for
approval. Such data shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors within 90 days of its
conditional approval, unless the Board of Supervisors grants a modification by extending the
effective time period. Failure of the applicant to submit the data in the time prescribed shall render
any and all approvals null and void.
Final plan certification.
After the Board of Supervisors' approval of the final plan and the required changes, if any, are
made, the applicant shall proceed to prepare two sets of final plans which shall be transparent
reproductions of the original plan with black line on a stable plastic base film (Mylar or equal)
and one set of final plans which shall be a paper copy for the Township's files. The two
transparent copies of the final plan shall be certified in the following manner: Both final plans
shall be presented to the Board of Supervisors for the signature of the Chairman and
Secretary or their designees (see Appendix No. 5).[2] Final plans will not be signed by the
Board of Supervisors:
If submitted more than 90 days from the Board of Supervisors' final plan approval action
unless the Board of Supervisors grants a modification by extending the effective time
period of the approval; and
Until payment of all outstanding plan review fees and inspection fees.
Editor's Note: For the Board of Supervisors' final plan approval Certificate, see Appendix No.
7. Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
At the time the applicant presents the final plan for certification, the applicant shall submit:
Two CDs, DVDs, or other digital recording media (format as specified by the Township),
each of which includes one computer-readable digital file copy of the complete
stormwater management plan and all other information contained on the approved final
plan, in both the most recent versions of AutoCAD and portable document format (*.pdf)
and unless otherwise specified by the Township. The file shall also be submitted in a
format and coordinate system in accordance with the law and the requirements of the
Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 250/520
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
A.
B.
(1)
C.
A copy of all deeds to be recorded for the development shall be submitted prior to the
recording of the final plan.
Final plan recordation. Upon approval and certification of a final plan, the applicant shall record the
final plan with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds. Should the applicant fail to record the
final plan within 90 days of the Board of Supervisors' final plan approval action, the Board of
Supervisors' action on the plan shall be null and void unless the Board of Supervisors grants a
modification by extending the effective time period of the approval.
All sheets of the final plan shall be recorded unless the Township Engineer recommends and
the Board of Supervisors approves recording only specified sheets of the final plan. All final
plan sheets which are to be recorded shall be noted on the cover sheet as well as on each
plan sheet as applicable.
The final plan shall be filed with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds before proceeding
with the sale of lots and proof of such recording provided to the Township.
The final plan shall be filed with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds before proceeding
with the construction of any improvement except as provided for in § 236-307 of this chapter.
No subdivision or land development plan may be recorded unless it bears the endorsement of
the Board of Supervisors.
Effect of recording of final plan.
Recording the final plan, after approval of the Board of Supervisors, shall have the effect of an
irrevocable offer to dedicate all streets and other areas designated for public use, unless
reserved by the landowner as provided in § 236-306H of this chapter. However, the approval
of the Board of Supervisors shall not impose any duty upon the commonwealth, county or
Township concerning acceptance, maintenance or improvement of any such dedicated areas
or portion of same until the proper authorities of the commonwealth, county or Township
actually accept same by ordinance or resolution or by entry, use or improvement.
Subject to approval by the Township, the landowner may place a notation on the final plan to
the effect that there is no offer of dedication to the public of certain designated areas, in which
event the title to such area shall remain with the owner, and neither the commonwealth,
county, Township nor any applicable authorities shall assume any right to accept ownership of
such land or right-of-way.
§ 236-307. Improvement construction plan application.
The procedures set forth in this section shall apply as an alternative to the guaranteeing of
improvements through a financial security. An applicant whose improvement construction plan is
approved under this section is permitted to install all or part of the improvements required by this
chapter prior to final plan submission.
Prerequisites to filing improvement construction plan application. An application for improvement
construction plan approval can be submitted only after the applicant has received official
notification that the preliminary plan has been unconditionally approved.
Improvement construction plan application.
Improvement construction plans may be filed with the Township on any business day;
however, the Board of Supervisors will review a plan at a particular meeting only if the plan
was filed at least 30 days prior to that meeting.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 251/520
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
E.
(a)
(b)
(1)
F.
In addition to submitting the required material in accordance with § 236-307D of this chapter,
the applicant shall file with the Township the required number of copies of plans, supporting
information and all filing fees required by the Township.
The improvement construction plan may be submitted in sections/phases, each section/phase
covering a portion of the entire proposed subdivision/land development shown on the
approved preliminary plan, provided that each section/phase, except for the last
section/phase, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number of units of occupancy as
depicted on the approved preliminary plan.
The Township may accept an improvement construction plan modified to reflect a change to
the site or its surroundings that occurs after the preliminary plan review. The Board of
Supervisors shall determine whether the modification of the improvement construction plan
will be accepted or where a revised preliminary plan shall be submitted.
Application requirements. All improvement construction plan applications shall include the
following:
Five copies of the improvement construction plan. All plans shall be either black on white or
blue on white paper prints.
Two copies of all reports, notifications and certificates which are not provided on the
improvement construction plan.
Three copies of the application form (see Appendix No. 10).[1]
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
A filing fee in an amount as specified on the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors and available at the Township Office.
Two CDs, DVDs, or other digital recording media (format as specified by the Township), each
of which includes one computer-readable digital file copy of the complete improvement
construction plan set (all sheets) and each report, notification, and certification (format as
specified by the Township).
Plan requirements. All improvement construction plans shall be prepared in conformance with the
provisions of § 236-403 of this chapter, with the exception of Subsection F(1)(f) and (2)(d), (e) and
(h) of this chapter.
Township action.
Board of Supervisors review process.
In general, the Board of Supervisors will receive the improvement construction plan
application for a brief review at its first regular meeting which is at least 15 days following
the filing of the application by the applicant. The Board of Supervisors will discuss the
improvement construction plan application with the developer or his agent at its regular
meeting and will review the application to determine if it meets the standards set forth in
this chapter.
All applications for approval of a plan shall be acted upon by the Board of Supervisors.
Unless a different schedule is required by the MPC, the Board of Supervisors shall
render its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days following
the date of the regular meeting of the Lancaster Township Planning Commission next
following the date of application; provided, however, should the said next regular meeting
occur more than 30 days following the filing of the application the said ninety-day period
shall be measured from the 30th day following the day the application has been filed.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 252/520
(a)
(b)
(2)
G.
[2]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
H.
I.
Notification of the Board of Supervisors action. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall
be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his
last known address not later than 15 days following the decision, or such later date as may be
authorized by the MPC.
When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision shall specify the
defects found in the application and describe the requirements which have not been met
and shall, in each case, cite the provision of the statute or ordinance(s) that are not
complied with or are unsatisfied.
Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and communicate it to the
applicant within the time and in the manner required herein shall be deemed an approval
of the application in terms as presented, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication
of the decision; in which case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
Compliance with Board of Supervisors action. If the Board of Supervisors conditions its
improvement construction plan approval upon receipt of additional information, changes and/or
notification, such data shall be submitted and/or alterations noted on two copies of the plan to be
submitted to the Township for approval. Such data shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors
within 90 days of its conditional approval, unless the Board of Supervisors grants a modification by
extending the effective time period. Failure of the applicant to submit the data in the time
prescribed shall render any and all approvals null and void.
Improvement construction plan certificate and authorization. After the Board of Supervisors'
approval of the improvement construction plan and the required changes, if any, are made, the
applicant shall proceed to prepare two plans which shall be either a) black ink on tracing cloth or
b) transparent reproductions of the original plan with black line on cloth or stable plastic base film
(Mylar or equal). These plans shall be certified in the following manner:
Improvement construction plans shall be presented to the Board of Supervisors for the
signature of the Chairman and Secretary or their designees (see Appendix No. 5).[2]
Improvement construction plans will not be signed by the Township if submitted more than 90
days from the Board of Supervisors' approval action unless the Board of Supervisors grants a
modification by extending the effective time period of the approval.
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
Approval and certification of an improvement construction plan shall not constitute final plan
approval of the proposal, nor shall this plan be recorded with the Lancaster County Recorder
of Deeds, but shall, when combined with the necessary municipal and/or commonwealth
approvals and permits, grant the authority to install the improvements required as part of this
chapter.
Following the Board of Supervisors' certification of the improvement construction plan, one
copy of the plan will be retained by the Board of Supervisors and the remaining copy will be
available to the firm which prepared the plan.
Improvement construction plan approval will be effective for a five-year period from the date
of the Board of Supervisors' approval action. Construction must be completed and a final plan
application must be submitted within five years of the improvement construction plan
approval, or else the plan approval will become null and void unless the Board of Supervisors
grants a modification by extending the effective time period of the approval.
Completion of improvements. Upon completion of the improvements required by this chapter, the
applicant may proceed to submit a final plan and application that shall include notice of approval of
the improvements by the agency or authority which is to accept the improvements.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 253/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
A.
§ 236-308. Procedure to request modification of chapter
provisions.
Application requirements. A request for a modification may be submitted to the Township at any
time. All requests shall be in writing and accompanied by a plan prepared at least to the minimum
standards of a sketch plan in accordance with § 236-401 of this chapter. The written request shall
identify:
The specific section of this chapter which is requested to be modified.
Provisions proposed as an alternate to the requirements.
Justification for the modification. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts of
unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based.
Township action.
In general, the Board of Supervisors will not act on a request for a modification until the
Lancaster Township Planning Commission has had the opportunity to present its comments to
the Board of Supervisors.
The Lancaster Township Planning Commission will schedule a request for a modification for
action at a regular meeting which is at least 30 days following the filing of the application by
the applicant. The Lancaster Township Planning Commission will review the request to
determine:
If compliance with the provisions of the Ordinance creates an undue hardship or appears
to be unreasonable as it applies to the particular property; or
If the applicant demonstrates that an alternative proposal will allow for equal or better
results and take such action as it shall deem necessary or advisable in the public
interest.
The request for a modification and accompanying documentation shall be submitted by the
Lancaster Township Planning Commission, together with its analysis and recommendations,
to the Board of Supervisors for consideration. All applications for approval of a modification
shall be acted upon by the Board of Supervisors, which shall render its decision and
communicate it to the applicant, in accordance with the requirements of the MPC.
Notification of Board of Supervisors action. After the meeting at which the modification was
reviewed, the Board of Supervisors shall send a written notice of the Board of Supervisors'
action to the applicant at his last known address not later than 15 days following the decision
or such later date as may be authorized by the MPC. If the Board of Supervisors denies the
request, the Board of Supervisors will notify the above individual, in writing. If the Board of
Supervisors grants the requests, the final plan shall include a note that identifies the specific
modification as granted, including any conditions of approval.
§ 236-309. Plans exempted from preliminary plan procedures.
Revised subdivision and/or land development plans. Any replatting or resubdivision of recorded or
unrecorded plans, excluding lot grading plans in subdivisions, shall be considered as a new
application and shall comply with all requirements of this chapter, except that plans may be
changed, provided that in making such changes:
No lot or tract of land shall be created that does not meet the minimum design standards
required by this chapter and existing Township regulations.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 254/520
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
[1]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(6)
(7)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
No structure shall be relocated which does not meet the minimum design standards required
by this chapter and existing Township regulations.
The stormwater management facilities are not altered in a manner that affects the discharge
of stormwater to an adjacent property or significantly relocates a major stormwater
management facility within the project.
Street locations and block sizes shall not be changed.
The character and land use of the original application shall be maintained.
In every case where a plan alteration conforms to the above, the applicant shall:
Submit to the Board of Supervisors two black on white or blue on white paper copies of
the revised final plan and one application form (see Appendix No. 9).[1] Upon review of
the revision, the Board of Supervisors will, in writing, advise the applicant whether or not
the revision complies with the above.
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
If the revision complies, the applicant shall prepare two copies of the plans, which shall
be a transparent reproduction of the original plan with black line on a stable plastic base
film (Mylar or equal) and which shall specifically identify the alteration(s) to the previously
recorded plan.
The applicant shall then submit the plan to the Board of Supervisors for signature as
specified in § 236-306G of this chapter.
The plans shall then be recorded as specified in § 236-306H of this chapter.
Application requirements. The applicant shall file with the Township the required number of
copies of plans, supporting information and all filing fees as required by the Township for final
plans in § 236-306, plus documentation that plans have been properly submitted to the LCPC.
Preliminary/final plans. In case of a subdivision plan of not more than 10 lots, including the
remaining lands, none of which can be further subdivided, and which does not require provisions
for a new street, the applicant may, at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, concurrently
submit a preliminary plan and final plan for processing by the Township in accordance with § 236-
306 of this chapter. If the plan qualifies, all procedures for preliminary/final plans by the Township
and applicant shall occur in accordance with § 236-306 of this chapter. All other plans shall be
submitted in accordance with § 236-305 of this chapter. For the purpose of interpreting this
section, a subdivision of not more than 10 lots shall not include the remaining tract if the remaining
tract can be further subdivided.
Lot add-on plans. The lease, conveyance, sale, or transfer of land for the sole purpose of
increasing the lot size of a contiguous lot shall comply with the following lot add-on procedure,
provided that the proposal does not create additional lots or result in a nonconformity with the area
and design standards found in the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning
Ordinance,[2] as amended, and Article VI of this chapter. In every case where a proposal conforms
to the above, the application shall comply with the following procedures:
Plan requirements. All lot add-on plans shall be prepared in conformance with the provisions
of § 236-404 of this chapter.
In addition to submitting the required material in accordance with § 236-306C of this chapter,
with the exception of § 236-306C(2) and (5) of this chapter, the applicant shall provide
documentation that plans have been properly submitted to the LCPC.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 255/520
(3)
(4)
[2]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
B.
The Township shall process and act on the lot add-on plan and communicate its decision to
the applicant in the same manner as required for a final plan application, as specified in
§ 236-306 of this chapter.
If the plan qualifies, the applicant shall seek plan certification and recordation as specified in
§ 236-306 of this chapter. Lot add-on plans shall be filed with the Lancaster County Recorder
of Deeds prior to the execution of a deed for the land.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
Article IV. Information Required with Subdivision or Land
Development Plan
§ 236-401. Sketch plans.
Sketch plans shall include any features of the Township's future land use plan, thoroughfares plan,
community facilities plan, or any plans of the Township, including, but not limited to, proposed
streets, recreation areas, drainage reservation, future school sites and public areas. A specific site
analysis shall be provided which highlights man-made and natural features. The analysis should
include information pertaining to soil types and stability, wetlands, scenic vistas, watercourses,
drainage patterns, slope, and transportation patterns and systems, including deficiencies of
existing roadways, public utilities, recreational facilities, and any other features of the site and
nearby areas which may be interlaced or impacted by the proposed development and land use.
The scale and sheet size of sketch plans shall be as required for preliminary plans in § 236-402 of
this chapter. Where appropriate, sketch plans may be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100
feet. The sketch plan shall show or be accompanied by the following data, legible in every detail
and drawn to scale, but not necessarily containing precise dimensions:
Name of the municipalities in which the project is to be located, including the location of any
municipal boundary line(s) if located within the vicinity of the tract.
Name and address of the developer (if applicable), landowner and parcel ID number.
Name of the individual and/or the firm that prepared the plan.
Location map with sufficient information to enable the Township to locate the property.
North arrow, a graphic scale, and a written scale.
Existing tract boundaries (approximate) and accurately labeled with the name(s) of adjacent
landowner(s) and adjacent plan(s) of record.
Significant topographical and man-made features (e.g., bodies of water, quarries, floodplains,
tree masses, structures).
Proposed street, parking, building, lot layout and setbacks.
Proposed land use; if several land uses are proposed, the location of each land use shall be
indicated.
Statement explaining the methods of water supply and sewage disposal to be used.
In the case of a plan for which the subject tract has an environmental covenant, the plan shall
include a plan note indicating the recording information of the environmental covenant
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 256/520
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
C.
executed pursuant to the Pennsylvania Uniform Environmental Covenants Act, Act No. 68 of
2007, 27 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6501 through 6517 (UECA).
§ 236-402. Preliminary plans.
Preliminary subdivision and land development plans shall be prepared by an engineer, surveyor,
or landscape architect qualified to perform such duties. If the preliminary plan does not include the
total land area held by the developer, a sketch plan shall be submitted for all areas that could be
available for future subdivision or land development. The preliminary plan shall show, be
accompanied by, or be prepared in accordance with the following:
Drafting standards.
The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at one of the scales (inches equals feet) in Table
4-1:
Table 4-1
Plan Scale Requirements
Inches Feet
1 = 10
1 = 20
1 = 30
1 = 40
1 = 50
1 = 100
Dimensions and bearings for the perimeter property line of the entire tract on preliminary
plans and for the proposed property lines and street right-of-way lines on final plans shall be
in feet and decimals and in degrees, minutes and seconds, respectively. Lot line descriptions
shall read in a clockwise direction.
The survey shall not have an error of closure greater than one foot in 10,000 feet.
The sheet size shall be no smaller than 18 inches by 22 inches and no larger than 24 inches
by 36 inches. If the plan is prepared in two or more sections, the Key Map showing the
location of the sections shall be placed on each sheet. If more than one sheet is necessary,
each sheet shall be the same size and numbered to show the relationship to the total number
of sheets in the plan (e.g., Sheet 1 of 5).
Plans shall be legible in every detail.
All street profiles as well as the design of sanitary sewer facilities, water supply facilities and
stormwater management facilities shall be drawn at the horizontal scale and one of the
vertical scales in accordance with Table 4-2:
Table 4-2
Plan/Profile Scale Requirements
Horizontal Scale Vertical Scale
1 inch = 50 feet 1 inch = 10 feet
1 inch = 5 feet
Location and identification.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 257/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
The proposed project name or identifying title.
Name of the municipalities in which the project is to be located, including the location of any
municipal boundary line(s) if located within the vicinity of the tract.
Name and address of the developer of the tract (or his authorized agent).
Name and address of the individual and/or firm that prepared the plan.
The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the plan, the plan date, and the
date(s) of all plan revisions.
A location map, drawn to scale, relating the subdivision to at least two intersections of road
center lines, including the approximate distance to the intersection of the center lines of the
nearest improved street intersections.
A North arrow, a graphic scale, and a written scale.
The entire existing tract boundary with bearings and distances. If a landowner is going to
retain a single lot with a lot area in excess of 10 acres, the boundary of that lot may be
identified as a deed plotting and may be drawn at any legible scale; if the retained lot has a lot
area of 10 acres or less, it must be described to the accuracy requirements of this chapter.
The total acreage of the entire existing tract.
The zoning requirements of the development, including the names of all zoning districts,
required lot size, required building setbacks and yards, maximum lot coverage, required
maximum and/or minimum development density, maximum building height for each district
and land use.
The location of existing lot line markers along the perimeter of the entire existing tract.
Source of title, deed, book, page, plan book (if applicable), and tax account identification
number.
In the case of a Plan for which the subject tract has an environmental covenant, the plan shall
include a plan note indicating the recording information of the environmental covenant
executed pursuant to the Pennsylvania Uniform Environmental Covenants Act, Act No. 68 of
2007, 27 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 6501 through 6517 (UECA).
Existing features.
Existing contours shall be shown at a minimum vertical interval of one foot for land with
average natural slope of 3% or less, two feet for land with average natural slope between 3%
and 20%, and at a minimum vertical interval of five feet for more steeply sloping land. Contour
interval may be adjusted based upon horizontal scale with concurrence of the Township
Engineer. Contours shall be accompanied by the location of the benchmark and a notation of
the datum used. The applicable datum used by the applicable authority shall be used in all
plans indicating connection to the public sewer system or public water system. Contours
plotted by interpolation of the USGS 7.5 feet quadrangle mapping will not be accepted.
Soils types as indicated by the USDA survey of Lancaster County.
The names of all immediately adjacent landowners, and the names and plan book record
numbers of all previously recorded plans for adjacent projects.
The following items when located within the subject tract or within 200 feet of the subject tract:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 258/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
E.
The location, name and dimensions of existing rights-of-way and cartways for streets,
access drives, driveways and service streets;
The location and size of sanitary sewer mains, water supply mains, fire hydrants,
buildings, stormwater management facilities, watercourses, floodplains and any related
rights-of-way;
The location of existing rights-of-way for railroads and for electric, gas, and oil
transmission lines;
The location of on-lot septic systems and on-lot water supplies; and
Significant environmental or topographic features, such as floodplains, wetlands, quarry
sites, solid water disposal areas, historic features, cemetery or burial sites,
archaeological sites, highly erosive soils, or wooded areas.
The following items when located within the subject tract:
The location, name, and dimensions of existing rights-of-way and cartways for streets,
alleys, access drives, and driveways.
The location and size of the following features and related rights-of-way: sanitary sewer
mains, water supply mains, fire hydrants, buildings, and stormwater management
facilities.
The location of existing rights-of-way for electric, gas, and oil transmission lines,
railroads, et cetera.
The location and identification of all existing buildings and other improvements.
The size, capacity, and condition of the existing stormwater management system and any
other facility that may be used to convey storm flows.
The location and size of existing on-lot sewage systems and wells.
Significant environmental or topographic features such as floodplains, quarry sites, solid
waste disposal areas, historic features, cemetery or burial sites, archaeological sites,
highly erosive soils, or wooded areas.
The location of wetlands and subsequent data or information required by § 236-407 of
this chapter.
Plan information.
The layout of streets, alleys and sidewalks, including cartway and right-of-way widths.
The layout of lots, with approximate dimensions.
Lot numbers in consecutive order.
The location and dimensions of any proposed parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, open
space, common elements, or other facilities or spaces intended to be dedicated for public use
or reserved for public, semi public, community or private use.
In the case of land developments, the location and configuration of proposed buildings,
parking compounds, streets, access drives, driveways, and all other significant planned
facilities.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 259/520
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
[1]
(17)
[2]
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)
Total number of existing and proposed lots, units of occupancy, density, and proposed land
use (if a multiple land use is proposed an indication of the location of each land use).
Easements and rights-of-way.
Building setback lines, with distances from the street right-of-way line and lot lines.
Identification of buildings to be demolished.
Typical street cross section for each proposed street and typical cross section for any existing
street that will be improved as part of the application. Each cross section shall include the
entire right-of-way width.
Street center-line profile for each proposed public or private street, including corresponding
center-line stationing.
Design of any proposed sanitary sewer facilities, water supply facilities, and stormwater
management facilities. In addition, design calculations shall be submitted to support the
design of the various facilities.
A statement on the plan indicating any special exception, conditional use, or variance granted
by the Township, along with the specific section reference of the Lancaster Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended, the date of approval, and specific conditions as part of an approval,
if applicable.
A statement on the plan indicating any existing or proposed modifications to this chapter
granted by the Township, along with the specific section reference of this chapter, date of
approval, and any specific conditions as part of an approval, if applicable.
Proposed street names.
A table indicating the existing zoning district, total tract area, required lot size, required
setbacks and yards, maximum lot coverage, required maximum and/or minimum development
density, maximum building height and number of lots in the proposed subdivision along with
the proposals for each of these parameters.
A stormwater management plan as required by the Lancaster Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 229, Stormwater Management.
Where the proposed subdivision or land development is located partially or wholly within an
area prone to frequent flooding (either by impoundment or conveyance) as indicated by the
Flood Insurance Rate Map profiles and supporting data, the Lancaster Township Floodplain
Management Ordinance,[2] as amended, or soil type or local historical record; the developer
shall supply the location and elevation of all proposed roads, fills, utilities, buildings,
stormwater management, and erosion control facilities.
[Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Floodplain Management.
Location of all percolation test holes, deep probe holes, and proposed well locations.
Easements for the on-lot sewage replacement locations.
Clear sight triangles and stopping sight distances for all intersections as described in Article
VI of this chapter.
Lighting plans, where street or parking lot lighting is proposed, including photometrics and all
details including locations, footers and mounting equipment.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 260/520
(23)
(24)
(25)
[3]
(a)
(b)
[4]
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
F.
The location of all trees and existing wooded areas on the site, and the location of trees to be
removed and trees to remain.
Where the preliminary plan covers only a portion of an intended larger development, a sketch
plan in accordance with § 236-401 of this chapter shall be furnished depicting the future
subdivision or development. The sketch plan shall be suitable to the Township and in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The sketch plan shall include the logical
extension of the transportation, sewer, and water facilities for future subdivision or
development, and those facilities and utilities shown on the preliminary plan will be
considered in light of adjustments and connections with future transportation facilities and
utilities as part of future subdivision or development.
In case of a preliminary plan calling for the installation of improvements beyond a five-year
period, a schedule delineating all proposed sections/phases as well as deadlines within which
applications for final plan approval of each section/phase are intended to be filed shall be
provided. Each section/phase in any subdivision or land development, except for the last
section/phase, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number of units of occupancy as
depicted on the preliminary plan.
Certificates, notifications, and reports.
Certificates.
Certificate, signature, and seal of a professional registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and qualified to perform such duties, to the effect that the plan is correct, in
accordance with the requirements of Pennsylvania Chapter 15 (State Board of
Landscape Architects) or Chapter 37 (State Registration Board for Professional
Engineers, Land Surveyor and Geologists), Title 49, of the Pennsylvania Code, as
applicable (see Appendix No. 1).[3]
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
Certificate, signature, and seal of the surveyor to the effect that the survey is correct, in
accordance with the requirements of Pennsylvania Chapter 37 (State Registration Board
for Professional Engineers, Land Surveyor and Geologists), Title 49, of the Pennsylvania
Code (see Appendix No. 2).
Certificate for approval by the Board of Supervisors with space for the signature of the
Chairman and Secretary or their designees (see Appendix No. 3).[4]
Editor's Note: For the Board of Supervisors' preliminary plan approval certificate, see
Appendix No. 4.
Notifications.
Where the tract described in the application includes any public utility, electric
transmission line, gas pipeline, or petroleum product transmission line located within the
tract, the applicant or lessee of such right-of-way shall notify the owner of the right-of-way
of his intentions. A note stating any conditions regarding the use of the land, minimum
building setback or right-of-way lines shall be included on the plan. This requirement may
also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the recorded agreement.
Where the land included in the subject application has an agricultural, woodland or other
natural resource easement located within the tract, the application shall be accompanied
by a letter from the party holding the easement stating any conditions on the use of the
land. This requirement may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the recorded
easement.
Reports.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 261/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
E.
A stormwater management report as required by the Lancaster Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance.
A water and sewer feasibility report as required in this chapter.
A traffic impact study as required in this chapter.
A wetland report as required in this chapter.
Filing fee. The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by a check or money order drawn to the
order of the Township in the amount specified on the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors and available at the Township Office.
§ 236-403. Final plans.
Final subdivision plans and boundary surveys shall be prepared by a surveyor, and final land
development plans shall be prepared by an engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect qualified to
perform such duties. The final plan shall show, be accompanied by, or be prepared in accordance
with the following.
Drafting standards. The same drafting standards shall be required for a final plan as required for a
preliminary plan in § 236-402 this chapter.
Location and identification. The same location and identification standards shall be required for a
final plan as required for a preliminary plan in § 236-402 of this chapter.
Existing features. The same existing features standards shall be required for a final plan as
required for a preliminary plan in § 236-402 of this chapter.
Plan information.
Complete description of the center line and the right-of-way line for all new streets and alleys,
whether public or private. This description shall include distances and bearings with curve
segments comprised of radius, tangent, arc, and chord.
Lot lines, with accurate bearings and distances, and lot areas for all lots. Curve segments
shall be comprised of arc, chord, bearings, and distances. Lot line distances and lot area shall
exclude areas within any street right-of-way.
Lot numbers in consecutive order.
The location, dimensions, and amenity details of any proposed parks, playgrounds,
recreational facilities or space intended to be dedicated for public use and reserved for public,
semipublic, community, or private use.
In the case of land development plans, the location and configuration of proposed buildings,
parking compounds, streets, access drives, driveways, and all other significant planned
facilities.
The total number of existing and proposed lots, units of occupancy, density, and proposed
land use; if a multiple land use is proposed, an indication of the location of each land use.
Easements and rights-of-way.
Building setback lines, with distances from the street right-of-way line.
Identification of buildings to be demolished.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 262/520
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
[1]
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
[2]
(19)
[3]
(20)
(21)
Typical street cross section for each proposed street, and a typical cross section for any
existing street which will be improved as part of the application. Each cross section shall
include the entire right-of-way width.
Final vertical and horizontal alignment for each proposed street, sanitary sewer, and water
distribution system. All street profiles shall show at least the existing profile along the center
line, proposed grade at the center line, and the length of all proposed vertical curves for
streets. All water distribution and sanitary sewer systems shall provide manhole locations and
size and type of material. This information may be provided on separate sheets and is not
subject to recording with the final plans.
Final street names with notice of approval from Lancaster Countywide Communications.
Location and material of all permanent monuments and lot line markers, including a note that
all monuments and lot line markers are set or indicating when they will be set.
A detailed grading plan. The grading plan shall include finished grades and ground floor
elevations. This information may be provided on separate sheets and is not subject to
recording with the final plans.
A stormwater management plan as required by the Lancaster Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 229, Stormwater Management.
Identification of any lands to be dedicated or reserved for public, semipublic, community, or
private use.
A table indicating the existing zoning district, total tract area, required lot size, required
setbacks and yards, maximum lot coverage, required maximum and/or minimum development
density, maximum building height and number of lots in the proposed subdivision along with
the proposals for each of these parameters.
Where the proposed subdivision or land development is located partially or wholly within an
area prone to frequent flooding (either by impoundment or conveyance) as indicated by the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (profiles), soil type or local historical record, the applicant shall
supply the location and elevation of all proposed roads, fills, utilities, buildings, stormwater
management, and erosion control facilities.
In the case of a plan which requires access to a highway under the jurisdiction of PennDOT,
the inclusion of the following plan note:
"A Highway Occupancy Permit is required pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945
(P.L. 1242, No. 428), known as the 'State Highway Law,'[2] before access to a state highway is
permitted. Access to the state highway shall be as authorized by a Highway Occupancy
Permit, and the Board of Supervisors' approval of this plan in no way implies that such a
permit can be acquired."
Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-420.
A statement on the plan indicating any special exception, conditional use, or variance granted
by the Township, along with the specific section reference of the Lancaster Township Zoning
Ordinance,[3] as amended, the date of approval, and specific conditions as part of an
approval, if applicable.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
A statement on the plan indicating any modifications to this chapter granted by the Township,
along with the specific section reference of this chapter, date of approval, and any specific
conditions as part of an approval, if applicable.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 263/520
(22)
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
(28)
(29)
(30)
[4]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
F.
A note shall be included on the plan indicating specific areas, including stormwater
management facilities, which shall be owned privately and those which shall be owned by the
Township. All areas and facilities that shall be offered for dedication to the Township shall be
clearly identified and marked on the plan.
Location of all percolation test holes, deep probe holes, and proposed well locations.
A complete landscape plan, prepared by a landscape architect qualified to perform such
duties, showing the location, size and type of all plant material required by the provisions of
this chapter or any other applicable Township regulations, including, but not limited to,
screening, plantings, parking landscaping, replacement trees, and street trees. The landscape
plan shall include all interior landscaping calculations, as well as a note indicating the specific
Township regulation or requirement and the specific number and type of proposed planting
demonstrating compliance with the applicable Township regulation or requirement. The
landscape plan should be provided on separate sheets and must include the signature and
seal of the landscape architect qualified to perform such duties and responsible for the
preparation of the plan to the effect that the plan is correct, in accordance with the
requirements of Pennsylvania Chapter 15 (State Board of Landscape Architects), Title 49, of
the Pennsylvania Code, as applicable.
Easements for the on-lot sewage replacement locations.
Clear sight triangles and stopping sight distances for all intersections as described in Article
VI of this chapter shall be shown on the plan.
Lighting plans, where street or parking lot lighting is proposed, including photometrics and all
details, including locations, footers and mounting equipment.
The location of all trees and existing wooded areas on the site and location of trees to be
removed and trees to remain.
A detailed schedule of inspections, as generally outlined by Article V of this chapter, which is
tailored for the site under consideration.
If a sketch plan or a preliminary plan of the total land area held by the developer has not been
submitted, then a sketch plan in accordance with § 236-401 of this chapter shall be furnished
depicting the future subdivision or development.
Certificates, notifications, and reports.
Certificates.
Certificate, signature, and seal of a professional registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and qualified to perform such duties, to the effect that the plan is correct, in
accordance with the requirements of Pennsylvania Chapter 15 (State Board of
Landscape Architects) or Chapter 37 (State Registration Board for Professional
Engineers, Land Surveyor and Geologists), Title 49, of the Pennsylvania Code, as
applicable. (See Appendix No. 1.)[4]
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
Certificate, signature, and seal of the surveyor to the effect that the survey is correct, in
accordance with the requirements of Pennsylvania Chapter 37 (State Registration Board
for Professional Engineers, Land Surveyor and Geologists), Title 49, of the Pennsylvania
Code. (See Appendix No. 2.)
Certificate of review by the Lancaster Township Planning Commission. (See Appendix
No. 6.)
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 264/520
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(2)
Certificate for approval by the Board of Supervisors with space for the signature of the
Chairman and Secretary or their designees. (See Appendix No. 7.)
A statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgment of
deeds and signed by the landowners, certifying that the subdivision or land development
shown on the plan is the act and the deed of the landowners; that all those signing are all
the landowners of the property shown on the survey and plan; that they desire the same
to be recorded as such; and that all streets and other property identified as proposed
public property are dedicated for public use. This must be dated following the last change
or revision to said plan. (See Appendix No. 3.)
Certification of review by the LCPC. (See Appendix No. 8.)
Notifications.
Notification from PA DEP that either approval of the sewage facility plan revision (plan
revision module for land development), supplement, or exemption has been granted or
notice from PA DEP that such approval is not required.
Where the tract described in the subject application includes any public utility, electric
transmission line, gas pipeline, or petroleum product transmission line located within the
tract, the applicant or lessee of such right-of-way shall notify the owner of the right-of-way
of his intentions. A note stating any condition regarding the use of the land, minimum
building setback line or right-of-way line shall be included on the plan. This requirement
may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the recorded agreement.
Where the land included in the subject application has an agricultural, woodland, or other
natural resource easement located within the tract, the application shall be accompanied
by a letter from the party holding the easement stating any conditions on the use of the
land. This requirement may also be satisfied by submitting a copy of the recorded
easement.
Where the tract described in the subject application includes any residential
development, the applicant shall prepare a written notice to the superintendent of the
School District of Lancaster. Such notice shall include, but not be limited to, the location
of the development, the number and types of units to be included in the development,
and the expected construction schedule of the development. The Township shall be
responsible for forwarding the written notice to the superintendent of the School District
of Lancaster.
Notice from Lancaster County-Wide Communications and the emergency service
providers in the Township stating that the proposed private and/or public street names
are acceptable.
A note placed on the plan indicating any area that is not to be offered for dedication, if
applicable.
Written notice from the Township Engineer and the applicable authority engineer that all
proposed improvements have been designed to the standards of the Township and/or the
applicable authority and that financial guarantees in a form suitable to the Board of
Supervisors and the applicable authority have been received in accordance with Article V
of this chapter.
When the applicant posts financial guarantee in lieu of completion of the improvements,
the final plan shall be accompanied by a completed improvement guarantee agreement
in a form that is acceptable to the Township.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 265/520
(i)
(j)
(k)
[5]
(l)
(m)
[6]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
G.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
Such written notices of approval as required by this chapter, including written notices
approving the water supply systems, sanitary sewage systems and stormwater runoff to
adjacent properties.
The submission of a controlling agreement in accordance with § 236-602A(22) of this
chapter when an application proposes to establish a street which is not offered for
dedication to public use.
Notification from the appropriate state and federal agencies that permits have been
issued, or are not required, for any proposed activities within streams, wetlands, or any
other state or federally regulated body of water. These permits include, but are not limited
to, floodplain encroachment permits, dam permits, earth disturbance permits, stream
encroachment permits, and general permits.
When the plan proposes the demolition, removal, alteration or relocation of an historic
feature, evidence of compliance with the Township's Demolition Review Ordinance.[5]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Demolition Review.
When the final plan is submitted in sections/phases, the above notifications for all
applicable activities on the entire site, shown on the approved preliminary plan, shall be
provided upon submittal of the first final section/phase of the project.
Reports.
A stormwater management report as required by the Lancaster Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance.[6]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 229, Stormwater Management.
A water and sewer feasibility report as required by this chapter.
A traffic impact study as required by this chapter.
A wetland report as required by this chapter.
Filing fee. The final plan shall be accompanied by a check or money order drawn to the order of
the Township in the amount specified on the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors and available at the Township office.
§ 236-404. Lot add-on plans.
Preparation. Lot add-on plans shall be prepared by a surveyor and shall include the following
information.
Drafting standards. The same drafting standards shall be required for a lot add-on plan as
required for a preliminary plan in § 236-402 this chapter.
Location and identification. The same location and identification standards shall be required for a
lot add-on plan as required for a preliminary plan in § 236-402 of this chapter.
Existing features.
The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the names and plan book record
numbers of all previously recorded plans for adjacent projects.
The following items when located within the subject tract:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 266/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
E.
[1]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
F.
G.
A.
The location, name, and dimensions of existing rights-of-way and cartways for streets,
alleys, access drives, and driveways.
The location and size of the following features and related rights-of-way: sanitary sewer
mains, water supply mains, fire hydrants, buildings, and stormwater management
facilities.
The location of existing rights-of-way for electric, gas, and oil transmission lines and
railroads.
The location and identification of all existing buildings and other improvements.
The location and size of existing on-lot sewage systems and wells.
Significant environmental or topographic features, such as floodplains, quarry sites, solid
waste disposal areas, historic features, cemetery or burial sites, archaeological sites,
highly erosive soils, or wooded areas.
The location of wetlands and subsequent data or information required by § 236-407 this
chapter.
Plan information. The same plan information standards shall be required for a lot add-on plan as
required for a final plan in § 236-403 of this chapter.
Certificates.
Certificate, signature, and seal of the surveyor to the effect that the plan is correct, in
accordance with the requirements of Pennsylvania Chapter 37 (State Registration Board for
Professional Engineers, Land Surveyor and Geologists), Title 49, of the Pennsylvania Code
(see Appendix No. 2).[1]
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
Certificate for approval of the plan by the Board of Supervisors with space for the signature of
the Chairman and Secretary or their designees (see Appendix No. 7).
A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgment of
deeds and signed by the landowners, to the effect that the subdivision or land development
shown on the plan is the act and the deed of the landowners, that all those signing are all the
landowners of the property shown on the survey and plan, and that they desire the same to
be recorded as such. This must be dated following the last change or revision to said plan
(see Appendix No. 3).
Certificate of review of the plan by the Lancaster Township Planning Commission (see
Appendix No. 6).
Certificate of review of the plan by the LCPC (see Appendix No. 8).
Filing fee. The lot add-on plan shall be accompanied by a check or money order drawn to the
order of the Township in the amount specified on the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors and available at the Township Office.
§ 236-405. Feasibility report on sewer and water facilities.
The following reports shall be included with all land development plans:
Water service feasibility report.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 267/520
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
The applicant shall submit a feasibility report concerning the availability of a public water
system in or near the proposed land development. Said report shall be prepared by an
engineer qualified to perform such duties and be submitted in conjunction with the plan for
review by the Township, the applicable authority, and for recommendations by the local office
of PA DEP.
Within any UGA or VGA or within any area that the Act 537 Plan identifies to be served
by public utilities, any lot created, and any land development plan that proposes to
increase flows equal to or greater than 400 gallons per day, shall be served by public
water.
For those areas not located within an UGA or VGA or within any area that the Act 537
Plan identifies to be served by public utilities, the feasibility report is not required for
residential subdivisions of four lots or less, including remaining lands and commercial or
industrial land development plans with a flow rate demand of less than 400 gallons per
day.
If connection to an existing public water system is proposed, the developer shall submit an
agreement which verifies the commitment of the public water provider to provide water as will
be utilized by the subdivision or land development for such period of time and under such
terms and conditions determined acceptable to the provider.
If the water supply system proposed involves the utilization of water obtained from the tract
being subdivided or developed (irrespective of whether or not that water is being distributed
as a part of a community water supply system), that water supply source may be utilized only
when:
The feasibility study establishes and the engineer qualified to perform such duties
performing the study certifies that the groundwater recharge on the tract in question after
development will exceed the anticipated water usage figures under the following PA DEP
standards:
A population of 3 1/2 persons per dwelling unit shall be assumed for residential units.
An average daily usage of 100 gallons per person per day is to be used where
residential use is contemplated.
Groundwater supply will exceed projected water usage quantities where industrial,
agricultural or commercial use is contemplated.
The Township Engineer recommends the study for approval.
When industrial, agricultural or commercial use is intended, the applicant shall, in the
feasibility study, set forth the proposed nature of the use, the proposed number of employees
and whether or not water will be used for cleanup and/or processing or otherwise in
connection with the use. The applicant shall in addition set forth the proposed allocation of
available water supply between or among the proposed uses and shall set forth a plan or
proposal pursuant to which such allocation can reasonably be monitored and enforced by the
Township or applicable authority.
In all cases the applicant shall demonstrate that the water to be supplied shall be of an
adequate quality and quantity for the intended use. Potable water shall meet all applicable
standards of PA DEP or the USEPA.
If community water systems are proposed, these systems shall be in compliance with the
above requirements as well as the regulations of PA DEP and the applicable authority.
Sewer service feasibility report.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 268/520
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
[1]
[1]
[2]
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
The applicant shall submit a feasibility report concerning the availability of a public sewer
system in or near the proposed land development. Said report shall be prepared by an
engineer qualified to perform such duties and be submitted in conjunction with the plan for
review by the Township, the applicable authority, and for recommendations by the local office
of PA DEP.
Within any UGA or VGA or within any area that the Act 537 Plan identifies to be served
by public utilities, any lot created, and any land development plan that proposes to
increase flows equal to or greater than 400 gallons per day, shall be served by public
sewer.
For those areas not located within an UGA or VGA or within any area that the Act 537
Plan identifies to be served by public utilities, the feasibility report is not required for
residential subdivisions of four lots or less, including remaining lands, and commercial or
industrial land development plans which propose effluent flows of less than 400 gallons
per day.
If connection to an existing public sewer system is proposed, the developer shall submit an
agreement which verifies the commitment of the public sewer service provider to provide such
sewage disposal as will be utilized by the subdivision or land development for such period of
time and under such terms and conditions as determined acceptable to the provider.
As a part of the feasibility study, the applicant shall state the type of sewage disposal desired
for each of the proposed lots. If other than connection to a public sewer system or the
installation of a conventional on-site sewage disposal system is intended on any of the lots,
that fact shall be indicated on the plan itself. The following conditions shall apply:
The Board of Supervisors will approve on-lot sewage disposal systems only when the
Township SEO shall certify that both an initial location and a replacement location for the
on-lot sewage disposal system are present on each lot.
The replacement location shall be of a size and capacity to allow complete
abandonment of the initial system in the event of failure.
The replacement location shall be protected from traffic, and no filling or excavation
shall be allowed within its boundary.
The standards for installation of the replacement system shall be as required by PA
DEP at the time of its construction.
Subdivisions proposing a lot or lots utilizing alternate on-site sewage disposal systems
will not be approved by the Board of Supervisors unless:
The Township SEO and/or a sanitarian of PA DEP certifies that a conventional
sewage disposal site cannot reasonably be located on the site; and
The lot itself cannot reasonably be redesigned or relocated consistent with the most
recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance,[1] as amended, and
other Township regulations so as to enable utilization of a conventional on-site
sewage disposal system.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
The feasibility study shall include the results of the probe hole analyses and soil
absorption tests on each of the lots as proposed in the subdivision. These probe hole
analyses and soil absorption tests shall be certified as accurate by the Township SEO.
If community sewer systems are proposed, these systems shall be in compliance with the
above requirements as well as the regulations of PA DEP and the applicable authority.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 269/520
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
§ 236-406. Traffic impact study.
There are two types of required traffic impact studies.
Studies required.
Abbreviated traffic impact study. Whenever a proposed development project will generate 50
to 99 new vehicle trips in the peak direction (inbound or outbound) during the site peak traffic
hour, the applicant shall perform an abbreviated traffic impact study. The study must utilize trip
generation rates from the most recent version of the ITE Trip Generation Manual or from a
local study of corresponding land uses and quantities. Based on this study, certain
improvements may be identified as necessary to provide safe and efficient access to the
development. The abbreviated traffic impact study shall include:
A capacity analysis report prepared under the supervision of a transportation engineer or
transportation planner, qualified to perform such duties.
The study area for the capacity analysis report shall only include all proposed site access
intersections.
Comprehensive traffic impact study. Whenever a proposed development project will generate
100 or more new vehicle trips in the peak direction (inbound or outbound) during the site peak
traffic hour or generate an ADT of greater than 3,000, the applicant shall perform a
comprehensive traffic impact study. Based on this study, certain improvements may be
identified as necessary to provide safe and efficient access to the development. In addition, a
comprehensive traffic impact study shall be prepared at the discretion of the Township
whenever either of the following conditions exist within the impact study area:
Current traffic problems exist in the local area or neighborhood, including but not limited
to a high crash location, confusing intersection, or a congested intersection that directly
affects access to the development.
The ability of the existing roadway system to handle increased traffic or the feasibility of
improving the roadway system to handle increased traffic is limited.
If access is proposed to a state roadway, the traffic impact study shall be prepared in
accordance with and shall conform to the most recent version of PennDOT Publications
and Procedures for Transportation Impact Studies, Publication 46, Traffic Engineering
Manual.
Traffic impact study requirements.
The traffic impact study shall be prepared in accordance with PennDOT Publications and
Procedures for Transportation Impact Studies, Publication 46, Traffic Engineering Manual,
and Institute of Transportation Engineers' (ITE) recommended practice "Transportation Impact
Analyses for Site Development."
Area and scope of traffic impact study. The traffic impact study area and scope shall be based
on the characteristics of the surrounding area and the impact of the plan on the area. The
intersections to be included in the study shall be adjacent to the site or have direct impact
upon the access to the site. Prior to initiation of the study, the area and scope shall be
mutually agreed upon between the Township Engineer and the traffic engineer preparing the
study.
Preparation by transportation engineer required. The traffic impact study shall be prepared by
a professional engineer registered in Pennsylvania with specific training in traffic and
transportation engineering, at least four years of experience related to preparing traffic studies
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 270/520
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(6)
(a)
(7)
for existing or proposed developments, and sufficient prior traffic study experience to qualify
the engineer to render any opinions and recommendations in the study.
Horizon year. The traffic forecasts shall be prepared for the anticipated opening year of the
development, assuming full build-out and occupancy. The horizon year in the remainder of
this chapter and shall be a minimum of five years after the opening year.
Traffic data, projections and analysis periods.
Traffic data used in the study shall not be more than one-year old.
Estimates of nonsite traffic shall be made and will consist of traffic generated by all other
developments within the study area for which preliminary and/or final plans have been
approved and traffic from background traffic growth in and around the study area. Traffic
generated by other development for which an application has been submitted but not yet
approved shall be included at the discretion of the Township. Nonsite traffic may be
estimated using the "build-up" technique or by way of area transportation plan data or
modeled volumes. Background growth compounded annually shall be established using
the growth rates from PennDOT.
Analyses shall be conducted for the a.m. and p.m. peak-hour periods. If the study area
includes an intersection on an arterial roadway or if the proposed development includes
retail related uses, then the Saturday peak-hour period shall also be analyzed. Where the
peak hour of the generator does not coincide with the peak hour of the adjacent street,
then the peak hour(s) of the generator shall also be analyzed.
Trip generation rates required.
The traffic impact study shall include a table showing the land uses and codes as defined
by ITE and quantities of each land use, with the corresponding trip generation rates or
equations (with justification for selection of one or the other), and resulting number of
trips, including entering, exiting and total trips. The trip generation rates used must be
either from the latest edition of Trip Generation by ITE or from a local study of
corresponding land uses and quantities. All sources must be referenced in the study. The
anticipated types and volumes of truck traffic using the site shall be identified.
All trip generation calculations shall be based on the methodologies as published in ITE's
"Trip Generation Handbook" or as mutually agreed between the Township Engineer and
the traffic engineer preparing the study.
Consideration of pass-by or shared trips. If pass-by trips or shared trips are a major
consideration for the land use in question, calculations of pass-by and/or shared trips
shall be based on published rates as identified in ITE's "Trip Generation Handbook."
Rate sums. Any significant difference between the sums of single-use rates and
proposed mixed-use estimates must be justified in the study.
Explanations required. The reasoning and data used in developing a trip generation rate
for special/unusual generators must be justified and explained in the study.
Definition of influence area.
Prior to trip distribution of site-generated trips, an influence area must be defined, which
contains 80% or more of the trip ends that will be attracted to the development. A market
study may be used to establish the limits of an influence area, if available. If no market
study is available, an influence area shall be determined based on a reasonably defined
market area. The influence area may also be based on a reasonable maximum
convenient travel time to the site, or delineating area boundaries based on locations of
competing developments.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 271/520
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(9)
(a)
(10)
Other methods, such as using trip data from an existing development with similar
characteristics, or using an existing origin-destination survey of trips within the area, may
be used in place of the influence area to delineate the boundaries of the impact.
Estimates of trip distribution required.
Trip distribution shall be estimated using analogy, trip distribution model, or surrogate
data.
Whichever method is used, trip distribution must be estimated and analyzed for the
horizon year and must be justified in the study. A multi-use development may require
more than one distribution and coinciding assignment for each phase (e.g., residential
and retail phases on the same site). Consideration must also be given to whether
inbound and outbound trips will have similar distributions.
The methodology for determining trip distribution shall be mutually agreed upon between
the Township Engineer and the traffic engineer preparing the study.
Trip assignments.
Assignments must be made considering logical routings, available roadway capacities,
left turns at critical intersections, and projected (and perceived) minimum travel times. In
addition, multiple paths shall often be assigned between origins and destinations to
achieve realistic estimates, rather than assigning all of the trips to the route with the
shortest travel time. The assignments must be carried through the external site access
points and, in projects producing 500 or more additional peak direction trips to or from the
site during the development's peak hour, through the internal roadways. When the site
has more than one access driveway, logical routing and possibly multiple paths shall be
used to obtain realistic driveway volumes. The assignment shall reflect conditions at the
time of the analysis. Assignments may be accomplished either manually or with
applicable computer models.
If a thorough analysis is required to account for pass-by trips, such analysis shall
determine the percentage of pass-by trips in the total trips generated using methodology;
estimate a trip distribution for the pass-by trips; perform two separate trip assignments,
based on the new and pass-by trip distributions; and combine the pass-by and new trip
assignment.
Upon completion of the initial site traffic assignment, the results shall be reviewed to
determine if the volumes appear logical, given characteristics of the road system and trip
distribution. Adjustments shall be made if the initial results do not appear to be logical or
reasonable.
The methodology for determining trip assignments shall be mutually agreed upon
between the Township Engineer and the traffic engineer preparing the study.
Total traffic impacts. Traffic estimates for any site with current traffic activity shall reflect
not only new traffic associated with the site's redevelopment but also the trips subtracted
from the traffic stream because of the removal of a land use. The number of trips to be
subtracted for the existing use shall be based on actual counts. The traffic impact study
shall clearly depict the total traffic estimate and its components.
Analysis.
Traffic analyses shall be completed for the existing conditions and opening day/build-out
year and horizon year, both without and with development. Analyses may consider
proposed roadway improvements only if said improvements have committed funding.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 272/520
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
A.
B.
(1)
(a)
(2)
C.
Capacity analysis shall be performed at each of the major street and project site access
intersection locations (signalized and unsignalized) within the study area. In addition,
analyses shall be completed for roadway segments, deemed sensitive to site traffic within
the study area. These may include such segments as weaving sections, ramps, internal
site roadways, parking facility access points, and reservoirs for vehicles queuing off site
and on site. Other locations may be deemed appropriate depending on the situation.
The recommended level of service analysis procedures detailed in the most recent
edition of the Highway Capacity Manual shall be followed. The operational analyses in
the Highway Capacity Manual should be used for analyzing existing conditions, traffic
impacts, access requirements, or other future conditions for which traffic, geometric and
control parameters can be established.
Where a Level of Service (LOS) "F" results, the associated delay shall be noted in the
study. Existing peak-hour factors and site-specific truck and roadway grade percentages
shall be utilized.
Traffic signal warrant analyses evaluating all warrant criteria shall be completed for each
unsignalized intersection which is shown to have an approach operating at an LOS "E" or
"F."
Where traffic signals exist or are proposed, analyses of the need for signalized left-turn
phases shall be completed in accordance with PennDOT Publication 149.
Queue length analyses shall be completed for each lane group. The need for
acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be presented in the study. The need for rightand
left-turn lanes shall also be evaluated. For both signalized and unsignalized
intersections, PennDOT Publication 46 shall be used as the basis for determining the
need and required lengths for said lanes.
Accident data for the most recent three-year period shall be presented and analyzed for
trends, type of accidents and causation factors.
Required levels of service. The study shall identify the improvements necessary to meet
the goals thereof and the applicant shall be responsible to make all improvements
required by law.
§ 236-407. Wetlands study.
The applicant shall submit a wetland study in duplicate with the submittal of all subdivision and
land development plans, if wetlands are present on the site. The purpose of the study shall be to
determine the extent of wetlands on the site.
The study shall be performed by a wetland scientist.
Requirements for wetland studies.
Delineations shall follow the procedures outlined in the version of the USACE's Wetlands
Delineation Manual, as amended and approved by the USACE for use, including any
supplements also so approved by the USACE for use.
Delineations shall be supported by reports. The report shall contain the following sections:
Introduction. Description of the physical features of the site, its location and the proposed
plans for the site.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 273/520
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Methods. Description of the methods used for the study. Relevant information includes
the date of the field investigation, the number of transects and sampling points used, the
size of vegetation quadrants employed, the size of soil pits used, and taxonomic
references.
Results and discussion. Description of the findings of the study. Soils, vegetation and
hydrology for wetland and upland areas of the site shall be discussed. Any problem areas
shall be thoroughly studied and discussed.
Conclusions. The extent of wetlands on the site shall be discussed. The impact of the
proposed project on these wetlands shall also be considered.
Included in the report as appendixes or tables shall be:
Site location map (USGS 7.5 feet quadrangle will suffice).
NWI map.
Soil survey map with soil descriptions.
Data sheets for each sampling point.
Wetland Boundary Map. Wetland boundaries shall be surveyed and shown on a map (or
drawing) of appropriate scale. The limits of the wetland study area shall be clearly shown.
The map shall also show the location of all sampling points used in the study, the date of
the delineation, and the name of the consulting firm which performed the delineation.
Color photos of wetland areas on the site, with locations and directions of view keyed to
the Wetland Boundary Map.
Resumes of the wetland scientist(s) who performed the delineation.
For sites on which no wetlands occur, an abbreviated report may be submitted. The
abbreviated report shall contain the introductory material, the methods section and a
discussion of the result of the study. Site location, NWI and soil maps shall also be provided.
All plans shall contain notes for future lot owners. The wetland boundary on each lot shall be
clearly marked. Each lot which contains wetlands, or to which access may be restricted by
wetlands, shall have a note which states: "State and Federal laws require permits for all
activities which result in a deposition of fill into delineated wetlands. Refusal of such a permit
may restrict some uses of all or portions of the lot."
Compensatory mitigation projects required as part of state or federal permits shall be shown
on the subdivision plans. Future lot owners whose property encompasses all or part of a
mitigation area shall be notified that the portion of their property which includes the mitigation
area may not be altered and is considered a regulated wetland by the state and federal
governments. Since lot owners may be responsible for maintenance of mitigation areas and in
order to help ensure the long-term viability of wetland mitigation efforts, the Township
discourages multiple ownership of mitigation areas. Ownership by one individual or a
homeowners' association is encouraged. Owners of the wetland mitigation areas must be
clearly identified to the Township. Mitigation areas need to be contained within an easement
meeting the requirements of § 236-605 of this chapter as it relates to drainage facilities with
the extent of the easements subject to the approval of the Township.
The Township reserves the right to reject any submitted wetland delineations. Should the
Township feel the actual wetland area differs from that shown on the subdivision plan, the
Township has the right to secure, at the developer's expense, qualified personnel to check the
delineation and redraw the boundary as necessary. Should the developer subsequently
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 274/520
(8)
A.
B.
C.
D.
disagree with the Township's delineation, a jurisdictional delineation by USACE will be
requested. Any charges for the jurisdictional delineation shall be the responsibility of the
developer.
Where the study shows the existence of wetland areas, the delineated boundary shall be
properly fenced off to prevent encroachment. Snow fence or other acceptable material shall
be used (the use of silt fence is not acceptable). The fence shall be properly installed, at a
minimum distance of five feet outside the delineated boundary, prior to any construction or
issuance of building permits. The fence must be properly maintained until all occupancy
permits have been issued and/or for the extent of all construction.
Article V. Improvement Construction Assurances
§ 236-501. Completion of improvements or guarantee thereof
prerequisite to final plan approval.
No plan shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plan have been improved as
may be required by this chapter, and any walkways, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire
hydrants, shade trees, landscaping, water mains, sanitary sewers, stormwater management
facilities, recreational facilities, survey monument and lot line markers, or other improvements as
may be required by this chapter have been installed in accordance with this chapter, except that
the surface course of streets shall not be completed until such time as 90% of the lots in the
subdivision or land development have been improved by the construction of a dwelling if approved
for residential development or by the construction of the proposed commercial or industrial
structures if the lots are approved for such uses.
In lieu of completion of the surface course of streets as well as in lieu of completion of other
improvements required as a condition for final plan approval of a plan, and at the discretion of the
developer, such developer may deposit with the Township and/or the applicable authority, as
applicable, a letter of credit or other financial security authorized by the MPC and acceptable to
the Board of Supervisors and/or the applicable authority in an amount equal to 110% of the
estimated cost of the required improvements at a time 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion of the respective improvements by the developer. The estimated cost of the surface
course shall be computed separately from the estimated cost of completing the other
improvements and shall be based upon the developer's projected timetable for completion of the
development.
The amount of financial security required by the Township shall be based upon an estimate of the
cost of the improvements, submitted by a developer and prepared by an engineer qualified to
perform such duties and certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such
cost. The Township, upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer, may refuse to accept
such estimate for good cause shown. If the developer and the Township are unable to agree upon
an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another engineer qualified
to perform such duties and chosen mutually by the Township and the developer. The estimate
certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final
estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer
shall be paid equally by the Township and the developer.
Annually the Township and/or the applicable authority may adjust the amount of required financial
security by redetermining the estimated cost for completion of the uncompleted improvements as
of the expiration of the 90th day after either the date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled
date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Township may require the developer to
post additional security in order to insure that the financial security equals 110% of the estimated
cost of the Township and/or the applicable authority completing the improvements at a time 90
days following the date scheduled for completion or alternatively reduce the required security so
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 275/520
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
A.
that it equals such amount. Any additional security shall be posted by the developer within 30 days
after being notified of the same. The amount of financial security required by the applicable
authority shall be computed in accordance with the applicable authority's rules and regulations.
As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial
security may request the Township to release or authorize the release from time to time, such
portions of the financial security necessary for the payment to the contractor or contractors
performing the work. Any such request shall be in writing addressed to the Board of Supervisors,
and the Board of Supervisors shall have 45 days from the receipt of such request to allow the
Township Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors that such portion of the work
has been completed in accordance with the approved plan. Upon such certification, the Board of
Supervisors shall authorize release from the required financial security of an amount as estimated
by the Township Engineer as representing the value of the work completed.
The value of the work completed shall be determined by subtracting 110% of the estimated cost of
the completion of the remaining uncompleted work from the total amount of security deposited.
At such time as 90% of the lots in the subdivision have been improved as set forth above, or if at
the expiration of three years from the date all of the improvements excepting the surface course
has been completed, less than 90% of the lots have been so improved, the Township may notify
the developer to complete the surface course within 60 days from the date of such notice. In
computing the sixty-day requirement, the period from November 1 to April 1 shall not be counted.
If, at the time the wearing course is completed, 90% of the lots are not improved as set forth
above, the developer must:
Post with the Township financial security in an amount equal to 15% of the reasonable cost of
the surface course as security to guarantee that damages to the road or street would not
occur during the completion of the improvements on the unimproved lots in such developer's
subdivision or land development. The Township shall hold such financial security and utilize it
to pay for the repair of any damage occurring to the road during the period between the
commencement of improvements on any particular unimproved lot and the completion of such
improvements irrespective of whether or not it can be established that the damage to the road
was caused by contractors or other persons working in and about the construction of such
improvements. The financial security shall be in a form acceptable to the Township.
Present to the Township agreements signed by the owners of all of such unimproved lots
pursuant to which they will agree to pay to the Township the cost of repairing any damage
occurring to roads in such subdivision during the period between the commencement of work
on the improvements to their lot and the completion of such improvements irrespective of
whether or not it can be established that such damage was caused by contractors or other
persons involved in the improvement of their respective lot.
§ 236-502. Release from financial security.
When the developer has completed all of the improvements as shown on the final plans, the
developer shall notify the Board of Supervisors, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the
completion of the aforesaid improvements, enclosing therewith certification by the engineer
qualified to perform such duties and responsible for the design of the improvements that they have
been installed as designed, and shall send copies of the notice and certification to the Township
Engineer. The Board of Supervisors shall, within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and
authorize the Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Township
Engineer shall thereupon file a report, in writing, with the Board of Supervisors and shall promptly
mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail. The report shall be made
and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the aforesaid authorization
from the Board of Supervisors, said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection
of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said improvements or any portion thereof
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 276/520
B.
C.
D.
[1]
A.
(1)
B.
shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall contain a
statement of the reasons for such nonapproval or rejection. Improvements shall not be considered
completed unless the developer can demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and all other applicable ordinances, statutes and regulations. Improvements shall also not
be considered complete until as-built plans of all stormwater management facilities, any
improvements to be dedicated to the Township and/or the applicable authority, and of all streets,
whether or not such streets shall be dedicated, have been submitted to the Township and/or the
applicable authority, as applicable.
The Board of Supervisors shall notify the developer within 15 days of receipt of the Township
Engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered mail, of its action with relation thereto. If the
Board of Supervisors or Township Engineer fails to comply with the time limitation provisions
contained herein, or such time limitations as contained in the MPC, whichever requirements shall
contain a longer time period for action by the Township, all improvements will be deemed to have
been approved and the developer's posted financial security shall be released.
If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the Board of
Supervisors, the developer shall proceed to complete the same, and upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the developer's right to contest or
question by legal proceedings or otherwise any determination of the Board of Supervisors or
Township Engineer.
§ 236-503. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
In the event that any improvements that may be required have not been installed as provided in this
chapter or in accordance with the approved final plan, the Board of Supervisors may enforce any letter
of credit or other financial security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If proceeds of such
financial security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Board of Supervisors may, at its option, install such
improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development and may institute appropriate legal
or equitable action to recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements.
All the proceeds, after deducting the costs of collection, whether resulting from the financial security or
from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer or both, shall be used solely for the
installation of the improvements covered by such security and not for any other Township purpose.
§ 236-504. Inspection during construction.
The Township and/or the applicable authority shall inspect the improvements during construction.
The developer shall pay the cost of any such inspection in accordance with the provisions of
Article V of the MPC.[1] The developer shall provide at least 24 hours' notice prior to the start of
construction of any improvements that are subject to inspection. All inspections of completed
items shall be requested, in writing, at least 48 hours in advance of the inspection time and date.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
General site construction. It is generally required that the following phases of site construction
have mandatory inspection. This general list of phases may be amended by mutual agreement of
the Township and developer when the site requires special construction procedures. The
inspection schedule must be recorded with the final plan or shown on the approved improvement
construction plan.
Upon completion of preliminary site preparation, including stripping of vegetation, stockpiling
of topsoil and construction of temporary erosion and sedimentation control devices.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 277/520
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
A.
B.
Upon completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil, permanent drainage, or other
site development improvements and ground covers.
During the construction of permanent stormwater management and BMP facilities.
Upon the final completion of permanent stormwater management and BMP facilities, including
the establishment of ground covers and plantings.
After review of the as-built drawings, required by § 236-508 of this chapter, but prior to final
release of the financial guarantee for completion of final grading, vegetative controls required
by the BMP standards, or other site restoration work.
Street construction.
Preparation of road subgrade. At the time of this observation, the subgrade should be proof
rolled, and the proposed crown and grade should be checked. It is recommended that a
developer's/contractor's representative accompanies the observer when the crown and grade
are checked. Proof rolling should be performed with a fully loaded, tandem-axle dump truck.
This observation must occur prior to any stone subbase being placed.
Placement and compaction of road subbase. At the time of this observation, the depth of
subbase should be checked after compaction, the subbase should be proof rolled in the same
manner as the subgrade and the crown and grade should be checked again. This observation
must occur prior to any binder or base course being placed.
Placement and compaction of the binder/base course. At the time of this observation, the
depth of the binder/base course should be checked, ambient temperature should be
monitored (this is important in early spring and late fall when the temperature can fall below
acceptable limits), the temperature of the bituminous material should be checked (if possible),
and it is recommended that copies of the weight slips for each truckload be obtained. The
crown and grade should also be checked again. This observation must occur prior to the
wearing course being placed.
Placement and compaction of the wearing course. At the time of this observation, the
guidelines for the placement and compaction of the binder/base course should be followed.
In addition to the above-outlined observations, additional observations will be made at the request
of the developer for reduction of financial securities. Random observations should be made at the
frequency desired by the Township. At the time of any of the above-listed observations, all ongoing
construction (i.e., storm drainage, sanitary sewer, water, erosion control, etc.) should also be
checked for compliance with the approved plans and the findings reported. Since the above
inspections are mandatory, it is recommended that requests for reduction of financial guarantee to
be submitted to coincide with the above inspections.
§ 236-505. Offers of dedication.
Any offer to dedicate any street or portion thereof shall be made on forms provided by the
Township, along with all required supporting documentation and required fees. Offers for
dedication may be submitted to the Township at any time during the calendar year; however, the
Township will not formally act upon any offer of dedication prior to April 15 nor later than
September 1 of any calendar year.
The offer to dedicate streets, parks or other areas or portions of them does not impose any duty
upon the Township and/or the applicable authority concerning maintenance or improvement until
the proper authorities of the Township and/or the applicable authority have made actual
acceptance of the dedication by ordinance or resolution or by entry or improvement.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 278/520
C.
D.
A.
B.
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(2)
A.
Where the Township accepts dedication of all or some of the required improvements following
completion, the Township may require the posting of financial security to secure the structural
integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in accordance with
the design and specifications as depicted on the final plan for a term of 18 months from the date of
acceptance of dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as otherwise required
in § 236-501 of this chapter with regard to installation of such improvements, and the amount of
such financial security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of the installation of the said
improvements.
Where the applicable authority accepts dedication of some or all of the required improvements,
the applicable authority may require the posting of financial security in accordance with its rules
and regulations and applicable law.
§ 236-506. Maintenance of streets.
The developer shall maintain all streets in the subdivision or development in travelable condition,
including the prompt removal of snow therefrom, until such time as the streets are accepted by the
Township as part of the Township highway system or, if such streets are not to be dedicated, until a
homeowners' association or other entity responsible for the maintenance of the streets has been
formed.
§ 236-507. Effect of plan recording on dedication and
reservations.
Recording of the final plan after approval by the Board of Supervisors has the effect of an irrevocable
offer to:
Dedicate all streets and other public ways to public use, unless such streets are indicated on said
plan as private streets.
Dedicate all neighborhood parks and all areas shown on the plan as being local recreation sites to
public use.
§ 236-508. As-built plan.
Prior to the release of the final escrow estimate, the developer shall prepare as-built plans of all
stormwater management facilities, any improvements to be dedicated to the Township and/or the
applicable authority, and of all streets, whether or not such streets shall be dedicated. The
developer shall provide the Township and/or the applicable authority, as applicable, with one Mylar
and two prints of the as-built plan showing the following:
Survey monuments and markers.
Actual location of all concrete monuments which were set at points of curvature and
tangents along streets on the rights-of-way and at all angle breaks around the perimeter
of the total tract. When the outside perimeter of a tract falls within or along an existing
road right-of-way, then the right-of-way of that roadway shall be monumented at the
above-referenced points.
Actual location of all iron pins or drill holes in curbs for all individual lot lines.
Street alignment.
Actual location of cartway center line versus right-of-way center line.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 279/520
(b)
[1]
[2]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(b)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(4)
B.
(1)
A.
Actual cul-de-sac radius.
Utilities.
Horizontal and vertical location of underground utilities, including, but not limited to:
Piping, valves, and manholes for publicly dedicated water and sewer utilities.
Gas, telecommunications, cable, fiber optic, and electric lines within the public rightof-
way.
Horizontal location of aboveground utilities, including, but not limited to:
Utility poles carrying overhead telecommunications, cable, fiber optic, and electric
lines within the public right-of-way.
Fire hydrants, natural gas piping, electric power substations.
Streetlights and traffic signal equipment.
Other improvements.
Sidewalks, pedestrian easements, and ADA ramps.
Playgrounds and recreational facilities.
Buildings, parking compounds, access drives, driveways, and all other significant
planned facilities.
Installed lighting fixtures and mounting heights.
Required landscaping, including actual caliber and/or height.
The applicant shall submit two CDs, DVDs, or other digital recording media (format as specified by
the Township); each of which includes one computer-readable digital file copy of the as-built plan,
in both the most recent versions of AutoCAD and portable document format (*.pdf) unless
otherwise specified by the Township, which includes all of the information contained on the paper
copy of the as-built plan.
Article VI. Design Standards
§ 236-601. Minimum standards.
The standards and requirements contained in this article shall apply as the minimum design standards
for subdivision and/or land developments in the Township. If studies, calculations, or reports, which are
acceptable to the Township, determine that greater or stricter standards are required, then the
Township shall require that the greater or stricter standard be made a part of the subdivision and/or
land development.
§ 236-602. Streets, private streets, alleys, lot access, driveways,
and access drives.
General.
Proposed streets shall conform to such county and state street and highway plans as have
been prepared, adopted and/or filed as prescribed by law.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 280/520
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(9)
Where a development abuts an existing or proposed arterial or collector street, the Board of
Supervisors may require access management techniques such as the use of marginal access
streets, reverse frontage lots, or other such treatment that will provide protection for abutting
properties, reduce the number of intersections with the arterial or collector street, and
separate the local and through traffic.
Streets shall be designed with consideration to both existing and planned streets. All streets
shall be arranged to conform as closely as possible to the original topography. New streets
shall be connected with streets of similar function, to form continuations thereof. Local streets
shall be laid out to discourage use by through traffic. Streets shall be laid out to provide
convenient and safe access to the property. The rigid rectangular street pattern need not be
adhered to; the use of curvilinear streets may be provided when their use will result in a more
desirable layout. Where a development abuts an existing or proposed major street, the Board
of Supervisors may require the use of marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots or such
other treatment that will provide protection for abutting properties, reduce the number of
intersections with the major street and separate the local and through traffic.
Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce reasonable grades,
satisfactory drainage and suitable building sites.
Where appropriate, areas shall be reserved for future street usage in conjunction with the
development of adjacent tracts. Areas to be reserved for future street usage shall be required
to be improved to the boundary of the tract being developed.
Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted area reserved for future street usage along the
boundary of a tract being developed, the street on the adjacent tract shall be extended into
the proposed project.
Plans with street locations along the perimeter of a property shall be required to show building
setback lines and clear sight triangles within the adjacent properties. Written permission from
the affected adjacent landowner shall be provided prior to preliminary plan approval.
When existing stub streets or temporary cul-de-sac streets adjoin the tract to be developed,
they shall be extended into the site and made part of the proposed street layout. Where a
temporary cul-de-sac is being extended, the bulb shall be reconstructed to Township street
specifications, any existing sidewalk extended through the area, and the remaining areas
shall be regraded and seeded.
Improvement of existing streets and intersections. Where a subdivision or land development
abuts an existing Township and/or state street or shall have a traffic impact on an existing
Township and/or state street as indicated by a traffic impact study required to be performed in
accordance with this chapter, the developer shall be required to make the following
improvements:
In cases where a subdivision or land development abuts an existing Township and/or
state street, the street shall be reconstructed to the widths specified in this chapter.
In cases where the development is situated only on one side of an existing street, the
Township may require that only that side of the street be reconstructed.
Where the developer of the subdivision or land development is required to provide a
traffic impact study and the traffic impact study indicates that improvements are required,
the developer shall install the improvements, including but not limited to traffic signals,
traffic control devices additional traffic lanes, traffic dividers and highway markings.
When the Township determines that the required improvements are not feasible at the
time of development of the use, the developer shall deposit funds with the Township in
the amount of 110% of the cost of the improvements computed in accordance with Article
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 281/520
(10)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(a)
(11)
V of this chapter. The amount of the deposit shall be submitted for approval by the
Township Engineer.
The extension of existing streets which are presently constructed with a cartway different from
current Township standards shall be provided with a transition area, the design of which is
subject to Township approval.
Street improvements. All construction shall be in conformance with the provisions and
specifications of the Township. (See Appendix No. 13.)[1]
Paving cross sections. All street paving shall conform to the following specifications:
Before paving the street surface, the applicant must install the required utilities and
provide, where necessary, adequate stormwater drainage for the street, acceptable
to the Board of Supervisors. The pavement base, wearing surface and shoulders
must be constructed according to the following specifications; excepting, however,
that for the construction of arterial streets or highways, the developer shall consult
with the Township Engineer and be governed by PennDOT for the method of
construction to be used, and the design shall conform to the most recent version of
PennDOT Publication 242, Pavement Policy Manual, as amended.
All new streets shall be designed to the following cross-sectional specifications (all
courses are compacted thicknesses).
The use of recycled materials is strongly encouraged.
Pavement. The pavement base and wearing surface must be designed and
constructed in accordance with the most recent version of PennDOT Publication
408, Highway Construction Specifications, as amended. Table 6-1 outlines the
alternatives available to the developer:
Table 6-1
Flexible Street Paving Options
Flexible Pavement
Types
Pavement
Courses Street Type
Local Street, Alley,
or Special Purpose
Street
(inches)
Collector
(inches)
Option No. 1 Wearing 1 1/2 1 1/2
Binder 0 2
Base 4 1/2 4
Subbase 8 8
Wearing 1 1/2 1 1/2
Option No. 2 Binder 2 2
CABC 6 8
Subbase 8 8
NOTES:
(1) Wearing: Superpave Asphalt Mixture Design, HMA Wearing Course, PG 64-
22, 0.0 to 0.3 million ESALs, 9.5 mm mix, SRL L.
(2) Binder: Superpave Asphalt Mixture Design, HMA Binder Course, PG 64-22,
0.0 to 0.3 million ESALs, 19.0 mm mix.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(4)
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 282/520
(b)
(c)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(d)
[1]
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
NOTES:
(3) Base: Superpave Asphalt Mixture Design, HMA Base Course, PG 64-22, 0.0
to 0.3 million ESALs, 25.0 mm mix.
(4) CABC: crushed aggregate base course.
For the construction of arterial streets or highways, the applicant shall consult the
Township Engineer and be governed by the most recent version of PennDOT Publication
408, Highway Construction Specifications, as amended, for the method of construction to
be used, and to submit pavement design calculations in accordance with the most recent
version of PennDOT Publication 242, Pavement Policy Manual, as amended.
The Board of Supervisors, after consulting with the Township Engineer, shall decide if a
collector or arterial street is required as a direct result of the construction of this
development in which case the applicant is responsible for paving the additional width
required and submitting pavement design calculations in accordance with the most
recent version of PennDOT Publication 242, Pavement Policy Manual, as amended.
Concrete curbing in accordance with Township specifications is required for all new
streets. Where a modification of this section is granted by the Board of Supervisors,
shoulders shall be provided in accordance with the following:
All shoulders shall be constructed in accordance with the most recent version of
PennDOT Publication 408, Highway Construction Specifications, as amended.
For minor streets, Type 3 shoulder shall be provided as shown on RC-25 of the most
recent version of PennDOT Publication 72M, Roadway Construction Standards, as
amended.
For collector streets, Type 1 shoulder, Type 1-I shoulder, or a Type I-S shoulder shall
be provided as shown on RC-25 of the most recent version of PennDOT Publication
72M, Roadway Construction Standards, as amended.
Arterial streets shoulder type shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors after
consulting with the Township Engineer and PennDOT.
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
Dedication of additional right-of-way. If a subdivision or land development abuts an existing
Township street and/or state street which has a right-of-way width of less than the widths as
set forth in this chapter, the developer shall dedicate to the Township or commonwealth, as
applicable, that amount of land necessary so that the distance from the center line of the
street to the edge of the right-of-way abutting the proposed development is 1/2 the ultimate
right-of-way width set forth in this chapter.
When the proposed development requires construction within an existing street right-of-way,
such as sewer, water or stormwater lines, the Township may require construction of a new
wearing course along the entire frontage and/or disturbed area.
If lots subdivided from the tract proposed for development are large enough to permit
resubdivision or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided or developed, adequate rights-of-way
for streets and other required improvements shall be provided as necessary to permit further
subdivision or development.
Future access strips are rights-of-way reserved for future street improvements. They shall be
designed in conformance with the design requirements of a street, and the contiguous parcels
must contain proper setbacks and sight distances.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 283/520
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(22)
(23)
(24)
As a minimum, all new streets shall be graded to the right-of-way line. All cut-and-fill banks
shall not exceed the steepness of a 3:1 slope.
Streets shall be designed to preclude or minimize the need for guide rail. The Township may,
however, require guide rail to be placed for protection on embankments when a barrier is
indicated as warranted in the most recent version of the PennDOT Design Manual, Part 2,
Highway Design, as amended.
The design and selection of guide rail shall generally be in accordance with the standards in
Design Manual, Part 2, Highway Design, as amended; however, the Township shall approve
all guide rail systems.
Streets that are extensions of or obviously in alignment with existing streets shall bear the
names of the existing streets. Street names shall not be repeated within the Township, and all
street names shall be subject to the approval of Lancaster County-Wide Communications.
Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections and shall identify both intersecting
streets, and their design shall be approved by the Township. Regulatory signs shall be
installed at all locations identified by a traffic engineering study prepared by the developer and
in accordance with the most recent version of PennDOT Publication 201, Engineering Traffic
Studies, as amended. Traffic signs shall be approved by the Township and shall be supplied
and installed by the developer in accordance with Township regulations; PennDOT
Publication 68, Official Traffic Devices, as amended; and the MUTCD.
Traffic signals. Where a traffic impact study indicates the necessity for a traffic signal, the
developer shall prepare a traffic signal condition diagram plan. The plan shall be designed
and the signal shall be located and installed by the developer in accordance with the rules
and regulations of PennDOT. The traffic signal condition diagram plans shall be reviewed by
the Township Engineer prior to submission to PennDOT.
All proposed streets except alleys and marginal access streets shall be offered for dedication.
Where a modification of this section is granted by the Township, all private streets shall
conform to the design standards for public streets as required by this chapter. Applications
that propose a private street shall include an agreement in a form acceptable to the Township
that shall be recorded with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds as part of the final plan.
This agreement shall establish the conditions under which the street will be constructed and
maintained, as well as conditions controlling an offer of dedication, and shall stipulate:
That the street shall be constructed and maintained to conform to the provisions of this
chapter and any other applicable ordinance or regulation of the Township.
The method of assessing maintenance and repair costs.
That an offer for dedication of the street shall be made only for the street as a whole.
That the owners of the abutting lots will include with any offer of dedication sufficient
funds, as estimated by the Township, to restore the street to the prevailing standards.
That an agreement by the owners of 51% or greater of the total lot frontage adjoining the
street shall be binding on the owners of the remaining lots.
The design arterial streets shall be in accordance with PennDOT specifications and based
upon the projected average daily traffic and proposed speed limit. All designs shall be
approved by the Township.
The design of collector, local, and special purpose streets and alleys shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 284/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
Horizontal alignment.
Horizontal street alignments shall be measured along the center line.
Horizontal curves shall be used at all direction changes.
The center line of the street cartway shall correspond with the center line of the street right-ofway.
Plans with street locations along the perimeter of a property shall be required to show building
setback lines and clear sight triangles within the adjacent properties. Written permission from
the affected adjacent landowner shall be provided prior to preliminary plan approval.
There shall be a tangent section of at least 100 feet between reverse curves for all local and
collector streets.
Horizontal curve center-line radii shall be designed in coordination with vertical geometry,
subject to the approval of the Township. The minimum acceptable center-line radii shall be
300 feet for arterial and collector streets and 150 feet for local and special purpose residential
streets.
Vertical alignment.
Vertical curves shall be used in all changes of grade.
The minimum vertical grade for all streets shall be 1%; the maximum vertical grade shall be
10%.
At street intersections, the through street shall be approached by side streets in accordance
with the following standards: where the grade of the side street exceeds 4%, there shall be a
level area on the side street within which no grade shall exceed 4% for a minimum distance of
100 feet (measured from the intersection of the center lines of the streets).
No side street shall intersect a through street where the through street exceeds 7% in grade.
The length of vertical curve shall be based on the formula L = KA, where L is the minimum
length of curve in feet, K is the length of vertical curve per percent change in A, and A is the
algebraic difference in grade (in percent). Table 6-2 lists the minimum rate of vertical
curvature for K:
Table 6-2
Vertical Alignment Values
Design Speed
(in miles per hour) K Crest Vertical Curves K Sag Vertical Curves
20 10 20
25 20 30
30 30 40
35 45 50
40 70 70
45 100 90
50 150 110
55 220 130
Notwithstanding the length of vertical curve calculated using the above formula, the minimum
length of vertical curve shall be 75 feet.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 285/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
Cul-de-sac and dead-end streets.
A cul-de-sac will not be approved when a through street could be constructed or would be
more advantageous.
Except as otherwise provided within this section, all culs-de-sac shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards for local streets in this chapter.
The center-line length of permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be greater than 250 feet and
shall not exceed 600 feet. The length of the cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the
center-line intersection of the intersecting street to the center of the cul-de-sac turnaround.
Permanent cul-de-sac streets must be provided with a paved turnaround with a minimum
diameter in accordance with Table 6-3 of this chapter.
Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the turnaround right-of-way shall
be placed adjacent to the tract boundary with sufficient additional width provided along the
boundary line to permit extension of the street at full width.
Temporary cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 800 feet in length measured from the centerline
intersection of the intersecting street to the center of the cul-de-sac turnaround.
Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as cul-de-sac streets, except in the case of
streets which are planned for future extension into adjoining tracts and which will be no longer
than the depth of one lot and which will not be the primary means of access to any lot or
dwelling unit, the Township may waive the requirements of providing a turnaround.
Any street temporarily dead-ended in order to provide for future continuation of the street into
adjoining property or for authorized section/phase development shall be fully constructed and
all utilities installed. A barricade to prevent vehicular access to adjoining property shall be
constructed at the termination point of the street. The barricade shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with acceptable PennDOT specifications and approved by the
Township.
Where any adjacent stub street is not proposed for extension as a through street, a cul-desac
shall be constructed in compliance with Township standards.
Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be toward the open end. If drainage is toward
the closed end, water shall be conveyed away in an underground storm sewer or by other
means approved by the Township. The minimum grade on culs-de-sac shall be designed to
ensure a minimum of 1%, maximum of 5% along the curbline to the designed low points.
Temporary culs-de-sac shall be constructed to the same cartway width as required for
permanent culs-de-sac. Temporary easements shall be provided for the affected adjoining
properties until such time that the street is extended. The use of a temporary cul-de-sac
turnaround shall be guaranteed to the public until such time as the street is extended.
Sidewalks along temporary culs-de-sac shall be continued at the same time that the street is
continued. Restoration to the temporary cul-de-sac paved areas and sidewalk system within
the right-of-way shall be the responsibility of the developer.
Street intersections.
Intersections involving the junction of more than two streets are prohibited.
The distance between the center line of streets opening onto the opposite sides of existing or
proposed local and special purpose streets and alleys shall be no less than 200 feet between
center lines, measured along the center line of the street being intersected.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 286/520
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(b)
[2]
(7)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(8)
Intersections involving two arterial and/or collector streets shall be located not closer than
1,000 feet from an intersection with another arterial and/or collector street, measured center
line to center line, along the center line of the arterial and/or collector street being intersected.
Right angle intersections shall be used.
The cartway edge at street intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum
radius of 35 feet for local and special purpose streets or alleys and 50 feet for intersections
involving arterial and collector streets. The right-of-way radii at intersections shall be
substantially concentric with the edge of the cartway. The Township may require larger radii
based on the largest design vehicle using the intersection.
All streets intersecting a state street shall be subject to the approval of the PennDOT.
Clear sight triangle. When stop control devices are not provided on the lesser street
classification or access drive, there shall be provided and maintained at all intersections a
clear sight triangle in accordance with the most recent version of the Lancaster Township
Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article XVI).[2] All clear sight triangles shall be indicated on
all plans.
All intersections shall be provided with appropriate stop control devices on the lesser
classification street or access drive.
Clear sight triangles shall include the area on each street corner that is bounded by the
line which connects the sight or "connecting" points located on each of the right-of-way
lines of the intersecting street. The planting of trees, other plantings, signs, and
structures exceeding 30 inches in height that would obstruct vision across the clear sight
triangle shall be prohibited.
Arterial streets shall have a clear sight triangle side of 150 feet.
Collector streets shall have a clear sight triangle side of 100 feet.
Local roads, culs-de-sac, and alleys shall have a clear sight triangle side of 75 feet.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning, Art. XVI.
Safe stopping sight distance (SSSD).
In addition to the other requirements of this article, there shall be unobstructed required
minimum SSSD at all intersections, as specified below:
Required SSSDs shall be at least as large as the minimum SSSDs.
SSSD = 1.47 Vt + V /30 (f+G)
Where:
SSSD = Minimum safe stopping sight distance (feet).
V = Speed of vehicle in miles per hour.
t = 2.5 seconds (perception/response time of driver).
f = 0.3 (wet pavement friction).
G = Roadway grade in percent divided by 100 (positive for
upgrade, negative for downgrade).
If the 85th percentile speed varies by more than 10 miles per hour from the posted
speed limit, the Township may require the 85th percentile speed to be used to
determine stopping distance.
2
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 287/520
[3]
[3]
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
(c)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(9)
A minimum safe stopping sight distance table that specifies minimum safe stopping
sight distance for selected speeds is provided in Appendix No. 12.[3] The sight
distances in the table apply for roadway grades in whole numbers from +10% to
-10% along with speeds from five miles per hour to 65 miles per hour in increments
of five miles per hour. The designer may use this table in lieu of the above formula.
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
Required sight distances shall be measured between a driver approaching along the
through street from either allowed direction and:
A driver awaiting egress onto the through street and whose eyes are 10 feet back
from the nearest cartway edge of the through street.
A driver stopped at a reasonable location on the through street waiting to make a left
turn into the cross street.
A driver having just completed a left or right turn from the stop street onto the
through street.
For purposes of measuring SSSD, the height of the driver's eye and the observed
vehicle (or object) shall be assumed to be 3 1/2 feet above their respective road
surfaces.
Inadequate SSSD remedies. If it is impossible to achieve required minimum SSSD in
both directions, the Township may exercise one or more of the following options:
Prohibit left turns by entering or exiting vehicles;
Restrict turning movements to right turns in and out of the access point;
Require installation of a right turn acceleration lane or deceleration lane;
Require alteration of the horizontal or vertical geometry of the street or access; all
such work shall be at the expense of the applicant;
Require removal of physical obstruction from the line of sight, at the expense of the
applicant;
Require installation of a separate left turn standby lane; or
Deny access to the street.
Streetlights. Streetlights shall be installed to provide safe traffic and/or pedestrian circulation
at intersections, sharp curves and isolated areas. When installed, streetlighting shall comply
with the following:
Lighting shall be provided at a minimum average of 1/2 footcandles at an elevation of
three feet above the surface. The uniformity ratio shall not exceed 6:1 (maximum to
minimum). The intensity of illumination projected onto an existing residential use from an
existing property boundary shall not exceed 0.1 of a footcandle at an elevation of three
feet above the surface.
All lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect the light downward and away from adjoining
premises.
Poles for mounting lights shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
Light fixture and pole styles shall be approved by the Township and, as applicable, the
appropriate utility company.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 288/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[a]
[4]
[b]
[1]
[2]
(d)
(4)
F.
(1)
G.
Special-purpose streets and alleys. Special purpose streets and alleys shall have the following
characteristics:
A property that utilizes a special purpose street or alley shall maintain frontage along a public
or private street.
All special purpose streets or alleys shall be privately maintained. The plan shall contain a
note that shall state that the special purpose street or alley shall not be offered for dedication
and shall be privately maintained and that the Township will not assume any responsibility for
maintenance. An application that proposes a special purpose street or alley shall be
accompanied by a private street agreement prepared in accordance with this chapter, that
shall be recorded with the final plan and which shall establish the conditions under which the
special purpose street or alley will be maintained.
All special purpose streets or alleys and associated parking compounds shall not encroach
upon the minimum required rear yard and side yard setbacks.
The cartway of all special purpose streets or alleys shall be constructed in accordance with
local street specifications in this chapter.
No part of any structure shall be located within 10 feet from the cartway edge of a special
purpose street or alley.
The same horizontal and vertical alignment standards shall be required for special
purpose streets or alleys that are required for local streets in this chapter.
The same intersection standards shall be required for special purpose streets or alleys
that are required for local streets in this chapter.
Special purpose streets or alleys that form a cul-de-sac shall not exceed 400 feet in
length, measured from the center-line intersection of a street or private street that is not a
cul-de-sac. A special purpose street or alley cul-de-sac that does not terminate in a
parking compound shall be provided at the terminus with a fully paved turnaround as set
forth below:
The turnaround for residential purposes shall be designed in accordance with one of
the following methods:
An eighty-foot paved diameter.
T-shaped turnaround with a twelve-foot width and the flared portions rounded by
minimum radii of 20 feet (see Appendix No. 14).[4]
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
The turnaround for commercial and industrial uses shall be a cul-de-sac designed to
accommodate WB-50 truck turning movements.
Right-of-way and cartway widths.
The minimum street rights-of-way and cartway widths for new streets shall be as follows in
Table 6-3:
Table 6-3
Cartway and Right-of-Way Standards
Street Classification
Minimum Cartway Width
(feet)
Minimum Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 289/520
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(3)
H.
Table 6-3
Cartway and Right-of-Way Standards
Street Classification
Minimum Cartway Width
(feet)
Minimum Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
Principal arterial street As determined after consultation with the Township, LCPC,
and PennDOT
Minor arterial street As determined after consultation with the Township, LCPC,
and PennDOT
Collector street 36 w/ curb 60
Local street with on-street
parking
36 w/ curb 50
Local street without on-street
parking
28 w/ curb 50
Cul-de-sac turnaround 80 in diameter 100
Alley or special purpose
street
12 20
If the traffic access or other studies indicate that requirements are necessary which differ from
or exceed the above minimum requirements, then those different improvements will be
required.
Lot access.
Arterial or collector street frontage. Where a subdivision or land development abuts or
contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector street, one or more of the following
methods of layout and site design shall be required:
The use of a service or frontage street, or limiting access only onto local or interior
streets, to collect traffic from numerous access drives and/or driveways and direct it to a
select few number of entrances to the arterial or collector street; or
The minimization of the number and length of access drives or driveways, curb cuts, or
street intersections onto an arterial or collector street, which may include requiring the
use of joint use or shared access drives or driveways between adjacent uses or lots; or
The restriction of ingress and egress involving left-hand turns onto or off of the arterial or
collector street; or
The prohibition of driveways from individual dwellings entering directly onto an arterial or
collector street. If there is no alternative to this, each driveway entering onto an arterial or
collector street shall have adequate turnaround space for vehicles provided within the lot
so that vehicles do not back onto the street.
The Board of Supervisors may require an applicant to provide reverse frontage lots on the
arterial or collector street and reduce the number of access points through access
management for the development.
The Board of Supervisors may require the applicant to provide ingress and egress to a
particular lot or tract through the remainder of a property or other properties over which the
applicant has control by the following:
A temporary cul-de-sac designed for access to any adjoining property or for phased
development.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 290/520
(b)
[5]
(1)
(2)
[1]
[2]
[a]
[b]
[3]
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(d)
(e)
(3)
I.
Provision of access to existing nonconforming lots which have no frontage on a street.
Driveways and access drives.
Driveways and access drives shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the
most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article XVI).
[5]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
Driveways and access drives shall be located as to provide minimum SSSDs at intersections
with streets and shall not be located within any required clear sight triangle. Driveways and
access drives shall not interfere with the normal traffic movement or be inconsistent with the
design, maintenance and drainage of the street. Driveway and access drive locations shall be
delineated on all land development plans and subdivision plans.
Driveways.
Setbacks.
Only one driveway connection per 100 feet of lot frontage is permitted, with the
exception of circular or loop driveways for residential dwellings. Circular driveways
on one lot shall have a minimum separation distance of 50 feet as measured from
the outside edge of the paved portion of each driveway.
Driveways shall not connect with a street within 40 feet of the right-of-way lines of
any intersecting street, nor within five feet of a fire hydrant or drainage inlet, as
measured from the outside edge of the paved portion of the driveway.
Driveways shall be set back at least five feet from any adjacent side or rear lot line
as measured from the outside edge of the paved portion of the driveway, with the
exceptions listed in § 236-602I(3)(a)[3][a] and [b] of this chapter:
Driveways may be located less than five feet from a property line if a written
agreement exists between the affected property owners allowing a lesser
distance. Such agreement shall be recorded with the Lancaster County
Recorder of Deeds, and shall be binding on all future property owners, heirs and
assigns of both properties. The Township is not responsible to settle conflict
issues with joint or shared driveways.
See § 236-602I(3)(f) of this chapter.
Driveways shall maintain a minimum width of 10 feet and maximum width of 24 feet at
the right-of-way line.
Intersection angles.
Driveways used for two-way operation shall intersect streets at 90° as site conditions
permit; however, in no case shall driveways intersect streets at less than 70°.
Driveways used for one-way operation, right turn only, shall not intersect public
streets at any angle less than 45°. Said angle shall be measured from the center line
of the street to the center line of the driveway.
Vertical alignment of driveways serving residential lots shall not exceed a maximum of
8% for the first 10 feet measured from the right-of-way line.
Driveways constructed in areas where sidewalks are provided shall have a concrete
apron between the curb and the edge of the sidewalk toward the structure. The apron
shall be constructed in accordance with applicable Township specifications and shall
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 291/520
[1]
[2]
[3]
(f)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(4)
J.
(1)
A.
include six inches of concrete with a six-inch welded wire reenforcing mesh, placed on a
six-inch stone base.
Driveways serving two or more adjacent lots are prohibited, with the exception of shared
or joint driveways, which may be permitted subject to the following standards:
Shared or joint driveways shall be used only for four or fewer dwelling units.
To decrease the potential for vehicular conflicts, driveways may be located centered
on or entirely on one property.
An easement agreement shall be provided and recorded that indicates the rights of
ownership, access, and maintenance. Such agreement shall be recorded with the
Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds and shall be binding on all future property
owners, heirs and assigns of both properties. The Township is not responsible to
settle conflict issues with joint or shared driveways.
Access drives.
Access drives shall comply with local street design standards relating to paving cross
sections, horizontal and vertical alignments, and intersections set forth in the chapter.
Access drives do not require a specific right-of-way; however, Table 6-4 lists the minimum
cartway widths for access drives:
Table 6-4
Access Drive Standards
Number of Lanes
Minimum Cartway
(feet)
3 36
2 24
1 12
NOTES:
(1) Parallel parking may be permitted along one side of access drives, provided that the
required width is increased by eight feet.
Setbacks.
Access drives shall be set back at least 10 feet from any adjacent side or rear lot line as
measured from the face of the curb or edge of cartway.
Access drives shall maintain a minimum center-line separation distance of 125 feet from
all other access drives and streets.
Access drives which terminate in a dead end shall not exceed 1,600 feet in length, measured
from the center-line intersection of a street or access drive which is not a cul-de-sac to the
center of the turnaround area.
§ 236-603. Vehicular parking facilities, sidewalks, and curbs.
Parking facilities.
Off-street vehicular parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article
(1)
(1)
(1)
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 292/520
[1]
[2]
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(9)
XIII).[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
Parking compound dimensions shall be no less than those as shown in Appendix No. 15.[2]
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
Landscape screening and interior landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended (Article XIII and Article XIV). Landscape screening and interior landscaping shall not
restrict sight distances.
Not less than a five-foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for curblines in parking
compounds.
All dead-end parking compounds shall be designed to provide sufficient back up area for all
end stalls.
Painted lines, arrows and dividers shall be provided and maintained to control parking when
necessary to direct vehicular circulation.
Parking compounds, main entrances and exits which are open to the public shall be lighted.
When installed, parking compound, main entrances and exits which are open to the public,
lighting shall comply with the following:
Lighting shall be provided at a minimum average of two footcandles at an elevation of
three feet above the surface. The uniformity ratio shall not exceed 4:1 (maximum to
minimum). The intensity of illumination projected onto an existing residential use from an
existing property boundary shall not exceed 0.1 of a footcandle at an elevation of three
feet above the surface.
All lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect the light downward and away from adjoining
premises and public rights-of-way.
All parking compounds shall be constructed to meet the following minimum standards:
Crushed aggregate base course with a minimum thickness of six inches, as specified in
PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408, as amended.
The bituminous surface shall consist of a minimum of two inches of ID-2 binder course
and one-and-one-half-inch ID-2 wearing course. Material shall be equal or superior to
PennDOT Specifications Publication 408, as amended, and shall be applied in
accordance with those same specifications.
Bicycle parking facilities for nonresidential land uses shall be provided in accordance with the
following regulations:
Each bicycle space shall be equipped with a device to which a bicycle frame and one
wheel can be attached using a chain or cable. There shall be adequate separation
between adjacent devices to allow bicycles to be attached or removed without moving
other bicycles. The devices shall also be suitable for use by bicycles not equipped with
kickstands, and the appearance shall be acceptable to the Township.
Bicycle parking spaces shall be convenient to the structure for which they are provided.
They shall be visible from at least one entrance to the structure.
For every 50 vehicular spaces required, three bicycle parking spaces shall be provided,
not to exceed a total of nine required bicycle parking spaces.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 293/520
(1)
[3]
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
(1)
A.
Sidewalks.
The Township shall require installation of curbs and sidewalks in any subdivision and land
development as provided herein. Sidewalks are required to provide access to and/or within a
commercial, industrial or community facility. Sidewalks which are provided as part of such
nonresidential facilities shall be designed and constructed to service the projected pedestrian
needs. All public areas shall be designed barrier free in accordance with applicable federal
and state standards, including, but not limited to, the most recent version of the ADA
Standards for Accessible Design of the USDOJ or the Lancaster Township Building Code, as
amended. Appropriate details shall be provided on the plans.
Sidewalks shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the specifications in the
appendix of this chapter[3] or any other ordinance enacted by the Board of Supervisors setting
requirements for the construction of roads, curbs, and sidewalks or, in lieu of such standards,
in accordance with the standards of PennDOT Publication 408, as amended. A grass planting
strip, with a minimum width of two feet and a maximum width of seven feet, shall be provided
between the back of curb and sidewalk.
Editor’s Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
Sidewalks shall be provided along all existing Township streets and/or state streets that adjoin
any portion of any subdivision and/or land development.
Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all proposed streets in subdivisions and land
developments as herein specified.
Sidewalks shall be located, if possible, within the street right-of-way line and shall be a
minimum of five feet in width.
Pedestrian easements may be required by the Township to facilitate pedestrian circulation or
to give access to community facilities. Pedestrian easements shall be a minimum of six feet
wide and suitably improved, in the sole opinion of the Township, to serve their intended
purpose.
Curbs.
Curbs shall be required along all proposed streets in subdivisions; along all proposed streets,
access drives, alleys, and parking compounds in land developments. The developer shall
submit the location and grade of all proposed curbs to the Township for review.
Curbs shall be provided along all existing Township streets and/or state streets that adjoin any
portion of any subdivision and/or land development.
Curbs shall be installed to the dimensions and construction standards of the Township or, in
lieu of such standards, in accordance with the most recent version of PennDOT Publication
408, Highway Construction Specifications, as amended (see Appendix No. 15-F).
Standard straight or vertical curb shall be required along all state streets and along all
Township streets which the Township has classified as an arterial or collector street or where
standing curbs exist. Standard vertical or slant curb shall be required along all other streets.
§ 236-604. Blocks, lots, building setback lines, and building
separation.
General configuration.
The configuration of blocks and lots shall be based upon the lot, yard, and other dimensional
requirements set forth in the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 294/520
[1]
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(6)
D.
Ordinance,[1] as amended, the salient natural features, the existing man-made features, and
the proposed type of use.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
Lot configurations should provide for flexibility in building locations while providing safe
vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
Lots with areas that are two or more times the minimum requirements shall, wherever
feasible, be designed with configurations which allow for additional subdivision.
Residential blocks.
All blocks in a residential subdivision shall have a maximum length of 1,500 feet.
Block lengths in excess of 1,000 feet shall include at least one pedestrian easement to
connect the bounding streets.
Nonresidential blocks. Blocks in nonresidential areas may vary from the above requirements when
required by the nature of the use. Adequate provisions shall be made for off-street parking,
loading areas and traffic circulation.
Lot and parcel configuration.
Lot and parcel configuration shall conform to the most recent version of the Lancaster
Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
Whenever practical, side lot lines shall be radial to street right-of-way lines.
In order to avoid jurisdictional problems, lot lines shall, wherever feasible, follow municipal
boundaries rather than cross them. Where a lot is divided by a municipal boundary, the
minimum standards of both municipalities shall apply.
All lots shall have lot frontage on an approved public or private street.
All remnants of land (areas remaining after subdivision) shall conform to the lot area and
configuration requirements.
Specific lots and parcels.
Double frontage lots prohibited. Double frontage lots are prohibited, except where
provided as reverse frontage lots.
Reverse frontage lots.
Reverse frontage lots are only permitted when a reduction of driveway intersections
along a street with a high volume of vehicular movements is desired. All reverse
frontage lots shall include an identification of the applicable lot frontage for vehicular
access to the lot.
All reverse frontage lots shall have a rear yard in accordance with the most recent
version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended, measured at the
shortest distance from the proposed building to the street right-of-way of the street of
greater classification or the street conveying the greater amount of existing daily
traffic, and shall have a ten-foot-wide planting strip easement within each rear yard
and immediately adjacent to the street right-of-way. Except that there shall be no
driveway or vehicular access permitted in the planting strip, the required planting
strip shall otherwise conform to the requirements of the most recent version of the
Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article XIV), regardless of the
type of proposed development.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 295/520
[2]
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
E.
Flag lots. Flag lots shall conform to the requirements of the most recent version of the
Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article XVI). (See Appendix No.
16.)[2]
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
Building setback lines, yards, and building separation.
Building setback lines and yards on public and private streets shall be provided per the most
recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
Minimum building setback lines and yards on access drives. Access drives shall be provided
with a minimum of 15 feet building setback line along the entire length of the access drive.
The depth of the building setback shall be measured from the face of curb or edge of cartway.
The building setback may be utilized for stormwater management facilities, utilities, lighting,
landscaping, pedestrian pathways, and other compatible uses. Additionally, parking
compounds in accordance with the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended, may be permitted in the building setback; however, in no case shall
any building or any other structure be permitted within the required yard area (Article XIII).
On any lot abutting a railroad, no dwelling shall be placed within 75 feet of any portion of the
railroad right-of-way or property line of the railroad.
On any lot abutting or traversed by a high-voltage transmission line, no dwelling shall be
placed within 50 feet of any portion of the right-of-way.
All building separations and height requirements shall conform to the most recent version of
the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
Where an application for a land development plan is made for the purpose of erecting more
than one principal structure on a single lot, the appropriate setback and yard requirements
shall be provided for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. In each case, the
Township shall require suitable provisions for utilities and access in the event of potential
subdivision of the tract.
§ 236-605. Easements.
Easements for sanitary sewer facilities, stormwater drainage facilities, public utilities, pedestrian
access, recreational, greenway, and riparian forest buffer easements shall meet the following
standards:
To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to property lines.
Nothing shall be placed, planted, set, or put within the area of an easement that would adversely
affect the function of the easement or conflict with the easement agreement. This requirement
shall be noted on the final plan and shall be included in all deeds for lots that contain an
easement.
Pedestrian easements shall have a minimum width of six feet.
Utility easements for water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and gas shall have a minimum width of
20 feet for a single utility and 30 feet for two or more utilities. All utility companies are encouraged
to use common easements.
Easements for stormwater or surface water drainage facilities.
The applicant shall reserve easements where stormwater or surface water drainage facilities
are existing or proposed, whether located within or beyond the boundaries of the property.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 296/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
F.
G.
H.
[1]
I.
A.
B.
(1)
C.
Easements shall have a minimum width of 20 feet and shall be adequately designed to
provide area for the:
Collection and discharge of water;
Maintenance, repair and reconstruction of the drainage facilities; and
Passage of machinery for such work.
The easements shall clearly identify who has the right of access and responsibility of
maintenance. This requirement shall be noted on the final plan and shall be included in all
deeds for lots that contain an easement. No easement for any purpose whatsoever shall be
recited or described in any deed unless the same has been shown on the approved plan. Any
error found in a deed shall be immediately corrected and rerecorded with the Recorder of
Deeds, at the sole expense of the applicant.
Where any petroleum or petroleum product transmission line traverses a subdivision or land
development, the applicant shall confer with the applicable transmission or distribution company to
determine the minimum distance which shall be required between each structure and the center
line of such petroleum or petroleum product transmission line. Additionally, the Township will
require, with the final plan application, a letter from the owner of the transmission line stating any
conditions on the use of the tract which shall contain the above.
Where a subdivision or land development is adjacent to or traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, open channel, or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourse, drainageway, open channel, or stream of such
width as will be adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow from a one-hundred-year design rainfall.
When a subdivision proposes multifamily attached dwellings, such as townhouses, the plans shall
include an access easement for the purposes of property maintenance along the front and rear
property lines of all units, and side property lines of the end units, to allow all lot owners within the
unit access to front and rear yards. The access easement shall have a minimum width of six feet.
This requirement shall be noted on the final plan and shall be included in all deeds for lots which
contain the easement. This easement is intended only for pedestrian access or for small and
nonlicensed motorized maintenance equipment.
Greenways and riparian forest buffers shall be established as easements in accordance with this
chapter and the requirements of the floodplain regulations of the most recent version of the
Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article XVI and Article X).[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
§ 236-606. Survey monuments and lot line markers.
Permanent concrete monuments shall be accurately placed along at least one side of each street
located on the right-of-way lines at corners, at the beginning and end of all curves and at all
angles, and as otherwise required by the Township Engineer for all new and existing streets.
Lot line markers shall be set at the points where lot lines intersect curves and/or other property
lines.
Monument and lot line marker composition.
Monuments shall be of concrete, with a flat top having a minimum width or diameter of four
inches and a minimum length of 30 inches. Cast-in-place or precast concrete monuments
shall be marked with center punch mark in a three-quarter-inch copper or brass dowel.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 297/520
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
Metallic lot line markers shall consist of steel bars at least 30 inches along and not less than
3/4 inch in diameter.
Alternative monumentation methods will be at the discretion of the Township Engineer.
All monuments shall be inscribed with a proper inscription indicating the name of the surveyor
qualified to perform such duties and responsible for the survey.
All monuments and lot line markers shall be placed by an engineer or surveyor qualified to
perform such duties, so that the scored or marked point shall coincide exactly with the point of
intersection of the lines being monumented or marked.
All monuments and lot line markers shall be placed by the applicant after a new street and/or
lot grading has been completed.
When final lot grading has been completed and before the issuance of occupancy permits,
permanent monuments and lot line markers shall be set by the applicant at all lot corners and
angle points and at all street intersections and intermediate points as may be required.
All existing and proposed monuments and lot line markers shall be delineated on the final plan.
§ 236-607. Landscaping, screening, wooded areas, and street
trees.
Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening shall conform to the requirements of the
most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article XIV).
Existing wooded areas and significant trees. Existing wooded areas shall be protected to prevent
unnecessary destruction.
At least 15% of the number of trees having at trunk caliper of least two inches measured at a
height of 4 1/2 feet above finished grade that exist at the time of plan submission shall be
maintained or replaced immediately following construction.
No more than 20% of existing woodlands located in environmentally sensitive areas shall be
destroyed or altered. If the applicant can prove that invasive species are within either of these
areas, then the percent of woodlands to be removed may be increased to eradicate invasive
species.
Replacement trees shall have a trunk caliper of at least two inches measured at a height at
least six inches above finished grade and located within unbuildable sections of the site (i.e.,
steep slope and setback areas).
If a significant tree is designated to be preserved but is removed or substantially damaged
during the clearing, grading, or construction, the applicant or developer shall be required by
the Township to replace the removed or damaged tree, by providing at least three trees each
with an equivalent cross-sectional area at maturity, in a manner acceptable to the Township.
Prior to construction, the Tree Protection Zone shall be delineated at the dripline of the tree
canopy. All trees scheduled to remain shall be marked; however, where groups of trees exist,
only the trees on the edge need to be marked. A forty-eight-inch-high snow fence or fortyeight-
inch-high construction fence mounted on steel posts located eight feet on center shall
be placed along the boundary of the Tree Protection Zone. No construction, storage of
material, temporary parking, pollution of soil, or regrading shall occur within the Tree
Protection Zone. When there is a group of trees, the Tree Protection Zone shall be based on
the location of the outer trees.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 298/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
[1]
[2]
(g)
(h)
(6)
C. All plantings and street trees. All planting shall be performed in conformance with good nursery
and landscape practice. Plant materials shall conform to the standards recommended by the most
recent version of American Nursery and Landscape Association's American Standard for Nursery
Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004.
A landscape plan note shall be provided indicating that the top of the main order root (first
large set of roots that divide from the trunk) shall be planted no lower than one inch or two
inches into the soil.
Planting designs are encouraged to share planting space for optimal root growth whenever
possible. Continuous planting areas versus isolated planting boxes are encouraged.
No staking and wiring of trees shall be allowed without a maintenance note for the staking
and wiring to be removed within one year of planting.
All required landscape plants shall be maintained and guaranteed for a length of 18 months
from the date of planting. No more than 1/3 of the tree or shrub shall be damaged or dead
without replacement. Replacement plants shall conform to all requirements of this section and
shall be maintained after replanting for an additional 18 months.
The plant's growth shall not interfere with the street cartway, sidewalk, sign, easement, clear
sight triangles, or utility line. Within the clear sight triangle, typical branching shall not be
within 10 feet of ground level after 10 years of growth.
Street trees shall be required by the Township with the following standards:
The trees shall be nursery grown in a climate similar to that of the locality of the project.
Varieties of trees shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
All trees shall have a normal habit of growth and shall be sound, healthy and vigorous;
they shall be free from disease, insects, insect eggs, and larvae.
Street trees shall have a trunk caliper of at least two inches measured at a height at least
six inches above finished grade.
Tree planting depth shall bear the same relationship to the finished grade as the top of
the root ball or original grade of origin.
Trees shall be planted between the street right-of-way line and the building setback line
except where the Township has authorized placement of trees within the street right-ofway.
The tree growth shall not interfere with the street cartway, sidewalk or utility line.
Street trees shall be spaced not less than 40 feet nor more than 60 feet apart along the
entire length of each existing or proposed street.
The minimum number of street trees shall be provided in accordance with the following:
One street tree shall be provided on each lot containing a residential building
containing two or fewer dwelling units;
One street tree shall be provided on each lot of a land development plan and spaced
in accordance with § 236-607C(6)(f) of this chapter.
All planting material shall be subject to the approval of the Township. Although a variety
of species is suggested, no one species shall comprise more than 33% of the entire
number of street trees in a particular development. Table 6-5 lists recommended species
for street trees, but selection is not limited to the following:
Table 6-5
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 299/520
(a)
(b)
(7)
(8)
[1]
(9)
(1)
(2)
A.
Street Trees: Recommended Species
Common Name Botanical Name
Table 6-5
Street Trees: Recommended Species
Common Name Botanical Name
Red maple Acer rubrum cultivars
Red horsechestnut Aesculus x carnea
American yellowwood Cladrastis lutea
Ginkgo Ginkgo biloba (males only)
Thornless honey locust Gleditsia triacanthos inermis cultivars
Sweetgum Liquidambar styraciflua
Black tupelo Nyssa sylvatica
Sawtooth oak Quercus acutissima
Willow oak Quercus phellos
Red oak Quercus rubra
Japanese pagoda tree Sophora japonica
Littleleaf linden Tilia cordata
Crimean linden Tilia x euchlora
Silver linden Tilia tomentosa
Japanese Zelkova Zelkova serrata cultivar
Native and invasive planting.
Native plant materials shall be incorporated in all designs. Native plant materials shall be
incorporated in all designs. The use of native plant material can help improve water
quality, provide additional and improved wildlife habitat, and typically adapt to local
conditions which then require less maintenance. Native plants must be used near
greenways, suburban forested areas, wetlands, and riparian areas.
Except as noted above, non-native plants may be included in place of a native plant if it is
not considered invasive and the plant does not introduce pests or diseases. A non-native
plant may be incorporated into designs when they prove to be better suited for the urban
soil, environment, or spatial constraints, urban stress mitigation, and integration into the
surrounding ecosystem.
Any existing vegetation that is in appropriate locations, of an acceptable species and quality
may be used to fulfill landscaping or buffering requirements.
Street tree and landscaping maintenance requirements, as listed in Appendix 11, shall be
noted on the plan, unless an acceptable maintenance agreement is provided.[1]
Editor's Note: Appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 236-608. Sanitary sewage disposal and water supply.
Sanitary sewage disposal.
Within any UGA or VGA, or within any area that the Act 537 plan identifies to be served by
public utilities, any lot created, and any land development plan that proposes to increase
flows equal to or greater than 400 gallons per day, shall be served by public sewer.
When the Township, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537 of
1966, as amended, determines the necessity for a sewer facilities plan revision (plan revision
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 300/520
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
B.
module for land development), or supplement, the Board of Supervisors shall require that
notice of approval from PA DEP be submitted as a condition of final plan approval.
If the applicant proposes connection to the public sewer system, the final plan application
shall include a statement from the sewer authority indicating the approval of the plans for
design, installation and possible financial guarantees.
If the applicant proposes connection to the public sewer system, the sewerage installation
shall be in accordance with the specifications of the sewer authority. The sewer authority shall
establish requirements for the ownership and maintenance of such system.
If the applicant proposes to provide a community sewer system, its construction and
installation shall be in accordance with applicable sewer authority specifications and all
regulations of PA DEP. The applicant shall obtain all permits and approvals required by the
sewer authority or PA DEP prior to final plan approval.
On-lot sewage disposal. If the applicant proposes installation of on-lot sewage disposal and has
presented documentation satisfactory to the sewer authority and the Board of Supervisors proving
the unfeasibility of connection to public or community sewer systems, the following documentation
shall be provided:
Sewage testing required for all proposed lots. Each lot or lot to be created shall contain a
suitable location for the installation of an initial individual on-lot sewage system except when
such lots or lots to be created are to be served by a community sewage system. The Sewage
Enforcement Officer shall perform or observe all tests required by PA DEP and this chapter
for the location of an individual on-lot sewage system to confirm the suitability of the location.
Replacement location for on-lot sewage systems required. A replacement location shall be
provided which shall comply with all regulations issued by PA DEP concerning individual onlot
sewage systems, including isolation distances, and with the terms of this chapter and any
other applicable Township ordinances.
Identification of replacement location.
Each applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township SEO and/or a
sanitarian certified by PA DEP that an area exists on the lot or on each lot to be created
for an initial individual on-lot sewage system and for the replacement location. The
Township SEO or sanitarian shall perform all tests required by PA DEP regulations for the
location of an individual on-lot sewage system to confirm the suitability of the
replacement location. Allowance of open land for the replacement location without such
testing shall not constitute compliance with the requirements of this section.
The location of each initial individual on-lot sewage system and each replacement
location shall be noted on the plans. An appropriate easement shall be provided around
the replacement location and shown on the final plan. The purchaser of each lot shall be
provided with a copy of the plans. A note shall be added to the plans stating that no
improvements shall be constructed upon the replacement location easement, and the
deed to each lot created as a part of the subdivision or land development shall contain
language reflecting this limitation.
Any revisions to a permit or plan affecting a replacement location which previously has
been approved pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to review and
approval by the Township or its authorized representative.
Construction of improvements upon or disturbance of replacement location prohibited. The
replacement location shall not be excavated, graded, filled, or otherwise disturbed in any
manner which would prevent its use as a future location for an on-lot sewage disposal system
during development of the lot. Unless approved by the Township, no permanent or temporary
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 301/520
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
improvements of any character which would disturb the suitability of the site for sewage
disposal shall be constructed upon the replacement location unless the person who desires to
construct such improvements shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township SEO that
an alternate replacement location which complies with all applicable Township ordinances
exists upon the lot. If such an alternate replacement location shall be identified, the alternate
replacement location may be considered to be the replacement location required by this
chapter, shall be designated as the replacement location, and the plans shall be accordingly
revised and submitted to the Lancaster Township Planning Commission. The newly
designated replacement location shall thereafter be considered the replacement location for
the purposes of this chapter.
The limits of both the initial individual on-lot sewage system and the replacement system
location easement for each lot must be staked and roped off, or other acceptable measures,
prior to issuance of building permits for each lot and properly maintained during construction
until the issuance of an occupancy permit.
Water supply.
Within any UGA or VGA, or within any area that the Act 537 plan identifies to be served by
public utilities, any lot created, and any land development plan that proposes to increase
flows equal to or greater than 400 gallons per day shall be served by public water.
If the applicant proposes connection to the public water system, the installation and
construction shall be in accordance with the specifications of the water authority or the public
utility. The water authority or the public utility shall establish requirements for the ownership
and maintenance of such system.
If the applicant proposes connection to the public water system, the final plan application shall
include a statement from the water authority or the public utility indicating the approval of the
plans for design, installation and possible financial guarantees.
If the applicant proposes connection to the public water system, the locations and kind of fire
hydrants shall be in accordance with the specifications of the water authority or public utility
which operates such water system in concert with the local fire department thread
requirements. A copy of the approval of such system by the water authority or the public utility
shall be submitted.
If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned and maintained by the
individual owners of lots within the subdivision or land development, the applicant shall
present evidence that the subdivision or land development is to be supplied by a certified
public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners or by the water authority. The
supplier and proposed system shall be in compliance with current PA DEP requirements. A
copy of a certificate of public convenience or an application for such certificate, a cooperative
agreement or a commitment to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be
acceptable evidence.
If the applicant proposes to provide a community water supply system, its installation shall be
in accordance with the water authority specifications and all regulations of PA DEP. The
applicant shall obtain all permits and approvals required by the water authority, the public
utility or PA DEP prior to final plan approval.
In all cases the applicant shall demonstrate that the water to be supplied shall be of an
adequate quality and quantity for the intended use. Potable water shall meet all applicable
standards of PA DEP or the USEPA.
§ 236-609. Dedication of park and recreation land.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 302/520
A.
[1]
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(1)
(2)
D.
All residential subdivisions and land developments shall be provided with park and recreation land
which shall, if acceptable to the Township, be dedicated to the Township. The Township may
require that the park and recreation land remain in private ownership and maintenance
responsibilities established to the satisfaction of the Township. The developer may request that the
Township not require the dedication of land, and any such request shall be accompanied by an
offer to pay a fee in lieu of dedication or reservation of the land, computed in accordance with the
regulations provided herein.
Open space development. Areas which are designed in accordance with the open space
development criteria and designated as restricted open space as provided for by the most recent
version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article XV),[1] and comply with
the minimum area requirements of this section may, subject to approval by the Township, satisfy
the park and recreational land dedication requirements of this section.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
Designated greenways.
Areas which are designed in accordance with the preservation of greenways criteria as
provided for by the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended (Article XVI) and comply with the minimum area requirements of this section may,
subject to approval by the Township, satisfy the park and recreational land dedication
requirements of this section.
Any lot proposed for any type of development that contains any portion of a greenway, shall,
by dedication or reservation, provide public access to and upon the greenway corridors as
identified in the most recent version of the LIMC Comprehensive Plan, as amended, and the
most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended, to enable the
preservation of the greenway corridors (Article XVI).
The land reserved for park and recreation usage shall be a single lot which shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter relating to length to depth ratios and which shall be accessible to the
public. No more than 15% of the lot shall consist of floodplain, wetlands, slopes in excess of 25%,
or other features which shall render the lot undevelopable.
The following areas shall not be included as part of the minimum required area of any land
reserved for park, recreation and open space usage:
Areas within 25 feet of any structure except structures devoted to park, recreation and
open space usage;
Any area less than 100 feet wide in the narrowest dimension at any point;
Stormwater management facilities. At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, areas
devoted to stormwater management facilities may be included within the minimum
required park, recreation and open space area when the applicant can demonstrate, to
the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors, that such facilities are designed to:
Promote recharge of the groundwater system;
Be available and appropriate for active or passive recreational use or scenic
enjoyment; and
Otherwise conform to the purposes, standards, and criteria for open space and
greenways as set forth in the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended.
In the event that the tract contains natural features which are worthy of preservation, the
developer may request that the Board of Supervisors permit the configuration of recreational
land in such a manner as to best preserve natural features.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 303/520
(3)
(4)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
F.
A.
The park, recreation and open space land shall be accessible to utilities such as sewer, water
and power that are provided with the subdivision, and if so requested by the Township that will
accept dedication of the land, the developer shall extend such utilities to the park, recreation
and open space land.
If the contiguous property has previously been developed and recreational land has been
provided at the boundary of that previously developed property, the Board of Supervisors
shall require that the recreational land required of the development shall be located adjoining
the previously provided recreational land.
A minimum of 0.02 acre of land shall be reserved as park or recreational land for each residential
lot created in a subdivision or each dwelling unit created in a land development. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, in all cases the minimum area of land reserved as park and recreation land shall be
equal to the minimum lot size in the district in which the subdivision or land development is
located.
The developer may request that the Board of Supervisors permit the provision of park and
recreation land other than through public dedication of land as set forth above. The developer
shall set forth, in writing, the means by which he will fulfill this requirement which may include the
payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of all or a portion of the amount of land required to be
dedicated, construction of recreational facilities, the private reservation of land, or any combination
of dedication, fees, construction of recreational facilities, or private reservation.
If a fee in lieu of dedication is proposed by the developer, the amount of the fee shall be
substantially equal to the value of the land that would be set aside if the standards specified in
§ 236-609D of this chapter were to be applied. A flat per-dwelling-unit fee in lieu of dedication
is set by resolution of the Township, if the developer chooses not to provide evidence of the
value of the land.
The fee shall be paid to the Township prior to the approval of the plan application.
All fees shall be held and used by the Township in accordance with the requirements of Article
V of the MPC.
If the developer proposes to construct recreational facilities, the developer shall present a
sketch plan of such facilities and an estimate of the cost of construction.
If the developer proposes the private reservation of land, the developer shall provide for the
maintenance of such land through either the inclusion of such land as common elements of a
condominium or the creation of a homeowners' association which shall meet the requirements
for a unit owners' association contained in the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68
Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq. Such documentation shall be recorded, shall provide that the land
cannot be further developed and shall give the Township the right, but not the obligation, to
maintain the land, at the owner's expense, as set forth in Article VII of the MPC dealing with
the maintenance of common open space in planned residential developments.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the developer may request that the Board of Supervisors
approve transfer of the land to an organization dedicated to the conservation of natural
resources with deed restrictions preventing further development acceptable to the Township.
The developer shall enter into an agreement with the Township setting forth the fees to be
paid, the facilities to be constructed, or the land to be privately reserved and the method of its
maintenance. All such agreements shall be in a form satisfactory to the Township.
§ 236-610. Emergency access requirements.
All subdivisions or land developments containing 25 or more dwelling units or nonresidential
buildings or buildings containing 15,000 or greater square feet of gross floor area shall be
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 304/520
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
A.
[1]
B.
C.
provided with at least two separate and distinct means of access to the subdivision or land
development.
Access may be provided through the location of two or more public or private streets, each of
which intersects with an existing public street. Such public or private streets shall meet all the
requirements of this chapter concerning design and construction.
Access for a land development may be provided through two or more access drives into the land
development. Such access drives shall be separated by a distance of at least 150 feet and shall
comply with all requirements of this chapter.
If the applicant is unable to provide access to the subdivision or land development through two or
more public or private streets, each of which intersect with an existing public street or two or more
access drives which intersect with one or more existing public streets, an emergency access shall
be provided.
The emergency access shall be improved so that emergency vehicles may safely transverse
it and shall be indicated on the plans.
The emergency access shall be acceptable to the providers of emergency services within the
Township and approved by the Township. Applicants proposing to provide emergency access
shall submit evidence of such approval.
The emergency access may be located so that access to the subdivision or land development
is gained from a public street at a location unsuitable for regular access with an existing public
street.
The emergency access may be located so that access is gained from an adjacent tract. For
example, a subdivision or land development adjoining a parking compound of another use
may provide emergency access through a point with a break chain. Applicants with plans
indicating emergency access through a contiguous private tract shall provide evidence that
the adjoining property owner has consented to such emergency access location.
§ 236-611. Refuse collection stations.
Outdoor refuse collection stations shall be provided for garbage and trash removal when individual
collection is not made and indoor storage is not provided.
Refuse collection stations shall be located outside of the front yard and separated adequately from
habitable buildings to avoid being offensive, but at the same time be convenient for both collectors
and residents, and shall be effectively screened so as not to be visible from off-site adjacent
parking areas, roadways, or adjacent residential properties. Such areas shall be screened with a
combination of architectural masonry (or fencing) and/or landscaping with a height of at least six
feet, in accordance with the landscaping and screening regulations of the most recent version of
the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended (Article XIV).[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 280, Zoning.
Refuse collection stations shall be so constructed as to prevent the escape of refuse by wind,
water or other natural elements and prevent animals, rodents, etc., from entering.
Article VII. Mobile/Manufactured Home Parks and
Campgrounds
§ 236-701. General requirements.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 305/520
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
Mobile/manufactured home park plans and campground plans shall be processed in accordance
with Article III of this chapter.
Mobile/manufactured home parks and campgrounds shall comply with the most recent version of
the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended, and the design standards set forth in this
article and Article VI of this chapter, with the exception that any specific design standard will be
superseded by any other Township ordinance, resolution, or regulation adopted prior to the
preliminary plan submission date and containing a different specific standard (Article XVI). Where
another Township standard applies, the plan shall note that item will be designed to such specific
Township standard.
§ 236-702. Mobile/manufactured home parks standards.
Internal circulation. An internal system of access drives shall be provided in mobile/manufactured
home parks, which shall be lighted for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night, in
accordance with the lighting standards for parking compounds in § 236-603 of this chapter.
Sidewalks and curbs.
Sidewalks. Mobile/manufactured home parks shall have sidewalks along parking compounds
and between the individual mobile/manufactured homes and the service buildings.
Curbs. Curbs shall not be required along mobile/manufactured home park access drives or
parking compounds.
§ 236-703. Campground standards.
Campgrounds shall be subject to the following design standards only:
Internal circulation.
An internal system of access drives shall be provided in campgrounds. Such access drives
shall have a minimum cartway width of 10 feet per driving lane and shall be improved with
any hard surface material acceptable to the applicant.
The Township may require additional cartway improvements for campgrounds with a potential
occupancy of more than 45 "camping" lots or spaces when, in the Township's judgment, such
improvements are necessary for safety or health reasons.
Article VIII. Administration
§ 236-801. Purpose.
This article outlines the procedures for enforcement and amendment of this chapter, as well as
procedures for challenges and appeals of decisions rendered under this chapter.
§ 236-802. Amendment.
Any revisions, modifications, or amendments to this chapter shall be made in accordance with the
procedures established by the MPC.
§ 236-803. Modifications.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 306/520
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
(1)
B.
All requests for modifications shall be processed in accordance with § 236-308 of this chapter.
The provisions of these regulations are intended as a minimum standard for the protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare. If the literal compliance with any mandatory provision of these
regulations is shown by the applicant, to the satisfaction of the majority of the members of the
Board of Supervisors present at a scheduled meeting, to create an undue hardship or appears to
be unreasonable as it applies to a particular property or that an alternative proposal will allow for
equal or better results, the Board of Supervisors may grant a modification from such mandatory
provision, so that substantial justice deemed necessary and advisable may be done and the public
interest secured while permitting the reasonable utilization of the property. The granting of a
modification shall not have the effect of making null and void the intent and purpose of this
chapter.
In granting modifications, the Board of Supervisors may impose such conditions as will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards and requirements of this chapter.
§ 236-804. Challenges and appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a finding, decision, or recommendation of the Board of Supervisors with
respect to the approval or disapproval of a plan or modification request may appeal in either of two
ways specified below:
The decision may be appealed, as provided for in the MPC.
The decision may be appealed to the Board of Supervisors, in writing, within 10 days after the
date of action of the Board of Supervisors. Upon receipt of such appeal and after proper
notification of any parties in interest, the Board of Supervisors may affirm, modify, or reverse the
previous action by a recorded vote. The findings and reasons for the disposition of the appeal
shall be stated on the records of the Township and a copy shall be given to the party who has
made the appeal. This decision may be further appealed as provided for in the MPC. The appeal
period shall start immediately after the final decision of the Board of Supervisors on the appeal.
§ 236-805. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, or corporation, or the members of such partnership or the officers of such
corporation, who or which, being the owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land,
shall lay out, construct, open, or dedicates any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, or
other improvements for public use, travel or other purposes or for the common use of occupants of
buildings abutting thereon; or sells, transfers or agrees or enters into an agreement to sell any
land in a subdivision or land development whether by reference to or by other use of a plat of such
subdivision or land development or otherwise; or erects any building or buildings which constitute
a land development thereon; or commences site grading or construction of improvements prior to
recording of a final plan unless such grading or construction is for the sole purpose of installing
improvements as prescribed in Article III of this chapter herein unless and until a final plan has
been prepared in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and has been recorded as
provided herein; or fails to comply with any condition imposed upon approval of a preliminary plan
or a final plan or any condition imposed upon the granting of a modification; or fails to comply with
any agreement with the Township relating to development in accordance with a preliminary plan or
a final plan; or fails to comply with any note included on an approved preliminary plan or final plan
commits a violation of this chapter.
Penalties for violations.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found
liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment
of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 307/520
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by a District Justice/Magisterial
District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that
a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation unless the District
Justice/Magisterial District Judge, determining that there has been a violation, further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation. If the District
Justice/Magisterial District Judge makes a determination of good faith, there shall be deemed
to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of determination of a
violation by the District Justice/Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
The Township may institute and maintain actions at law or in equity to restrain, correct or
abate violations of this chapter, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and/or
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises.
The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further
improve or develop any real property which has been developed or which has resulted from a
subdivision or land development of real property in violation of this chapter. The authority to
deny such permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
The owner of record at the time of such violation.
The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such violation without regard
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent to the time of the
violation without regard as to whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual constructive knowledge of the violation.
As an additional condition for the issuance of a permit or the granting of an approval to any
such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the development of any such real property,
the Township may require compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to
the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real estate.
The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the
process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or
from the remedies herein provided.
No applicant shall proceed with any site grading or construction of improvements prior to
recordation of a final plan as specified in this chapter, unless such grading or construction is
undertaken in accordance with this chapter. No deeds shall be executed or recorded for lots, nor
shall the construction of any structure be initiated, before the Township has approved the final plan
and such plan is filed with the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
§ 236-806. Records.
The Township shall keep an accurate, public record of its findings, decisions, and recommendations
relevant to all applications filed with it for review or approval.
§ 236-807. Severability.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 308/520
Should any article, section, subsection or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or of
any other part thereof.
§ 236-808. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective five days after its adoption by the Board of Township Supervisors
of Lancaster Township, County of Lancaster, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Chapter 241. (Reserved)
[Former Ch. 241, Swimming Pools, adopted 7-12-1965 by Ord. No. 1965-7, was repealed 6-11-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-03.]
Chapter 246. Tattoo Parlors and Body Art Establishments
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 3-8-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 246-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Lancaster Township Tattoo and Body Piercing
Ordinance."
§ 246-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by regulating
individuals and establishments providing tattooing and body piercing services and by providing a
uniform set of guidelines for the provision of those services and the operation of those establishments.
§ 246-3. Definitions and word usage.
In the administration of this chapter, words in the present tense include the future, the singular number
includes the plural and the plural the singular; the masculine includes the feminine; the words "shall"
and "will" are mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive. The following words, unless otherwise
indicated, shall have the following meanings, while words not defined in this chapter shall have the
meanings set forth in Mosby's Medical and Nursing Dictionary, Environmental Engineering and
Sanitation, Fourth Edition, and/or the most recent edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary,
whichever shall be applicable to such term:
AFTERCARE
Written and verbal instructions given to the client, specific to the body art procedure(s) rendered,
on caring for the body art and its surrounding area.
ANTISEPTIC
An agent that destroys disease-causing microorganisms on human skin or mucosa.
APPRENTICE
An individual being taught a trade.
ARTIST/OPERATOR/TECHNICIAN/PRACTITIONER
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 309/520
Any person who controls, operates, manages, conducts or practices body art activities at a body
art establishment. The term includes technicians and apprentices who work under the operator
and perform body art activities.
AUTOCLAVE
An apparatus for sterilization, utilizing steam pressure at a specific temperature over a period of
time.
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS
Standard OSHA Guidelines as defined in 29 CFR 1910.1030, "Occupational Exposure to
Bloodborne Pathogens."
BOARD OF HEALTH
The Board appointed by Lancaster Township.
BODY ART
The practice of body piercing and tattooing.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT OR FACILITY
Any space where body piercing or tattooing is conducted.
BODY PIERCING
The perforation of human tissue, excluding ear piercing, for a nonmedical purpose.
CLIENT
A person who requests a body art procedure at a body art establishment.
CLIENT RECORD
A file for the client maintaining information regarding the client and the body art procedures
provided to the client.
CONTAMINATED WASTE/BIOHAZARD/BIOLOGICAL WASTE
Any liquid or semiliquid blood or other potentially infectious materials; contaminated items that
would release blood or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semiliquid state if
compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or other potentially infectious materials and are
capable of releasing these materials during handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood and
other potentially infectious materials, as defined in 29 Code of Federal Regulations Part
1910.1030 (latest edition), known as "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens" and/or
105 CMR 480.000 "Storage and Disposal of Infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or
Biological Waste."
COSMETIC TATTOOING (see TATTOOING)
Permanent cosmetics and/or micropigment implantation.
DISINFECTANT
A product registered as a disinfectant by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
DISINFECTION
The destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby
rendering these objects safe for use or handling.
EAR PIERCING
The puncturing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear using a presterilized single-use stud and
clasp ear piercing system following manufacturers' instructions.
EQUIPMENT/FURNITURE
All machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display
and storage areas, sinks and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 310/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
operation of a body art establishment.
EXPOSURE
Any event where there is an eye, mouth or other mucus membrane or nonintact skin contact with
the blood or body fluids of another person or contact of eye, mouth or other mucus membrane,
nonintact skin with other potentially infectious matter and/or an occurrence whereby an individual
is exposed to medical waste.
GLOVES
Disposable protective coverings for the hands.
HANDSINK
A lavatory equipped with tempered hot and cold running water under pressure, used solely for
washing hands, arms or other portions of the body.
HEALTH OFFICER
A person or persons appointed by Lancaster Township to enforce this chapter.
HOT WATER
Water at a temperature greater than or equal to 110° F. but not greater than 125° F.
INFECTIOUS WASTE
Blood and body fluids in a liquid or semiliquid state;
Items contaminated with blood or body fluids, which, if compressed or disturbed, may release
liquid or semiliquid blood or body fluids;
Sharps which have been used in performing body art;
Other waste which contains pathogenic microbial agents or other biologically active materials
in sufficient concentrations that exposure to the waste directly or indirectly creates a
significant risk of disease.
INSTRUMENTS USED FOR BODY ART
Hand pieces, needles, sharps, needle bars and other instruments that may come in contact with a
client's body or may be exposed to bodily fluids during body art procedures.
INVASIVE
Entry into the body either by incision or insertion of an instrument into or through the skin or
mucosa, or by any other means intended to puncture, break or compromise the skin or mucosa.
JEWELRY
Any personal ornament inserted into a newly pierced area.
LICENSE
The written approval by Lancaster Township to operate a body art establishment and/or to provide
body art services. This license is separate from any other licensing requirement that may exist
within communities or political subdivisions other than Lancaster Township.
LICENSEE
A person who holds a license to operate a body art establishment or to provide body art services.
LIQUID CHEMICAL GERMICIDE
A disinfectant or sanitizer registered with the Environmental Protection Agency or an approximate
1:100 dilution of household chlorine bleach made fresh daily and dispensed from a spray bottle
(500 ppm, 1/4 cup per gallon or two tablespoons per quart of tap water).
MEDICAL WASTE
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 311/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
Blood and body fluids in a liquid or semiliquid state;
Items contaminated with blood or body fluids, which, if compressed or disturbed, may release
liquid or semiliquid blood or body fluids;
Sharps which have been used in performing body art;
Other waste which contains pathogenic microbial agents or other biologically active materials
in sufficient concentrations that exposure to the waste directly or indirectly creates a
significant risk of disease.
MINOR
Any individual under the age of 18.
PERSON
An individual, any form of business or social organization or any other nongovernmental legal
entity including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association,
trust or unincorporated organization.
PHYSICIAN
A health professional who has earned a degree of Doctor of Medicine (M.D.) or Doctor of
Osteopathy (D.O.) after completing an approved course of study. A physician is required to obtain
a license from the state in which professional services will be performed.
PROCEDURE SURFACE
Any surface of an inanimate object that contacts the client's skin during a body art procedure, skin
preparation of the area adjacent to and including the body art procedure or any associated work
area, which may require sanitizing.
RECORD/REGISTER
List.
SANITARY
Clean and free of agents of infection or disease.
SANITIZE/SANITIZATION PROCEDURE
A process of reducing the numbers of microorganisms on cleaned surfaces and equipment to a
safe level as judged by public health standards and which has been approved by the Board of
Health and/or by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
SHARPS
Any object (sterile or contaminated) that may purposefully or accidentally cut or penetrate the skin
or mucosa including, but not limited to, presterilized, single-use needles, scalpel blades and razor
blades.
SHARPS CONTAINER
A puncture-resistant, leak-proof container that can be closed for handling, storage, transportation
and disposal and is labeled with the International Biohazard Symbol.
SINGLE-USE
Products or items that are intended for one-time, one-person use and are disposed of after use on
each client, including, but not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or
plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel blades, stencils, ink
cups and gloves.
STERILIZATION
A process approved by the Board of Health resulting in the destruction of all forms of microbial life,
including highly resistant bacterial spores.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 312/520
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
TATTOO
The indelible mark, figure or decorative design introduced by insertion of dyes or pigments into or
under the subcutaneous portion of the skin.
TATTOOING
One or more of the following:
An indelible mark made upon the body of another person by the insertion of pigment under
the skin;
An indelible design made upon the body of another person by production of scars other than
by branding;
The above include all forms of cosmetic tattooing.
TATTOOIST
Any person who applies a tattoo to the body of another person.
TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT
Any place or premise operating at a fixed location where an operator performs body art
procedures for no more than 14 days consecutively in conjunction with a single event or
celebration.
THREE-DIMENSIONAL BODY ART
The form of body art consisting of or requiring the placement, injection or insertion of an object,
device or other thing made of material such as steel, titanium, rubber, latex, plastic, glass or any
other material beneath the surface of the skin of a person.
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS
A set of guidelines and controls, published by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) as "guidelines for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus and
hepatitis B virus to health-care and public-safety workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No. S-6, and as "recommendations for preventing
transmission of human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B virus to patients during exposureprone
invasive procedures", in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8. This method of infection
control requires the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and specified
human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV and other blood pathogens. Precautions include
hand washing, gloving, personal protective equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and
disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood- and body-fluid-contaminated products.
VARIANCE
A written document issued by the Health Officer with the consent of the Board of Health which
authorizes a modification or waiver of one or more of the requirements of this chapter if, in the
opinion of the Health Officer and Board of Health, a health hazard or nuisance will not result from
the modification or waiver.
§ 246-4. License required.
No person shall operate a body art establishment without first having obtained a license from
Lancaster Township. A license application may be refused and a license may be revoked or
suspended summarily by a Health Officer, but such action shall be subject to review by the Board
of Health.
No person shall perform body piercing or tattooing in Lancaster Township without first having
obtained a license from Lancaster Township. A license application may be refused and a license
may be revoked or suspended summarily by a Health Officer, but such action shall be subject to
review by the Board of Health.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 313/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 246-5. Annual renewal; fees.
No body art establishment shall be operated in Lancaster Township unless such establishment's
owner, or manager, or designated agent has obtained the annual license required by this chapter.
No person shall perform body piercing or tattooing in Lancaster Township unless such person has
obtained the annual license required by this chapter.
Any person failing to obtain or renew an annual license as required hereunder on or before the
due date shall pay a penalty in addition to being subject to any other fines, penalties and
enforcement procedures set forth by resolution.
The fees for licenses referred to in this section shall be established by resolution.
§ 246-6. License applications; transferability, and inspections.
Any person wishing to obtain a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter (whether initially
or for renewal thereof) shall submit the applications required by Lancaster Township. For body art
establishments, the applications will require, inter alia, the following information: name of the body
art establishment, names of all operators working there having licenses and their home addresses
and phone numbers, address of the body art establishment, proof of liability insurance in amounts
established from time to time by the Board of Health, phone number of the establishment, method
of sterilization to be utilized at the establishment, a site plan of the establishment drawn to scale,
and a description of all body art procedures performed at the establishment. For body piercing and
tattooing licenses, the application will require, inter alia, the following information: the name,
address, home phone number and business phone number of the applicant, the address and
phone number of the body art establishment where the applicant will be providing body art
services, proof of vaccination (copy) of the applicant for Hepatitis B, the applicant's criminal
history, a description of the applicant's experience in the field of body art, information regarding the
applicant's completion of a bloodborne pathogen-training program and proof that the applicant is
at least 18 years of age.
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are nontransferable.
Any person obtaining a license hereunder, by submitting an application for license, agrees to
permit the inspection of the body art establishment or work area of the body art operator and to
comply with the requirements, rules and regulations of this chapter. All body art establishments
shall be inspected at least once annually, which inspections may be unannounced. All license
holders shall at all times post conspicuously at their body art establishment their licenses and the
results of the most recent inspection.
A Health Officer may revoke the license of any person who fails to comply with the provisions of
this chapter or who willfully or continuously ignores or fails to comply with any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant hereto within 10 days after the licensee has been notified, in writing, by a Health
Officer or the Board of Health of his delinquency in accordance with the provisions of § 246-9
hereof. All licenses may be suspended immediately if in the discretion of the Health Officer
continued operation poses a serious health risk to operators, employees or clients. In such case,
the license holder shall, within 24 hours of the revocation, be given written notice of the
revocation, the reason for the revocation and the means by which the license may be reinstated.
No person shall hinder, impede or prevent any Health Officer from entering and/or inspecting any
body art establishment or from performing any duty authorized by this chapter.
§ 246-7. Documents to be posted.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 314/520
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
C.
The holder of a license for operating a body art establishment shall ensure that the following
documents are posted in each such licensed body art establishment in a conspicuous and prominent
place:
A copy of the most recent inspection sheet (results);
Pamphlets or literature explaining body art aftercare;
The name, address and phone number of the Health Officers;
An emergency plan including:
A plan for the purpose of contacting the police, fire, or emergency medical services in the
event of an emergency;
A sign at or adjacent to the telephone indicating the correct emergency telephone numbers;
and
A plan for exiting the building in case of fire or other disaster;
An occupancy permit issued by the appropriate municipal official for the body art establishment;
and
The license for such establishment and the licenses for each operator performing body art
procedures at the establishment.
§ 246-8. Regulations for establishments and operators.
All body art establishments and operators providing body piercing and tattooing services shall comply
with the following regulations:
In order for the operator to properly assess the client's condition for receiving body art procedures
and not violate the client's rights or confidential medical information, the operator must obtain and
maintain a client record containing the following information regarding each client:
Name, address, date of birth and ID (driver's license, passport, state ID of client);
Any known allergies; and
Any condition that may affect/hamper the healing process.
In addition to the information collected from the client, the client record must include:
The name of the artist who performed the procedure;
The date of the procedure;
The location of the procedure on the client's body;
A description of the type of procedure provided;
Consent of the parent or legal guardian for all persons under the age of 18; and
A signed statement by the client acknowledging that he or she may be temporarily prohibited
from donating blood under the rules and regulations of the Red Cross.
The holder of a body art establishment license must ensure that the following records are kept and
retained and shall be made available to the Health Officer upon request:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 315/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
E.
Identification of each operator;
Client records, which must be maintained in a confidential manner for four years; and
Consent forms for persons under the age of 18, which must be kept for four years.
The holder of a body art establishment license must ensure that the establishment is well lighted,
well ventilated and kept in a clean, orderly, sanitary condition at all times and free of infestation by
insects or vermin and must assure that there is a telephone in good working order easily available
and accessible to all operators, employees and clients during all hours of operation.
All body art establishments shall conform with the following requirements:
Light with an artificial light source equivalent to at least 20 foot candles three feet off the floor,
except that light sources equivalent to at least 100 foot candles shall be provided at the level
where body art procedures are being performed and where instruments and sharps are
assembled.
All walls, floors and all procedure surfaces in rooms or areas where body art procedures are
performed must be smooth, nonporous, washable, and in good repair. Floors shall be cleaned
daily. Cleaning shall not occur while procedures are being performed.
All body art establishments must have a dedicated physical address.
All body art establishments must have:
An entrance leading directly into the establishment;
No direct opening between the establishment and any building or portion of a building
used as living or sleeping quarters or as a food, liquor, or tobacco establishment; and
Notwithstanding the foregoing, body art establishments located in a nail salon or
cosmetology salon may share an entrance into the establishment. However, the body art
establishment must be separated by a wall extending from floor to ceiling.
Each establishment shall have an area that will be screened from public view for customers
requesting privacy or for all genital body art procedures. Dividers, curtains or partitions at a
minimum shall separate multiple body art stations.
A consistent fresh air supply must be provided to the establishment. Furnace or air
conditioners shall be maintained to allow for proper airflow. Filters shall be cleaned or
replaced annually or more frequently if necessary.
No domestic or wild animals of any kind shall be present in a body art establishment except
service animals used by persons with disabilities. Fish aquariums shall be allowed in
nonprocedural areas.
The doors to the establishment shall be self-closing and kept closed to prevent entrance by
vermin and foreign particles.
The establishment must at all times have a supply of hot and cold running water in sufficient
quantities to conduct the facility in a sanitary manner. Further, the body art establishment shall
be protected by a testable reduced back flow preventer installed in accordance with
Pennsylvania codes. All wastewater must be disposed of through a system that carries it
away from buildings and to a public sewer connection.
The establishment must be maintained in a safe condition. It must have:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 316/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(c)
(d)
(e)
(11)
Floors, floor coverings, walls, woodwork, ceilings, furniture, fixtures and equipment that
are clean, smooth, washable and in good repair;
Floors that are free of unsafe objects or slippery or uneven surfaces;
Doors, stairways, passageways, aisles or other means of exit providing safe and
adequate access and, where applicable, exits marked for easy escape;
Electrical appliances or apparatus must be clean and have no worn or bare wiring to
avoid fires, shocks and electrocution and all electrical outlets in operator areas, cleaning
areas and bathroom facilities, must be equipped with ground-fault (GF) protected
receptacles; and
Water or product spills on the floor shall be removed immediately and the floor dried to
avoid falls.
The body art establishment must have the following equipment, all of which shall be in good
repair, easily cleanable and kept in a sanitary manner at all times:
Hand wash sink, which is kept clean and includes:
Hot and cold running water, preferably with wrist- or foot-operated controls;
Liquid pump soap;
Single-use paper towels; and
Waste container.
Sharps container: Contaminated sharps must be disposed of in an approved sharps
container to prevent cross-contamination in accordance with 105 CMR 480.00, Storage
and Disposal or Infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological Waste, State
Sanitary Code Chapter. It will be the responsibility of the owner of the body art
establishment to be in possession of the most recent regulations and copies of OSHA
Chapter 4.
Equipment sink for employees use only which is easily cleanable and includes:
Hot and cold running water, preferably with wrist- or foot-operated controls;
Liquid pump soap;
Single-use paper towels; and
Waste container.
Autoclave(s): The autoclave shall be used, cleaned and maintained according to the
manufacturer's instructions. A copy of the manufacturer's recommended procedures for
the operation of the autoclave must be available for inspection by the Health Officer.
Autoclaves, while running, shall be positioned away from workstations or areas available
to the public as space permits. Cleaning and logbooks are to be available for inspection.
Each owner of the body art establishment shall demonstrate that the autoclave is capable
of attaining sterilization by monthly spore tests. These tests shall be verified through an
independent laboratory. These records shall be kept by the owner for three years and
made available to the Health Officer upon request.
Waste receptacles: Each workstation shall have a waste receptacle, which is covered
and lined with a disposable bag.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 317/520
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(k)
(l)
(12)
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(13)
Work counters: All work counters shall be smooth, nonporous and easily cleanable. All
work areas shall have a germicidal cleaner marked as such.
Disposable ink caps: Ink caps are required if providing tattooing and permanent color
technology procedures. Ink cap holders shall be smooth, nonporous and disposable.
First aid kit: Body art establishments are required to have a complete first aid kit.
Chairs: All chairs for operators, as well as clients, shall be made of smooth, cleanable
materials. Cloth is not permitted.
Cabinets or containers for storage: All cabinets and containers shall be maintained and
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary manner.
Requirements for single-use items including inks, dyes and pigments:
Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for any reason. After use,
single-use sharps shall be immediately disposed of in approved sharps container
pursuant to 105 CMR 480.000.
All products applied to the skin, such as but not limited to body art stencils,
applicators, gauze and razors, shall be single-use and disposed of properly.
Hollow bore needles or needles with cannula shall not be reused but rather properly
disposed of.
All inks, dyes, pigments, solid core needles, and equipment shall be specifically
manufactured for performing body art procedures and shall be used according to
manufacturer's instructions.
Inks, dyes, or pigments may be mixed and may only be diluted with water from an
approved potable source. Immediately before a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the
dye to be used shall be transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use
paper cups or plastic cups. Upon completion of the tattoo, these single-use cups or
caps and their contents shall be discarded.
Toilet facilities: Toilet facilities shall be offered and conveniently located during all
business hours for all operators, employees and clients. A hand wash sink shall be
offered and signage shall be visible reminding employees to wash their hands.
The holder of the body art establishment license shall maintain all the furniture and equipment
in the establishment in good working order and keep it in a clean and sanitary manner.
The holder of the body art establishment license must ensure body artists and that storage
within the establishment comply with the following requirements:
Flammable and combustible chemicals shall be stored away from potential sources of
ignition such as an open flame or an electrical device.
All chemicals shall be stored in closed bottles or containers and clearly labeled.
No cleaning/sterilizing products shall be stored:
Where food is kept;
In the restroom, unless in a locked cabinet; or
With single-use supplies.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 318/520
(d)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(e)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(f)
(g)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(h)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(14)
(15)
Storage units: All cabinets, drawers, and containers used for storage of supplies,
instruments and towels shall be kept clean:
Supplies:
Unused supplies shall be stored in a clean, enclosed container or drawer;
Used/soiled disposable supplies shall be discarded immediately in a clean, closed
waste receptacle with a plastic liner; and
Shall be labeled accordingly.
Instrument storage:
Instruments that have been used on a client or soiled in any manner shall be placed
in a properly labeled covered receptacle until sterilized;
Sterilized instruments shall be individually packed and stored in a clean, closed
container or drawer until used and are to be stored six to 12 inches off the floor,
dated with an expiration date not to exceed six months; and
Sterile instruments may not be used if the package has been breached or after the
expiration date without first resterilizing.
Contaminated sharps must be stored and disposed of in approved sharps container to
prevent cross-contamination.
Infectious waste must be:
Handled and stored so that human exposure is prevented;
Discarded in double-lined plastic bags in a covered waste receptacle or in an
approved "red" bag marked with the international biohazard symbol and stored
safely until transported by a licensed infectious waste hauler to an appropriate
treatment or disposal facility; and
Records of infectious waste disposed of shall be retained for one year.
The holder of a body art establishment license must ensure that the use of towels/linens in
the establishment meets the following requirements and that body artists working therein
comply with the following requirements:
Cloth linens, after use, shall be disposed of in a labeled receptacle that has a cover;
Used cloth linens shall not be used again until they are laundered and sanitized;
Only single-use towels are to be used for body art procedures and must be discarded in
a labeled receptacle that has a cover, with a disposable plastic liner, immediately
following each body art procedure; and
Linens to be laundered shall be laundered either by a commercial washer which includes
immersion in laundry detergent and either chlorine bleach or water at 160° F., for not less
than 15 minutes during the washing and rinsing operation. Linen service from a source
approved by the Health Officer may be substituted as an alternative method.
The holder of a body art establishment license must ensure that the use of products in the
establishment meet the following requirements and that all body artists providing services
therein comply with the following requirements:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 319/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(16)
All liquids, cosmetics, creams, gels, pastes, powders, and other products are kept in
clean, closed containers;
Original product bottles and containers have an original manufacturer label;
When only a portion of the product is to be used on a client, the product shall be removed
from the container by a spatula, scoop, spoon, or dropper so that the product does not
come in direct contact with the client and to assure that the remaining product is not
contaminated;
If a product is poured into another container, such as a shaker, dispenser pump
container, or spray container, the container is labeled to identify the product;
Supplies and implements which come in direct contact with a client and cannot be
disinfected, such as cotton pads, cotton balls, pads, Q-tips®, sponges, bandages, tapes,
surgical dressing and other similar items shall be disposed of in a covered waste
receptacle, with a plastic liner, or, if contaminated with body fluids, in a hazardous waste
container, immediately after use;
All products applied to the skin, including stencils, must be single-use and disposable.
Acetate stencils will not be allowed for re-use if sanitization procedures are not performed
between uses. Petroleum jellies, soaps, and other products used in the application of
stencils must be dispensed and applied on the area to be tattooed with sterile gauze or in
a manner to prevent contamination; and
Only petroleum jelly, United States Pharmacopoeia or National Formulary, shall be
applied to the area to be tattooed and it shall be in a collapsible metal or plastic tube. The
application may be spread by the use of sterile gauze but not directly with the fingers,
unless both hands are covered with gloves. The stencil for transferring the design to the
skin shall be thoroughly cleansed and rinsed in an approved germicidal solution for at
least 20 minutes, and shall be dried with sterile gauze or in the air before each use.
All license holders must ensure that after use by each operator and/or a client, all
nondisposable instruments and procedure work surfaces are cleaned and sterilized with a
sanitizer that has a demonstrated antimicrobial activity, as indicated by the product label and
that the following requirements are complied with:
Jewelry used for new body piercing must be sterilized with an autoclave or chem-clave.
Acrylic jewelry cannot be used for a new piercing. Jewelry used in healed body piercing
does not have to be sterilized, but must be used according to product label;
Clippers must be disinfected with a liquid chemical sterilizer after each use;
All nondisposable instruments used for body art must be cleansed and sterilized after
each use. Autoclave or chem-clave sterilization must be conducted for the cycle of time
and corresponding operating pressure recommended by the manufacturer of the
autoclave. Sanitizers used in the cleaning process must have demonstrated antimicrobial
activity, as indicated by the product label, and be registered with the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency;
Instruments that are to be autoclaved within the facility must be packed in a single-use
autoclave bag with the date of sterilization. The expiration date must not exceed six
months from the date autoclaved;
All sterilized instruments must remain stored in sterilized packages until just prior to
performing a body art procedure. Where several instruments are sterilized at the same
time in the same package, such as in a single-use setup, once the container is opened
any instrument not used immediately in a procedure must be resterilized;
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 320/520
(f)
(g)
(h)
(17)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(18)
(19)
Every batch of sterilized equipment must be monitored for sterilization by use of a heat
sensitive indicator that is capable of indicating approximate time and temperature
achieved;
Only jewelry meeting the requirements hereunder which is free of nicks, scratches or
irregular surfaces and which has been properly sterilized prior to use may be inserted
into a newly pierced area; and
All instruments must be disposed of and no longer used after the manufacturer's
expiration date for each such instrument.
Each body art establishment is to be equipped with an autoclave which is a design, style or
model that has received clearance by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for conformance
with Section 510 (k) of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. Alternate sterilizing
equipment may only be used when specifically approved in writing by the Board of Health.
After each use and before use on another customer, all needle bars, grips and tubes and
needles shall be cleaned and packaged in a self-sealing autoclave bag which is dated with an
expiration date not to exceed six months, and arranged in an autoclave which is operated in
strict accordance with the autoclave manufacturer's recommendations. As the operation time
of the autoclave may vary with the type of instrument, the packaging of that item and the
arrangement of items in the autoclave, it is critical that the manufacturer's operation manual
be followed. This will assure that each item placed in the autoclave achieves the proper
temperature for sterilization. Temperature-sensitive autoclave tape, autoclave bags with a
chemical color indicator on the bag, or any other temperature-sensitive medium approved for
autoclaves by the Board of Health must be applied to each load every time the autoclave is
used. To further confirm that the autoclave is operated in a manner to assure sterility of the
processed instruments, it must be tested monthly using a biological indicator such as spore
strips or spore suspensions which are processed by a laboratory. The operator must maintain
records documenting such testing for three years. A copy of the manufacturer's
recommended procedures for the operation of the autoclave is to be available for inspection
by the Board of Health. An autoclave which has received a positive spore test must be
immediately removed from service and all instruments allegedly sterilized by that autoclave
shall not be utilized on any client. Prior to using, the operator must ensure that there is
evidence of one negative spore test. If the autoclave requires repair work, it cannot be utilized
until it has received two negative spore tests. Autoclaves must be cleaned and serviced at the
frequency recommended by the manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer's cleaning and
servicing instructions must be maintained in the body art establishment.
Pigments, colors and dyes used from stock solutions for each client must be placed in a
single-use receptacle and the receptacle and remaining solution must be discarded and
disposed of after each use.
All dyes, inks and pigments shall be from a source of supply which complies with
applicable U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulations when available. Dyes, inks and
pigments are to be used in accordance with the manufacturer's directions and are not to
be adulterated with any substance not recommended by the manufacturer.
A client must not receive body art procedures on areas which are irritated/inflamed or
which have moles, rash, broken skin, infection or any other evidence of an unhealthy
condition such as TB, influenza, HIV, impetigo, syphilis, mumps, hepatitis, sclera,
jaundice or rubella.
Licensees and operators must be able to demonstrate knowledge in anatomy and skin
diseases, infections, disease control and universal precautions.
Every body artist must wash his/her hands thoroughly with liquid antibacterial soap and water
and dry them with single-use disposable towels before and after serving each client and at
any time during the procedure when the hands may become contaminated.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 321/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(20)
(21)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(22)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(23)
(a)
(b)
(24)
The owner of a body art establishment must ensure that each licensee wears gloves and
each operator shall wear gloves in accordance with the following:
When performing body art procedures, the operator must wash his/her hands prior to
gloving;
Gloves must be disposed of after the completion of each procedure on each client; and
If gloves become torn, punctured or otherwise contaminated, the operator must remove
and dispose of the gloves, wash his/her hands with liquid soap and water and dry with a
disposable towel, and then put on a new pair of gloves before resuming the body art
procedure.
Single-use items must not be used on more than one client. After use, all single-use needles,
razors, razor blades and other sharps must be immediately disposed of in an approved
sharps disposal container in accordance with 105 CMR 480.000.
No body art procedure shall be performed until the following inspections, shavings and
preparations of the body art area have occurred:
No body piercing shall be done on skin surfaces which have any rash, pimples, boils,
infections or any other evidence of an unhealthy condition;
If the skin is to be shaved, the skin surface must first be washed with soap and warm
water. Disposable razors, for each client, shall be used for preparation of the areas to be
pierced;
Prior to piercing, the area to be pierced shall be gently scrubbed with an approved
surgical scrub material or a sterile gauze pad soaked in a germicidal preparation
registered with the Environmental Protection Agency and applied in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations;
Only medical-grade markers or ink and sterile toothpicks are to be used to identify the
areas to be pierced. Gentian violet may be utilized for marking oral piercings; and
The use of styptic pencils, alum blocks or other solid styptic to check the flow of blood is
prohibited.
All license holders must ensure that the body art establishment, operators and employees
use disinfectant solution in accordance with the manufacturer's directions. Body artists must
comply with the following requirements:
Label the disinfectant solution;
Keep the disinfectant solution covered at all times; and
Change the disinfectant solution whenever visibly cloudy or dirty.
While in the body art establishment, license holders must not engage in or allow any other
person to engage in any of the following activities:
Consuming food or beverages in any area where body art is performed (beverages of a
nonalcoholic type can be consumed or given to clients for the reason of dehydration,
lightheadedness and general comfort and small snacks may be given to diabetics whose
sugar may have dropped);
Storing food in the same area where chemical supplies are used or stored;
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 322/520
(c)
(d)
(25)
(a)
(b)
(26)
(27)
A.
B.
C.
D.
Using, consuming, serving, or in any manner possessing or distributing intoxicating
beverages or controlled substances upon its premises during the hours the facility is
open to the public and/or any body art procedures are being performed; and
Performing body art when she/he is under the influence of alcohol, narcotic drugs,
stimulants, or depressants or on any person who appears to be under the influence of
alcohol, narcotic drugs, stimulants, or depressants.
All external threaded jewelry to be used in body art procedures is to be made from one of the
following grades: 316LVM and/or surgical implant grade stainless steel AST F 138; solid
yellow or white gold which is 14K or 18K; titanium meeting ASTM TiA4V ELI, F136; niobium;
platinum; high-density, low porosity non-toxic plastics meeting FDA standards where
applicable (Tygon and PTFE); and autoclavable borosilicate glass (Pyrex). Certification of the
quality of the jewelry is to be obtained from the manufacturer/supplier and made available for
inspection. Substandard jewelry such as that which is damaged, scratched, intended for
earlobes or not expressly designed for body piercing, jewelry made of silver, gold plated or
filled or other corrosive metal or any internal threaded jewelry shall not be used. When stored
in a closed clean, dry container, jewelry stored in paper autoclave bags may be stored up to
three months and up to six months when a full plastic autoclave bag is used.
No person may perform a body art procedure on or to any person under 18 years of age
without prior written consent of the parent or court-appointed guardian of such person. The
person giving consent must be present during the procedure.
The person providing the body art procedure must retain a copy of the consent for four
years.
Artists have the right to refuse to perform body art procedures on a person less than 18
years of age.
All recipients of a body art procedure shall receive from the body artist and/or the body art
establishment both written and verbal aftercare which shall include, inter alia, circumstances
under which the client should seek medical treatment.
§ 246-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with this chapter or any section or provision hereof or any
regulation made under its authority and any person who hinders, obstructs or interferes with a
Health Officer or any of his assistants in the discharge of their duties shall, on conviction, be fined
not less than $50 or more than $300 plus the costs of their prosecution for the first offense and not
less than $200 and not more than $1,000 plus the costs of prosecution for all succeeding offenses
and in default of payment of such fines and costs, shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days.
If the violation shall be by a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association or other
legal entity, the directors of such corporations, partners of such partnership, or members of such
limited liability companies or associations, its agents and employees, with guilty knowledge of the
violation, shall also be guilty of an offense and on conviction thereof shall be punished as
aforesaid.
All fees and fines imposed or collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid to
Lancaster Township for use by the Lancaster Township.
Failure to observe any of the provisions of this chapter or failure to correct and cure any violations
within 60 days of notice is grounds for revocation of a license or denial of a renewal of a license.
Unless a license is being temporarily and immediately revoked for health reasons in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the revocation or denial of renewal, the Borough shall
give 10 days' written notice to the licensee of his violation of or his failure to observe a general
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 323/520
E.
F.
condition as set forth herein. If the licensee requests a hearing prior to the expiration of that tenday
notice period, the Board of Health shall have a hearing to determine if the revocation or
renewal denial should occur. In order to request a hearing, the licensee must do so in writing and
include with his or her written request for a hearing the sum of $50 made payable to Lancaster
Township as the fee for such hearing. The licensee may present evidence in his behalf at such
hearing. The Board of Health shall render a written decision within 45 days of the hearing. If the
licensee fails to request such a hearing, the revocation or renewal denial shall be effective upon
the expiration of the ten-day period or upon expiration of the term of the existing license, as will be
set forth in the written notice.
Any person convicted of two violations of the provisions of this chapter within any twelve-month
period shall have his license suspended for one full year and shall not be eligible for another
license until the expiration of one full year.
This chapter and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit or deny the right of
Lancaster Township or any person to such equitable or other remedies as may be otherwise
available with or without process of law.
Chapter 247. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Collector — See Ch. 72, Art. II.
Article I. Interim Assessments
[Adopted 6-9-1986 by Res. No. 1986-11]
§ 247-1. Assessment on new construction or renovations.
The Collector of Taxes is hereby authorized to make assessments of and levy interim real estate taxes
(based on the annual rate of taxation as may be set, from time to time, by the Township Supervisors)
on new construction within the Township of Lancaster and on renovations which increased the
assessed valuation of improved real property within said township.
§ 247-2. Interim assessment.
For the purposes of assessment, the aforesaid Collector of Taxes shall use the interim assessment as
determined by the Lancaster County Assessment Office and as transmitted to said Collector of Taxes
by the County of Lancaster.
Article II. Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-22-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-12]
§ 247-3. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the Township of Lancaster."
§ 247-4. Authority.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 324/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
This realty transfer tax is levied under the authority of the Tax Reform Code of 1971, as amended,
March 4, P.L. 6, No. 2, 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq., and Article XI-D, entitled "Local Real Estate Transfer
Tax," of the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer Tax Act which is a new article added by Act 77-1986
(Act of July 2, 1986, No. 77, P.L. ____) to the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer Tax Act, Act 14-1981
(Act of May 5, 1981, No. 14, P.L. 36) as amended, and the Local Tax Enabling Act, approved
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, No. 511, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. The Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer
Tax Act is codified at 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. and Article XI-D is codified at 72 P.S. § 8101-D.
§ 247-5. Definitions and word usage.
As otherwise stated, the following words shall, for purposes of this article, have the meaning herein
indicated. Words in the present tense include future tense. Words in the singular include the plural and
words in the plural include the singular.
ASSOCIATION
A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of unincorporated enterprise owned or
conducted by two or more persons.
COLLECTOR
A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust, or banking institution which is organized
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United States, or any other state,
territory, foreign country or dependency.
DOCUMENT
Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers, demises, vests, confirms or evidences
any transfer or demise of title to real estate within the township, but does not include wills,
mortgages, deeds of trust or other instruments or like character given as security for a debt and
deeds of release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the
grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has been paid or any cancellation
thereof unless the consideration is payable over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or
instruments which solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also
include a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under § 247-11 of this
article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION
A corporation of which at least 75% of its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at
least 75% of each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing, camping, skiing, show
competition or racing;
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish, cats, dogs or pets or
animals intended for use in sporting or recreational activities;
Fur farming;
Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY
Any individual, such individual's brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's
parents and grandparents, the ancestors or lineal descendants of any of the foregoing, a spouse
of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood
or legal adoption shall be treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 325/520
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
Every natural person, association, or corporation or entity of any kind. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or both, the term "person" as applied to
associations, shall include the responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE
Any lands, tenements or hereditaments within this township, including without limitation
buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper
or lower boundaries, trees, and other improvements, immovables or interests which by
custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached
machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation, trust or association
under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
REAL ESTATE COMPANY
A corporation or association which is primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling or
leasing real estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons
and which:
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or disposition of real
estate; or
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the value of its entire tangible
asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets which are freely transferable and actively traded
on an established market.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the termination of which is not
fixed or ascertained by a specific number of years, including without limitation an estate in fee
simple, life estate, or perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but which, either by reason of
the length of the term or the grant of a right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise,
consists of a group of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or possessory interest
under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest
or possessory interest in real estate in which the lessee has equity. In determining the term of
a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option to renew or extend a lease will be
exercised if the rental charge to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental
charge is established.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Lancaster.
TRANSACTION
The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for actual monetary worth, the
amount of the actual consideration therefor, paid or to be paid, including liens or other
encumbrances thereon existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof
where such liens or other encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged
against other real estate: Provided, That where such documents shall set forth a nominal
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 326/520
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set forth in or actual
consideration for the contract of sale;
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the foreclosure of a mortgage
by a judicial officer, transactions without consideration or for consideration less than the actual
monetary worth of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or
possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate of an acquired company,
value shall be the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by adjusting the
assessed value of the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio
of assessed values to market values of the taxing district in which the township is located as
established by the State Tax Equalization Board, or a commensurate part of the assessment
where the assessment includes other real estate;
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of which is not
determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary worth of such interest; or
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory agreement for the
construction of buildings, structures or other permanent improvements to real estate between
the grantor and other persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related corporation, association
or partnership and the grantee existing before or effective with the transfer.
§ 247-6. Imposition of tax.
A tax is hereby levied and imposed, for general township purposes, on every real estate transaction, at
the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by the document involved in the real estate
transaction.
The tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the document is presented for recording, within
30 days of acceptance of the document, or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
If the real estate is located partially within and partially outside the township, the tax shall be
calculated on the value of the portion within the township.
The tax imposed hereunder shall be due and payable to the collector, as a joint and several
liability, by every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for recording any
document, or in whose behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented
for recording. In the case of an acquired company, the company shall also have liability for
payment of the tax. All such persons shall also be liable for any penalties imposed under this
article.
It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed on a real estate transaction
by the township and other political subdivisions shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in
Section 8 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6908, so that if any other political subdivision
imposes a tax on real estate transactions taxed under this article, the provisions of said Section 8
shall apply.
§ 247-7. Evidence of payment.
The payment of the tax imposed hereunder shall be evidence by the collector affixing on the document
an official stamp or writing setting forth the date of payment of the tax and amount of tax paid.
§ 247-8. Exempt parties.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 327/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
The United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any of their instrumentalities, agencies or
political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment or the tax imposed by this article. The exemption
of such governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability
for the tax.
§ 247-9. Excluded transactions.
The tax imposed by § 247-6 shall not be imposed upon:
A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities, agencies or political
subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed of confirmation in
connection with condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the
property condemned to the owner of record at the time of condemnation which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year from the
date of condemnation.
A document which the township is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the
United States.
A conveyance to a township, school district or county pursuant to acquisition by the township,
school district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau sale.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or confirms a transfer previously
recorded, but which does not extend or limit existing record legal title or interest.
A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of property passed by testate or
intestate succession and held by cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were previously husband and wife
who have since been divorced, provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the final decree
in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such
grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject to
tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by testate or intestate
succession from a personal representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an ordinary trust where the transfer
of the same property would be exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named.
No such exemption shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of the
trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a beneficiary of an ordinary
trust.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to successor trustee.
A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal and agent or straw party; or
from or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax
would be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee
or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for
the benefit of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 328/520
L.
M.
N.
(1)
(2)
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a corporation or statutory
division of a nonprofit corporation, except where the township reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax imposed by this
article.
A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record in the name of the
corporation or association where the grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the association has been held
by the grantee for more than two years.
A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee of property
conveyed by the grantee to that agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee, or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority to a grantee purchasing
directly from it, but only if:
The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose of manufacturing,
fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing, research and development, transportation,
energy conservation, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real estate transferred.
A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in default in lieu of a foreclosure
or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons holding title for a religious
organization if such real estate is not being or has not been used by such transferor for
commercial purposes.
A transfer to a conservancy which possesses tax exempt status pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 and which has as its primary purpose preservation of land for
historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.
A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a family farm corporation by a
member of the same family which directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership interest in a real estate company
or family farm corporation.
A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, and assignments
thereof. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full and complete
value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty
Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 247-10. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 329/520
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Except as otherwise provided with respect to excluded transactions, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations or corporations and the
members, partners, shareholder or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this
article, corporations and associations are entities separate from their members, partners, stockholders
or shareholders.
§ 247-11. Acquired company.
A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the ownership interest in the
company, however effected, if the change does not affect the continuity of the company; and of
itself or together with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or
more of the total ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family farm corporation is an
acquired company when, because of voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family
farm corporation or when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or
transfer of assets it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation under this
article.
Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall present a declaration of
acquisition with the recorder of each county in which it holds real estate for the affixation of
documentary stamps and recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax
Declaration of Acquisition may be submitted for this purpose.
§ 247-12. Credits against tax.
Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real estate broker which property
was transferred to him within the preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other
residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to him shall
be given to him toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was transferred to the builder
within the preceding year as consideration for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied
residential property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the builder
shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due upon the transfer.
Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a credit for the amount of
tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was previously sold under a land
contract by the grantor, a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the
grantor toward the tax due upon the deed.
If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under this section, the difference
shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater than the amount or tax due, no refund or carryover
credit shall be allowed.
§ 247-13. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the collector for recording, shall set forth therein and as a
part of such document the true, full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a
statement of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing such
connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 330/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
document is not subject to tax under this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax
Statement of Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family relationship
provided the relationship is specified in the deed, instrument or writing. Documents which are not to be
recorded shall be presented to the collector and shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the
document and a statement of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if
any, why such document is not subject to tax under this article. Evidence of payment shall be affixed to
the original document and the certified copy. The certified copy and statement of value shall be filed
with the collector.
§ 247-14. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
Make, execute, deliver, accept, or present for recording or cause to be made, executed,
delivered, accepted or presented for recording any document without the full amount of tax
thereon being duly paid;
Fail to record a declaration of acquisition, as required by this article;
Fraudulently affix to any document, any forged evidence of payment; or
Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate other provisions of, this article or any rules and
regulations promulgated by the township under this article or any rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue to the extent applicable to the tax levied hereunder.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this § 247-14 shall be guilty of a summary offense.
A person who makes a false statement of value or declaration of acquisition, when he does not
believe the statement or declaration to be true, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
§ 247-15. Civil penalties.
If any tax owing under the terms of this article shall not be paid when due, 10% of the amount of
the tax shall be added and collected as an initial penalty for nonpayment or underpayment of the
tax.
In addition, if any tax owing under the terms of this article shall not be paid when due, a penalty
shall accrue on the amount of the unpaid tax at the rate of 1% per month or fractional part of a
month, on the amount of the unpaid tax, from the due date until the amount of the tax is paid in
full.
In addition, in the case of failure of any acquired company to record a declaration of acquisition, as
required by this article, unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the township that such failure is due
to reasonable cause, a penalty shall accrue at the rate of 5% per month or fractional part of a
month, on the amount of the unpaid tax, from the due date until the amount of the tax is paid in
full. This penalty shall be in addition to all other penalties, but shall not in the aggregate exceed
50% of the amount of the unpaid tax.
In addition, if any part of any underpayment of tax is due to fraud, there shall be added to the tax
an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment.
In addition, if the township files suit in order to collect the amount of any tax not paid when due
under this article in the discretion of the court, any person liable for payment of the tax shall also
be liable for reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the township in prosecution of the suit.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 331/520
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
No document upon which tax is imposed by this article shall at any time be made the basis of any
action or other legal proceeding, nor shall proof thereof be offered or received in evidence in any
court of this commonwealth, or recorded in the office of any Recorder of Deeds of any county of
this commonwealth, unless the tax imposed hereunder shall have been paid in full and evidence
of payment shall have been affixed thereto by the collector.
§ 247-16. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall be a lien against the real estate to which the document relates
and, in the case of an acquired company, the real estate owned by the acquired company. The lien
shall date from the time when the tax is due and payable and shall continue until discharged by
payment in full of the tax, together with all penalties. In order to enforce the lien, the township may
proceed under the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., or in any other
appropriate manner.
§ 247-17. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax imposed under this article shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the proceeds or any
judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation, claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale
and of the writ upon which the sale is made and the sheriff, or other officer, conducting said sale shall
pay the tax herein imposed out of the first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds
of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the
remaining tax.
§ 247-18. Collector.
As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, the Recorder of Deeds for the County of Lancaster ("Recorder")
shall be the collection agent for this tax, including any amount payable to the township based on a
redetermination of the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax, without compensation from the township.
In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is located in more than one
political subdivision, the Recorder shall not accept for recording any document unless it is
accompanied by a statement of value showing what taxes are due each political subdivision.
On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the township all local realty
transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the county, together with a report containing the
information as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission shall be paid to the county.
In accordance with Act 77-1986, any recorder of deeds who shall record any document upon
which tax is imposed under this article without payment of tax as required under this article as is
indicated in the document or accompanying statement of value shall, upon summary conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and costs of prosecution.
§ 247-19. Enforcement.
In order to determine whether the proper amount of tax has been paid, without limiting any other
rights of the township, the township shall have the right to review all documents or records relating
to any real estate transaction or any related transactions, and to take such other steps as the
township shall deem necessary or appropriate, including a review or audit of any documents or
records of any party to a real estate transaction to determine the fair market value of the real
estate or any other relevant matter as determined by the township. Upon request of the township,
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 332/520
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
and at such place and time as specified by the township, any party shall make available to the
township any documents or records requested by the township.
In the event any tax is not paid when due, the township may enforce payment of the tax, together
with all penalties, by suit in assumpsit or any other appropriate means.
§ 247-20. Regulations.
The Treasurer of this township is hereby charged with enforcement and collection of tax hereunder and
is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable regulations incident thereto.
§ 247-21. Interpretation and effect.
To the extent this article imposes a tax on a real estate transaction which is subject to the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania realty transfer tax imposed by Act 77-1986, and to the extent not
inconsistent herewith or with rules or regulations adopted by the township, this article shall be
interpreted in the same manner as Act 77-1986 and in accordance with regulations promulgated
thereunder.
The provisions of this article so far as they are the same as those of ordinances in force
immediately prior to the adoption of this article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances,
and not as new enactments.
This article is intended to supplement the realty transfer tax in effect prior to adoption of this article
by imposing a tax on real estate transactions not covered by prior ordinances and now taxable
under Act 77-1986. This article shall impose a tax on all transactions which the township is
permitted to tax under Act 77-1986 to the fullest extent permissible.
In the event this article is declared invalid, the prior ordinance or ordinances of the township
levying a realty transfer tax shall remain in full force and effect, and shall not be affected in any
way by adoption of this article.
§ 247-22. Repeal of existing ordinance or ordinances.
In no event shall this article be deemed to repeal the existing realty transfer tax ordinance or
ordinances of the township. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors of the
township that the existing ordinance or ordinances of the township shall remain in full force and effect
pursuant to Article XI-D entitled "Local Real Estate Transfer Tax," of the Pennsylvania Real Estate
Transfer Tax Act which is a new article added by Act 77-1986 (Act of July 2, 1986, No. 77, P.L.___) to
the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer Tax Act, Act 14-1981 (Act of May 5, 1981, No. 14, P.L. 36) as
amended and that all transactions taxed under said existing ordinance or ordinances shall continue to
be taxable despite the provisions of this article.
Article III. Recovery of Attorneys' Fees
[Adopted 10-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-8]
§ 247-23. Legislative intent.
By Act 1 of 1996, the General Assembly amended the Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law Act of May
16, 1923, P.L. 207, No. 153,[1] as amended, to specifically authorize inclusion of attorneys' fees
incurred in the collection of delinquent accounts as part of a municipal lien. Act 1 requires that
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 333/520
[1]
[1]
A.
municipalities by ordinance adopt a schedule of attorneys' fees. Act 1 further requires that, prior to
imposing attorneys' fees, the municipality must notify the owner of the property with the delinquent
account by certified mail of the municipality's intent to recover these fees and the manner by which
assessment of the fees may be avoided by payment of the delinquent account. It is the intention of the
Board of Supervisors in enacting this article to comply with the requirements of Act 1 of 1996.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 247-24. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings
herein indicated:
DELINQUENT ACCOUNT
Any sums due and owing to the township which have not been paid within the time required by the
township's ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations or policies including, but not limited to,
charges for trash collection, water service, removal of nuisances, or any other charge which may
lawfully be imposed by the township and for which a municipal claim may be filed.
HOURLY RATE
The hourly fee charged by the Township Solicitor to the township consistent with the ordinary and
customary charges by the Township Solicitor for similar services in the community, but in no event
shall the hourly rate exceed the rate charged by the Township Solicitor to the township when fees
are not reimbursed by or otherwise imposed upon delinquent customers to the township.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Lancaster, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP SOLICITOR
The person or law firm appointed by the Board of Supervisors to serve as legal counsel to the
township in accordance with Section 1101 of the Second Class Township Code.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 66101.
§ 247-25. Imposition of attorneys' fees for collection of delinquent
accounts.
The Board of Supervisors specifically authorizes the recovery of attorneys' fees incurred by the
township in the collection of delinquent accounts from the person or persons who are responsible for
the payment of such delinquent accounts. The Board of Supervisors authorizes the Township
Secretary or the Assistant Secretary to take all actions required by applicable law to enable the
township to recover attorneys' fees incurred from the persons responsible for this cost and to include
such attorneys' fees in municipal claims. This authorization includes, but is not limited to, sending
notification to such persons of the intention of the township to impose attorneys' fees incurred in
collection efforts upon such persons.
§ 247-26. Schedule of attorneys' fees for related services.
[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1]
All delinquent accounts and obligations which may be subject to lien pursuant to the Municipal
Claims and Tax Liens Act (the Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, as amended), or any other statute or
authority which shall permit the filing of liens or collection of municipal claims and obligations,
which accounts and obligations shall not have been paid for 30 days after a notice or invoice
showing the amount due, shall bear interest at the rate of 10% from the date of the invoice.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 334/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
C.
D.
E.
The following fees shall be charged by the Township Solicitor for each service liened against
properties and paid by delinquent account holders in connection with each delinquent and overdue
account, as defined by the statute, owed to the Township for each municipal service, including but
not limited to charges for removing trash and refuse, removing nuisances, mowing, cleaning
properties, repairs to properties, sidewalks, streets, curbing or related structures, or any other
service which may be subject to liens.
Open file, review the account, confirm ownership of property by deed only and forward a
demand letter: $200;
Prepare and file certificate of service, praecipe for entry of appearance and municipal claim,
pursuant to 53 P.S. § 1701 et seq., together with the correspondence thereon, as required:
$500;
Prepare and file a praecipe for seire facias, together with any supporting correspondence, as
required: $500;
Prepare and file a default judgment, together with any supporting correspondence, as
required: $500;
Prepare and file amended liens; writ of revival, together with supporting correspondence:
$500 (each lien);
Prepare and file writ of execution for sheriff's sale: $1,000;
Miscellaneous letters and telephone calls to mortgage holders, checking records for accurate
title information, other than simply photocopying deed per Subsection B(1); contacts with title
companies and others regarding payoff figures; checking records to obtain mortgage
information; settlement letters and documents necessary to remove liens; preparation of
proofs of claim for bankruptcy. The aforesaid and other miscellaneous services (if any) will be
billed at the hourly rate of $150 per hour, or such higher rate which shall be charged by the
Solicitor for other legal services provided to the Township.
All court costs as they shall be from time to time fixed by the Prothonotary or other office of the
court system shall also be the obligation of the property owner(s), in addition to the foregoing fees.
The Township may include such costs, fees and interest in all claims and liens filed pursuant to the
Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act (the Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, as amended) or any other
statute or authority which shall permit the filing of liens or collection of municipal claims and
obligations.
The costs, fees and interest shall apply to all accounts and obligations which are now delinquent
or which shall become delinquent in the future. Interest shall begin to run from the effective date of
this section.
§ 247-27. Recovery of additional attorneys' fees in specific
circumstances.
The services and minimum times expended by the Township Solicitor for the services set forth in
§ 247-26 of this article are based upon the experience of the Township Solicitor and upon standard
collection practices. Should the person or persons responsible for payment of a delinquent account
take action which will require the Township Solicitor to perform additional or more time consuming
services than contemplated by § 247-26, it is the intention of the township to recover all of its attorneys'
fees so incurred. Such actions include, but are not limited to, filing of counterclaims, challenging the
legal power of the township to impose and collect the fee, rate, charge or other cost or similar actions.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 335/520
[1]
A.
Article IV. Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-8]
§ 247-28. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lancaster Township Earned Income Tax
Ordinance," as amended.
§ 247-29. Definitions.
All terms defined in Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53
P.S. § 6913, shall have the meanings set forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings
set forth herein:
BUREAU (the Lancaster County Tax Collection Bureau)
An agency organized and operated by its member school districts to collect, receive, and
administer earned income taxes as authorized by resolutions of the various districts and also of
municipalities with which it may enter into agency and collection agreements.
ENABLING ACT
The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., and as
may be amended in the future.
REGULATIONS
Regulations duly adopted by the Bureau for the administration of the earned income tax. To the
extent provided by law, including but not limited to 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937, it is the intention of the
Board of Supervisors to incorporate amendments to the regulations. If a court of competent
jurisdiction prohibits such construction, it is the intention of the Board of Supervisors to incorporate
the regulations as they exist on the date of enactment of this article except as provided in § 247-
32D herein.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Lancaster, County of Lancaster, and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 247-30. Imposition of tax.
A tax for general revenue purposes, at the rate of 1%, subject to the maximum rate as permitted under
Section 8 of the Enabling Act,[1] is hereby restated and amended on earned income received and net
profits earned by individual residents of the Lancaster Township during the calendar year 2000 (or
taxpayer's fiscal year beginning in said calendar year) and during each year thereafter (on a calendar
or taxpayer fiscal year basis), without reenactment, until this article shall be repealed or the rate of tax
changed.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6908.
§ 247-31. Returns and payments by taxpayers.
Every taxpayer earning net profits or receiving earned income in the current year shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the Income Tax Officer a return thereof
(on forms, and furnishing information, prescribed by the Income Tax Officer) and pay the tax (or
balance thereof after crediting employers' withholding) due thereon.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 336/520
B.
[1]
[2]
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
A.
Further details concerning taxpayers' payment and making returns of tax levied by this article are
set forth in the regulations. If required in the regulations, taxpayers shall file a declaration of
estimated net profits and pay the tax due thereon and shall file quarterly returns of earned income
and pay the tax due thereon.
§ 247-32. Employers' collection at source.
As authorized in Section 10 of the Enabling Act,[1] Lancaster Township has entered into a joint
agreement with other political subdivisions for collection of the tax by the Bureau, and has
included in this article provision as deemed necessary for collection of the tax. Every employer
with a place of business within Lancaster Township, or within the jurisdiction of the Bureau as
defined in the regulations, is required to register, to deduct tax from earned income of employees
subject to the tax within the jurisdiction of the Bureau, to file quarterly reports and make
remittances, and to do other acts as fully set forth in Section 13(IV) of the Enabling Act.[2]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6910.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913.
Any employer who has no place of business in Lancaster Township, or within the jurisdiction of the
Bureau as defined in the regulations, but who desires, for the convenience of his employees
residing within Lancaster Township, to deduct tax hereunder from such employees' wages, shall
become subject to all obligations of timely filing of returns, reports and remittances, and of
maintaining and disclosing records, and to all interest and penalties with respect to such tax as he
may actually deduct, in all respects, and with the same incidents, as though he were a resident
employer.
Tax deducted from wages by an employer shall at all times be and remain the property of this
Lancaster Township, and shall constitute a trust fund in the employer's hands until remitted to the
Income Tax Officer; and deduction of tax from wages shall, as between the employee and
Lancaster Township, constitute payment of the tax by the employee, regardless of any insolvency
or failure to remit on the employer's part.
If and to the extent provided in the regulations, every employer who shall deduct tax from wages,
and remit it, may deduct from each such remittance a commission, not to exceed 2%, or any
lesser amount provided in the regulations, of the tax withheld. Lancaster Township expressly
authorizes the Bureau to amend the regulations to decrease or eliminate such commission.
§ 247-33. Income Tax Officer designated.
Lancaster Township hereby designates the Bureau (an unincorporated agency organized and operated
jointly by the school districts of Lancaster County) as its Income Tax Officer to perform all the duties,
be subject to all the requirements, and have all the powers prescribed by Section 13(V) of the Enabling
Act.[1] Said Bureau shall receive such compensation for its services as it and Lancaster Township may
agree from time to time. Lancaster Township expressly authorizes the Bureau to promulgate and
amend the regulations.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6913.
§ 247-34. Suit for collection of tax; interest and penalties;
incorporation of provisions.
Suits for collection of tax are hereby authorized, and interest and penalties shall be imposed, as
provided in Section 13(VII) and (VIII) of the Enabling Act.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 337/520
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
Notwithstanding prior mention in this article, for convenience, of reference only, of specific
subsections of Section 13 of the Enabling Act, all provisions of the entire Section 13 of the
Enabling Act are hereby incorporated into this article by this reference, as required by the
Enabling Act. Any provisions which any future supplements to or amendments of the Enabling Act
may require to be included in or construed to be a part of any tax on earned income or net profits,
or of the ordinance levying the same, shall automatically become a part of this article upon the
effective date of such supplement or amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
article by the Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township to the maximum extent authorized by 1
Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 247-35. Deductions; losses; exemption for persons under age
16.
Employee's unreimbursed business expenses. Business expenses are as set forth in the
regulations.
Losses. Losses are as set forth in the regulations.
Persons under 16 years of age. This Board of Supervisors finds that minors of various age groups
have traditionally, and with judicial sanction, been considered as comprising separate classes for
many legislative purposes; and that minors under the age of 16 years are for the most part
unemancipated and subject to compulsory school attendance and child labor laws, and therefore
for the most part so lacking in power to earn and to have legal control of money or property that
enforcement of reporting and collection of tax hereunder against them would yield inconsequential
amounts and would be unduly difficult, expensive, and not in the public interest; and therefore
persons under the age of 16 years are hereby exempted from all liability for tax under this article.
§ 247-36. Continuity and scope.
The tax levied by this article imposes the same tax without substantial change as imposed in
previous years, and shall be so interpreted.
This article shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or which it is beyond the legal
power of Lancaster Township to impose any tax or duty herein provided for.
§ 247-37. Effect on prior provisions.
The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as ordinances in force immediately prior to
the enactment of this article, including but not limited to a resolution passed by the Board of
Supervisors on May 11, 1970, are intended as a continuation of such resolution and not as a new
enactment. In the event that this article is declared invalid, the resolution passed May 11, 1970, and
any other ordinances or resolutions of Lancaster Township levying an earned income tax shall remain
in full force and effect and shall not be affected in any manner by enactment of this article. The
provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit
or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under
the authority of any ordinance in effect prior to the enactment of this article. Subject to the foregoing
provisions of this section, this article shall supersede, replace and repeal ordinances or resolutions
levying an earned income tax, including but not limited to the resolution passed May 11, 1970, in force
immediately prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 247-38. Effective date.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 338/520
This article shall become effective as provided by law. To the extent that this article amends imposition,
collection, or any other matter relating to the earned income tax as reenacted by this article, such
revised provisions shall become effective January 1, 2000.
Chapter 258. Vector Control
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 8-26-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-2. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 105.
Dumps and dumping — See Ch. 136.
Sewers — See Ch. 209.
Solid waste — See Ch. 222.
§ 258-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Vector Control Ordinance."
§ 258-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
A detached structure which is not used or not intended to be used for living or sleeping by human
occupants and which is located on or partially on any premises.
BREEDING AREA
Any condition which provides the necessary environment for the birth or hatching of vectors.
COLLECTION OF WATER
As considered in this chapter shall be held to be those contained in ditches, pools, ponds,
streams, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks,
shallow wells, barrels, troughs, urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, roof gutters, tanks of
flush closets, reservoirs, vessels, or other receptacles, containers, or devices of any kind, which
may hold water.
DILAPIDATED
Fallen into partial ruin or decay.
DISPOSAL
Includes the storage, collection, disposal, or handling of refuse.
EXTERMINATION
The control and elimination of vectors by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
fogging, larviciding, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal vector control elimination
methods approved by the local or state authority having such administrative authority.
GARBAGE
All animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption
of foods.
HARBORAGE
Any place where vectors can live, nest, or seek shelter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 339/520
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
OCCUPANT
Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or actually having
possession of, a dwelling unit or a rooming unit; except that in dwelling units a guest will not be
considered an occupant.
OWNER
Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
Shall have legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or
Shall have charge, care, or control of any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or
agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the
owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the
same extent as if he were the owner.
REFUSE
All solid wastes, except body wastes, and shall include garbage, ashes, and rubbish.
RUBBISH
Includes glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood, or nonputrescible solid wastes excluding,
however, cut and stacked firewood and leaves.
VECTOR
A rodent, arthropod, or insect capable of transmitting a disease or infection. Vectors shall include
but not be limited to rats, mosquitoes, cockroaches, flies, ticks, etc.
VECTOR-PROOFING
A form of construction to prevent the ingress or egress of vectors to or from a given space or
building or gaining access to food, water, or harborage. This term shall include, but not be limited
to rat-proofing, fly-proofing, mosquito-proofing, etc.
§ 258-3. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit any refuse, offal, pomace, dead
animals, decaying matter, or organic substance of any kind in or upon any private lot, building,
structure, accessory structure, premises, or in or upon any street, avenue, alley, parkway, ravine,
ditch, gutter, or into any of the waters of the commonwealth so that same shall or may afford food,
harborage, or breeding areas for rats, flies or other vectors.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to deposit or permit to accumulate in or
upon any premises, improved or vacant, or on any open lot, or alley, any lumber, boxes, barrels,
bottles, cans, glass, scrap iron, wire, metal articles, pipe, broken stone or cement, broken
crockery, broken plaster, or rubbish of any kind, unless the same may be kept in approved
covered receptacles or placed on open racks that are elevated not less than 18 inches above the
ground, and evenly piled or stacked, or disposed of as may be approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection.
It shall be unlawful to maintain a junkyard or a place for the dumping or wrecking or disassembling
of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind or for the storing or leaving of
dilapidated, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinery of any kind or of
any of the parts thereof, or for the storing, or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by
contractors or builders or by other persons which said places may afford harborage or breeding
areas for rats or other vectors.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 340/520
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
It shall be unlawful to store refuse in containers other than those which shall be made of durable,
watertight, rust-resistant material having a tight-fitting lid which must be kept on the container
when in use. These containers must be kept clean by thorough rinsing and draining as often as
necessary so as not to provide food or breeding areas for flies.
It shall be unlawful to dump, burn, bury, destroy, or otherwise dispose of refuse except at an
approved refuse disposal site.
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, or use a sewage system, privy, urinal, cesspool, or other
receptacle for human excrement so that vectors may have access to the excrementitious matter
contained therein.
It shall be unlawful to permit weeds, or similar vegetation more than six inches in height to remain
standing in any vacant lot, yard, or other place except as may be approved by the municipality.
It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit any collection of standing or flowing
water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is treated
or maintained so as effectually to prevent such breeding.
§ 258-4. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that
part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof that he occupies and
controls.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination of insects, and/or rodents, on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in
a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination
whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding, the foregoing provisions of
this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
rodent-proof or reasonable insect-proof condition, exterminations shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the
shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be
the responsibility of the owner.
§ 258-5. Vector-proofing.
Any dwelling, building, structure, accessory structure, premises or any other place may be
required to be vector-proofed when found to be providing harborage or breeding areas for rats,
flies, mosquitoes, or any other vectors.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, contractor, public utility company, plumber, or any
other person to remove and fail to restore in like condition the vector-proofing from any building,
structure or accessory structure for any purpose.
§ 258-6. Plans and specifications for private vector control
programs.
A program plan and specifications for private vector control programs may be required to be submitted
to the municipality as deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors or such township official who
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 341/520
A.
B.
C.
[1]
may from time to time be designated by the Board to administer this chapter. Said program plan shall
be submitted by the owner or agent of the property on or in which said vector control program is or will
be conducted. The program plan shall state the type of vectors to be controlled, the name of the
company contracted to carry out the program, and any and all work to be conducted in an effort to
control said vectors. If, after review of the program plan, it is found to be inadequate or incomplete,
additional information may be required as well as additional control methods.
§ 258-7. Authority to abate vector problems.
From and after passage of this chapter, the interior and exterior of all dwellings, buildings,
structures, and accessory structures, premises, collections of water, or any other places shall be
subject to inspection by agents of the township to determine full compliance with this chapter and
to determine evidence of vector infestation and the need for vector-proofing or additions or repairs
to existing vector-proofing.
Whenever it shall be determined that any dwelling, building, structure, accessory structure,
premises, collection of water, or any other place is in violation of this chapter, a notice shall be
issued setting forth the alleged violations, and advising the owner, occupant, operator, or agent
that such violations must be corrected. The time for the correction of said violations must be given
as well as the necessary methods to be employed in the correction.
Whenever said violations shall fail to be corrected within the time set forth, and an extension of
this time is not deemed to be necessary, the municipality may proceed to abate the said violations
in the manner provided by the law.
§ 258-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision(s) of this chapter shall upon conviction
before any District Justice be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $300 plus the cost of prosecution.
Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. In default of the payment of such fine and
costs, said person shall undergo imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 258-9. Repealer.
This chapter shall not repeal, except as specifically inconsistent therewith, Ordinance No. 1970-1 of
the Township of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, referred to as the "Grass and Weed Ordinance" adopted
May 11, 1970.[1] This chapter shall repeal all ordinances or parts of ordinances which conflict with the
provisions of this chapter insofar and only insofar as they are inconsistent with this chapter.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Brush, Grass and Weeds.
§ 258-10. Enforcement.
This chapter may be enforced by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster, or such
township official who may from time to time be designated to enforce this chapter, and who shall be
endowed with police powers with regard to the enforcement of this chapter.
Chapter 263. Vehicles and Traffic
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 2-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-1; amended in its entirety 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02. Subsequent amendments noted
where applicable.]
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 342/520
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Skateboards, scooters and rollerblades — See Ch. 215.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 231.
Unattended vehicles — See Ch. 270.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 263-1. Definitions and word usage.
Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or articles to which different or
additional definitions apply, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. (the Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except that in
this chapter the word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway" and shall
have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and include New Year's Day, Martin
Luther King Day, Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day
and Christmas Day.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, the
masculine shall include the feminine, and the feminine shall include the masculine.
§ 263-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as ordinances or as parts of
ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of the Township of Lancaster.
§ 263-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
The Board of Supervisors shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking
temporarily and in time of emergency:
In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish temporary traffic and/or
parking regulations.
In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited scope or duration, to restrict
or prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the Board of Supervisors and
the Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person who drives or
parks a vehicle in violation of any such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or
deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulation shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for
a violation of such nature.
§ 263-4. Experimental regulations.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, designate places upon and along the streets in
the Township where, for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 343/520
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
effective just as if they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall drive or park a vehicle
in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove,
destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any
person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set
out in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature.
The purpose of this section is to allow for test and experimental determination of the feasibility and
desirability of permanent changes in the ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
§ 263-5. Streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or specific part of a street to
vehicular traffic, and to place barriers or station police officers at each end of the closed portion,
while construction or maintenance work is underway or a special event is being conducted on the
closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
The Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic area upon any street
where construction or maintenance work is underway and to station flagmen at each end of the
restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop or is
signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
§ 263-6. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ASSEMBLAGE
A gathering of people without vehicles, which interferes with the movement of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on any street.
PROCESSION
A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or objects moving along a street in a way that
interferes with the normal movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral
caravan or military convoy.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any assemblage unless the person
organizing or conducting the assemblage first obtains a permit from the Board of Supervisors,
which shall be issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in
advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held; but in any case where a
state-designated highway is proposed to be used, the applicant shall successfully obtain
necessary permission from PennDOT. The permit shall state the place where and the date when
the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may convene and the hour by which
it shall have been completely dispersed. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate
in any assemblage unless the permit has been granted or at any time or place other than that
authorized by the permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any procession unless the person
organizing or conducting the procession first obtains a permit from the Board of Supervisors,
which shall be issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks in
advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be held; but in any case where a statedesignated
highway is proposed to be used, the applicant shall successfully obtain necessary
permission from PennDOT. The permit shall specify the date on which the procession is to be
held, the route to be followed by the procession, the hour when and place where participants may
commence to assemble and form before the procession is underway, the time when the
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 344/520
procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by which the end of the
procession shall have reached the end of the route of the procession and the procession shall
have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted or under any conditions as to time or route or otherwise
than those stated in the permit.
§ 263-7. Authority of police officers.
The police shall have authority to direct traffic on the streets in the Township, at intersections in public
and in other places where the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or this chapter applies.
Article II. Traffic Regulations
§ 263-8. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the following streets or parts thereof is hereby
established at the rate of speed indicated in said schedule. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle at a higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that street or part of a street.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Abbeyville Road 25 Entire length
Atkins Avenue 25 Entire length
Bean Hill Road 25 Entire length
Charles Road 25 Entire length
City Mill Road 25 Entire length
Columbia Avenue 35 Entire length
Conestoga Drive 25 Entire length
Cottage Avenue 25 Entire length
East Orange Street 25 Between North Broad Street and Riverside Avenue
Elm Avenue 25 From Abbeyville Road west to the cul-de-sac
Elm Avenue 25 From Abbeyville Road to Atkins Avenue
Gable Park Road 25 From Friends Lane to Cold Stream Drive
Hamilton Road 25 Entire length
Hillcrest Road 25 Entire length
Honeysuckle Lane 25 Entire length
Jackson Drive 25 From Meadowbrook Road to Columbia Avenue
Jamaica Road 25 Entire length
Judie Lane 25 Entire length
Maple Avenue 25 From South West End Avenue to Abbeyville Road
Michelle Drive 25 Entire length
Millersville Pike 40 Entire length
Montrose Avenue 25 Entire length
Nassau Road 25 Entire length
New Danville Pike 45 Entire length
North Conestoga Drive 25 From East King Street to Riverside Avenue
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 345/520
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
North President Avenue 25 Entire length
North School Lane 25 From Marietta Avenue to Hillcrest Road
Parkside Avenue 25 From East King Street to East Orange Street
Race Avenue 25 Entire length
Ranck Avenue 25 From East King Street to Ranck Mill Road
Ranck Mill Road 25 Entire length
River Drive 25 From Marietta Avenue to Hillcrest Road
River Drive 25 From Marietta Avenue to Wheatland Avenue
River Drive 25 From Marietta Pike to Jackson Drive
Riverside Avenue 25 From East Orange Street to East King Street
Riverside Avenue 25 From Ranck Mill Road to dead end
Riverside Avenue 25 From Ranck Mill Road to Jamaica Road
Rosedale Avenue 25 Entire length
Schoolhouse Road 25 Entire length
Second Lock Road 25 From New Danville Pike to Hoover Road
South West End Avenue 25 Entire length
Spencer Avenue 25 Entire length
Sterling Place 25 From Bean Hill Road to Kentshire Drive
Valley Road 25 Entire length
Wheatland Avenue 25 From River Drive to North President Avenue
Wilderness Road 25 Section II of the Windolph Landing development
Wilson Drive 25 From Columbia Avenue to Wheatland Avenue
Wilson Drive 25 From Hillcrest Road to Wheatland Avenue
§ 263-9. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the following intersections:
Intersection
Abbeyville Road, Columbia Avenue and Wilson Drive
Columbia Avenue (LR 128), Jackson Drive and Stone Mill Plaza
East King Street (State Route No. 462), City Mill Road and Ranck Avenue
East King Street (State Route No. 462) and North Conestoga Drives
Marietta Avenue and North President Avenue
Millersville Pike and Manor Shopping Center entrance
New Danville Pike, Hershey Avenue and Prince Street, also known as "Engleside"
North President Avenue and Columbia Avenue
Schoolhouse Road, Millersville Pike and Roselawn Avenue
Wabank Road and Route 741
§ 263-10. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 346/520
No person shall make a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another one-way street)
when facing a steady red signal at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Prohibited Right Turn on Red Signal Onto
Jackson Drive South Columbia Avenue
Millersville Pike East Roselawn Avenue
Millersville Pike West Schoolhouse Road
§ 263-11. Prohibited turns at intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at
any of the following intersections:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
Abbeyville Road North Left All Columbia Avenue, except from
left lane
Atkins Avenue North Left All Columbia Avenue
East King Street East Left All Into property located at 1003
East King Street
1003 East King Street — Left All Onto East King Street (exiting
from 1003 East King Street)
Millersville Pike West Right All Schoolhouse Road, except
from the right turn lane
North President Avenue Southwest Left All Buchanan Avenue, except
from left lane
Schoolhouse Road Southeast Left All Millersville Pike, except from
left lane
§ 263-12. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of
streets described below:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 263-13. One-way streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other than in
the direction established for traffic on that street:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
Atkins Avenue North From Spencer Avenue to Columbia Avenue
Elm Avenue East From Abbeyville Road to Spencer Avenue
Maple Avenue West From Atkins Avenue to Abbeyville Road
Sixth Street East From South West Avenue to the Township line
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 347/520
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
Spencer Avenue South From Columbia Avenue to Atkins Avenue
§ 263-14. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established along the following streets or parts of streets, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of
the roadway in any no-passing zone described in said schedule:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 263-15. Through streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby established as through streets, and the driver of
any vehicle, upon approaching any such street at any intersection thereof (except for such
intersections where there are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals), shall come to a
full stop or yield the right-of-way, as the case may be, before entering any such through street:
Name of Street Limits
Abbeyville Road From Columbia Avenue to Schoolhouse Road
Columbia Avenue From Rider Avenue to the western Township boundary
East King Street From Broad Street to the Conestoga River
East Orange Street From North Broad Street to Riverside Avenue
Marietta Avenue From Race Avenue to the western Township boundary
Millersville Pike From South West End Avenue and Hershey Avenue southwest to
the Millersville Borough line
Millersville Road From the Millersville Borough line to the Lancaster
Township/Pequea Township line
New Danville Pike (PA Route
324)
From Prince Street intersection to the Lancaster Township/Pequea
Township line
Riverside Avenue From East Orange Street to Route 462
Schoolhouse Road From Millersville Pike to Stonemill Road
Wabank Road From Charles Road to the Millersville Borough line
§ 263-16. (Reserved)
§ 263-17. Stop intersections.
The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through streets established by this
chapter) are hereby established as stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a
position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the second-named street in the
direction or directions indicated in said schedule. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any such
intersection upon the first-named street, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall
come to a full stop before entering any such intersection.
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 348/520
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Abbeyville Road Southwest Schoolhouse Road
Alley A East Ranck Avenue
Alley A West Broad Street
Alley B North Orange Street
Alley B South Clark Street
Alley C North Orange Street
Alley C West Alley B
Alley D East Ranck Avenue
Alley E East Cottage Avenue
Alley E East Glennwood Avenue
Alley E East Parkside Avenue
Alley E East Riverside Avenue
Alley E North Orange Street
Alley E West Cottage Avenue
Alley E West Glennwood Avenue
Alley E West Parkside Avenue
Alley F North Clark Street
Alley G East Riverside Avenue
Alley G North Ranck Mill Road
Alley H South Woods Avenue
Alley H West North President Avenue
Alley I North Wheatland Avenue
Alley I North Woods Avenue
Alley I South Columbia Avenue
Alley I South Wheatland Avenue
Alley J East Alley I
Alley J West North President Avenue
Alley K East Atkins Avenue
Alley K West Spencer Avenue
Alley L North Elwood Avenue
Alley L North Watson Avenue
Alley L South Watson Avenue
Alley M East Alley L
Alley M West South President Avenue
Alley N North Elwood Avenue
Alley N South Elm Avenue
Alley O West Rider Avenue
Alley P West Rider Avenue
Alley Q North Fifth Street
Alley Q North Sixth Street
Alley Q South Sixth Street
Alley R East South School Lane
Alley R West Abbeyville Road
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 349/520
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Alley R West South School Road
Alley S North Maple Avenue
Alley S North Spring Grove Avenue
Alley S South Hamilton Park Drive
Alley S South Maple Avenue
Alley S South Spring Grove Avenue
Alley T East Alley S
Alley T East Perry Avenue
Alley T East South School Lane
Alley T South Cheves Place
Alley T West Perry Avenue
Alley T West South School Lane
Alley U North Alley T
Alley U South South School Lane
Alley V North Spring Grove Avenue
Alley V South Hamilton Park Drive
Alley W North Hamilton Park Drive
Alley W North Spring Grove Avenue
Alley W South Hamilton Park Drive
Alley X North Maple Avenue
Alley X South Hamilton Park Drive
Alley Y East Alley X
Alley Y West Atkins Avenue
Atkins Avenue North Columbia Avenue
Atkins Avenue North Elm Avenue
Atkins Avenue North Hamilton Park Drive
Atkins Avenue Southwest Schoolhouse Road
Barton Drive Northwest Honeysuckle Lane
Bean Blossom Drive North Passey Lane
Bean Blossom Drive South Schoolhouse Road
Bean Hill Road North Wabank Road
Bean Hill Road South Second Lock Road
Belle Valley Road West Meadowcreek Lane
Bentley Lane Southwest Bentley Lane
Bentley Summit Northeast Bentley Lane
Betz Farm Drive North St. Philips Drive
Betz Farm Drive West Gable Park Road
Betz Road North City Mill Road
Betz Road South South Conestoga Drive
Big Bend Road North Passey Lane
Big Bend Road South Schoolhouse Road
Brewster Drive Southwest Hoover Road
Buchanan Avenue West North President Avenue
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 350/520
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Center Road East Wilson Drive
Center Road West Center Road (island at Wilson
Drive)
Center Road West River Drive
Chadwick Circle East Judie Lane
Charles Road North Millersville Pike
Cheves Place East Perry Avenue
Cheves Place West Abbeyville Road
City Mill Road East South Conestoga Drive
City Mill Road West East King Street
Clarendon Drive Northwest Turnbridge Drive
Clarendon Drive West Brewster Drive
Clark Street East Riverside Drive
Clark Street East and west Cottage Avenue
Clark Street East and west Parkside Avenue
Clark Street East and west Ranck Avenue
Clark Street West Broad Street
Colchester Drive East Judie Lane
Colchester Drive West Chadwick Circle
Cold Stream Drive East Gable Park Road
Conestoga Boulevard North South Conestoga Drive
Conestoga Drive East South Conestoga Drive
Conestoga Road West South Conestoga Drive
Conestoga Woods Road North Conestoga Road
Conestoga Woods Road West South Conestoga Drive
Cottage Avenue North Clark Street
Cottage Avenue North and south East Orange Street
Cottage Avenue South Clark Street
Cottage Avenue South East King Street
Crossfield Drive West Gable Park Road
Davis Drive East and west Spencer Avenue
Davis Drive North and south Spencer Avenue
Davis Drive Northwest Abbeyville Road
Davis Drive Southeast Atkins Avenue
Deep Hollow Lane North Betz Farm Drive
Dogwood Lane East Conestoga Boulevard
Drummers Lane North St. Philips Drive
East Orange Street East and west Ranck Avenue
East Orange Street West Broad Street
Edgehill Drive North Millersville Pike
Edgehill Drive Southwest Springhouse Road
Edgewood Avenue West Rider Avenue
Elm Avenue East South School Lane
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 351/520
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Elm Avenue East South West End Avenue
Elm Avenue East and west Abbeyville Road
Elm Avenue East and west Atkins Avenue
Elm Avenue East and west Rider Avenue
Elm Avenue East and west Spencer Avenue
Elmshire Drive West Kentshire Drive
Elwood Avenue East West Street
Elwood Avenue East and west Atkins Avenue
Elwood Avenue West Spencer Avenue
Fairfax Drive West Brewster Drive
Fairview Avenue Northwest Millersville Pike
Fairview Avenue Northwest and southeast Rosedale Avenue
Fawn Court North South Port Drive
Fawn Court North White Water Road
Fifth Street East and west South West End Avenue
First Street West Rider Avenue
Fourth Street East and west South West End Avenue
Gable Park Road South Wabank Road
Glenwood Avenue North Clark Street
Glenwood Avenue South East King Street
Gordon Road North Wheatland Avenue
Gordon Road South Wilson Avenue
Grafton Circle Northwest Turnbridge Drive
Grandview Avenue Northwest Millersview Pike
Grandview Avenue Northwest and southeast Penrose Avenue
Grandview Avenue South Rosedale Drive
Green Spring Circle North Millrace Drive
Grey Thorne Road South Betz Farm Drive
Grofftown Road East East Chestnut Street
Grofftown Road West Broad Street
Hamilton Park Drive East and west Atkins Avenue
Hamilton Park Drive East and west Spencer Avenue
Hamilton Park Drive West South School Lane
Hamilton Road North and south Hillcrest Road
Hamilton Road North and south Marietta Avenue
Hamilton Road North and south Valley Road
Hamilton Road West Wilson Drive
Hillcrest Road East North School Lane
Hillcrest Road East and west Wilson Drive
Hillcrest Road West River Drive
Hillside Drive East Gordon Road
Hillside Drive West Jackson Drive
Holly Lane East Conestoga Boulevard
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 352/520
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Homestead Lane East Hamilton Road
Homestead Lane West Wilson Drive
Honeysuckle Lane East Millersville Road
Hoover Road Northwest Second Lock Road
Hoover Road Southeast New Danville Pike
Jackson Drive Wheatland Avenue
Jackson Drive North Meadowbrook Road
Jackson Drive North Wheatland Avenue
Jackson Drive South Columbia Avenue
Jackson Drive South Wheatland Avenue
Jamaica Road East Cottage Avenue
Jamaica Road West Nassau Road
James Street West North President Avenue
Jennings Drive East and west Michelle Drive
Judie Lane South Wabank Road
Judie Lane (except right
turn)
West Michelle Drive
Kensington Road North and south Wyncroft Lane
Kentshire Drive Northwest Sterling Place
Landis Drive North Conestoga Boulevard
Maple Avenue East South West End Avenue
Maple Avenue East and west Abbeyville Road
Maple Avenue West Atkins Avenue
Maple Avenue West South School Lane
Maple Avenue West Spencer Avenue
Meadowbrook Road East Wilson Drive
Meadowbrook Road West River Drive
Meadowcreek Lane East Abbeyville Road
Michelle Drive North Judie Lane
Michelle Drive North Millersville Pike
Millersville Road East Water Valley Road
Mill Pond Drive North Betz Farm Drive
Millrace Drive East Rice Road
Misty Drive North and south Wyncroft Lane
Misty Drive Northwest Wabank Road
Misty Drive West Kensington Road
Montrose Avenue North Millersville Pike
Montrose Avenue Southwest Rosedale Avenue
Nassau Road North Ranck Mill Road
Nassau Road South East Orange Street
Newton Road East Hamilton Road
North Bausman Drive Edgehill Drive
North Bausman Drive South Millersville Pike
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 353/520
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
North Conestoga Drive South East King Street
North Field Drive South Wilderness Road
North Pier Drive South Rosewood Drive
North School Lane North Hillcrest Road
North School Lane North and south Marietta Pike
North School Lane North and south Wheatland Avenue
North School Lane South Columbia Avenue
North School Lane (loop) West North School Lane
Oak Lane North Hillside Drive
Orchard Lane South Hillcrest Road
Parkside Avenue North East Orange Street
Parkside Avenue South East King Street
Passey Lane South Schoolhouse Road
Passey Lane Southeast Abbeyville Road
Pennshire Drive Northwest Sterling Place
Pennshire Drive South Elmshire Drive
Penrose Avenue Northeast Grandview Avenue
Penrose Avenue Southwest Montrose Avenue
Penrose Avenue Southwest and northeast Fairview Avenue
Perry Avenue North Maple Avenue
Perry Avenue South South School Lane
Perthshire Drive Northwest Sterling Place
Perthshire Drive Southeast Elmshire Drive
Pickford Drive East Brewster Drive
Pickford Drive South Fairfax Drive
Pilgrim Drive Fresh Meadow
Pilgrim Drive Quaker Hill Road
Prangley Avenue West South West End Avenue
Quarry Lane East Hamilton Road
Quarry Lane East and west Wilson Drive
Quarry Lane West River Drive
Race Avenue South Columbia Avenue
Ranck Avenue North and south Clark Street
Ranck Avenue North and south East Orange Street
Ranck Avenue North and south Ranck Mill Road
Ranck Avenue South East King Street
Ranck Mill Road East and west Ranck Avenue
Ranck Mill Road West Grofftown Road
Rice Road North Millersville Road
Rider Avenue North Columbia Avenue
Rider Avenue North Maple Avenue
Rider Avenue North and south Elm Avenue
Rider Avenue South Maple Avenue
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 354/520
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Ridge Road East Wilson Drive
Ridge Road West River Drive
Ridgewood Drive North Millersville Pike
River Drive Wheatland Avenue
River Drive North and south Marietta Avenue
River Drive South Jackson Drive
Riverside Avenue East and west Ranck Mill Road
Riverside Avenue North Grofftown Road
Riverside Avenue South East King Street
Rock Ledge Court South Bean Hill Road
Rock Ledge Court South White Water Road
Rosedale Avenue Northeast Charles Road
Roselawn Avenue Northwest Millersville Pike
Roselawn Avenue Northwest and southeast Penrose Avenue
Roselawn Avenue Southwest Rosedale Avenue
Roselle Avenue Northwest Millersville Pike
Roselle Avenue South Rosedale Drive
Rosewood Drive East Wilderness Road
St. Joseph Street Southwest Charles Road
St. Paul Circle East Michelle Drive
St. Philips Drive East Michelle Drive
St. Philips Drive West Crossfield Drive
St. Regis Lane Oak Ridge Road
Second Lock Road North Hoover Road
Second Lock Road Northeast New Danville Pike
September Drive North School House Road
South Conestoga Drive North and south East King Street
South Conestoga Drive West Broad Street
South Port Drive East Bean Hill Road
South Port Drive North White Water Road
South Port Drive South Bean Hill Road
South President Avenue North and south Davis Drive
South President Avenue North and south Elm Avenue
South President Avenue North and south Hamilton Park Drive
South President Avenue North and south Maple Avenue
South President Avenue North and south Spring Grove Avenue
South School Lane East Alley
South School Lane North Elm Avenue
South School Lane North Spring Grove Avenue
South School Lane North and south Maple Avenue
South Woods Drive South Wabank Road
Spencer Avenue South Atkins Avenue
Spencer Avenue South Maple Avenue
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 355/520
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Spring Grove Avenue East and west Atkins Avenue
Spring Grove Avenue East and west Spencer Avenue
Spring Grove Avenue West Atkins Avenue
Springhouse Road Southeast Edgehill Drive
Spring Ridge Lane East Gable Park Road
Springside Drive South Abbeyville Road
Sterling Place Southeast Yorkshire Drive
Sterling Place Southwest Beacon Hill Road
Stockbridge Circle Northwest Turnbridge Drive
Timber Point Lane East Cold Stream Drive
Townsend Court South Betz Farm Drive
Turnbridge Drive Northwest Second Lock Road
Turnbridge Drive Northwest and southeast Brewster Drive
Valley Road East North President Avenue
Valley Road East and west North School Lane
Valley Road East and west Wilson Drive
Valley Road Southeast Valley Road (island at River Road)
Valley Road West River Drive
Watson Avenue East Spencer Avenue
Watson Avenue West South President Avenue
Westmore Way East Fairfax Drive
West Street North Columbia Avenue
West Street South Elm Avenue
West View Drive North Springside Drive
West View Drive Southeast Abbeyville Road
Wheatland Avenue Jackson Drive
Wheatland Avenue East Race Avenue
Wheatland Avenue East and west North President Avenue
Wheatland Avenue East and west Wilson Drive
Wheatland Avenue West Jackson Drive
White Water Road Northwest Wilderness Road
White Water Road Southeast Bean Hill Road
Wickford Road North Meadowbrook Road
Wickford Road South Wheatland Avenue
Wilderness Road East Bean Hill Road
Wilderness Road Southeast Rosewood Drive
Wilderness Road West Wilderness Road
Wildflower Lane Southwest New Danville Pike
Willis Lane South East King Street
Wilson Avenue East Wilson Drive
Wilson Avenue West Jackson Drive
Wilson Drive North Newton Road
Wilson Drive North and south Hillcrest Road
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 356/520
Stop Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Wilson Drive North and south Marietta Avenue
Wilson Drive North and south Wheatland Avenue
Woods Avenue East Race Avenue
Woods Avenue West North President Avenue
Yardley Green North Second Lock Road
Yardley Green South Brewster Drive
Yorkshire Drive Southeast Elmshire Drive
§ 263-18. Yield intersections.
The following described intersections (in addition to intersections with the through streets established
by this chapter) are hereby established as yield intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in
such a position upon the first-named street as to face traffic approaching the second-named street in
the direction or directions indicated. Every driver of a vehicle approaching any such intersection upon
the first-named street, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop the
vehicle and then yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the secondnamed
street so closely as to constitute a hazard during the time that the driver is moving across or
within such intersection:
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Betz Road North City Mill Road
Center Road East Center Road (island near River
Road)
Kensington Road West Wyncroft Lane
North School Lane (loop) North North School Lane
Spencer Avenue East Atkins Avenue
§ 263-19. Closing of certain streets to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle, except a passenger vehicle (but not including
any passenger vehicle drawing any trailer or towing any other vehicle), upon any of the following
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 263-20. Vehicle weight limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any commercial vehicle or other tractor, trailer or tractortrailer
combination, having a gross weight in excess of that respectively prescribed, upon any of the
following streets or bridges, except for the purpose of making local deliveries on said streets:
Name of Street or Bridge
Max. Gross Weight
(pounds) Location
Jackson Drive 10,000 From Columbia Avenue north to Wheatland
Avenue
River Drive 10,000 From Marietta Avenue to Jackson Drive
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 357/520
A.
B.
A.
Article III. Parking Regulations
§ 263-21. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual vehicle, every
vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a
violation of this article for any person to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
No person shall park a vehicle more than 12 inches away from the curb or side of the paved
roadway.
§ 263-22. Forty-eight-hour parking limit.
No vehicle shall be allowed to remain parked on any Township highway for a period longer than 48
hours.
§ 263-23. Commercial and other large vehicle parking limitations.
No truck-tractor, semitrailer, bus, truck or van having more than four wheels, motor carrier vehicle,
mobile home, house trailer, tractor-trailer or trailer designed or used to haul motorized recreational
equipment such as a boat, motorcycle, snowmobile or jet ski, or any other vehicle having an actual or
registered gross weight in excess of 9,500 pounds may be parked on any road, street, highway or
right-of-way owned or maintained by the Township of Lancaster or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
within any residentially zoned district within Lancaster Township. The definitions of those vehicles listed
in this section which are defined in the Vehicle Code, Act of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., shall apply. The districts which are residentially zoned within Lancaster
Township are R-1, R-2 and R-3. For the purpose of this section, in the event a street is bounded on
one side by a residential district and on the other by a nonresidential district, the provisions of this
section shall be appropriate and apply to that street even though the boundary line of the district is
situated in the middle of the street or on the residentially zoned side. Further, for the purpose of this
section, the term "registered gross weight" shall mean that weight shown or reflected on a certificate
and attestation relative to weight issued by the Department of Transportation, Bureau of Motor
Vehicles and Licensing.
§ 263-24. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the following streets or parts thereof, except at the angle
designated and only within the painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking
is now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked with the front
thereof nearest the curb.
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 263-25. Parking prohibited at all times; penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine as established by ordinance by the Lancaster Township Board of
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 358/520
[1]
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Supervisors and known as the "Schedule of Fees," together with costs of prosecution.[1] Such
fines and costs shall be collected in a manner provided by law for the recovery of fines and
penalties for the violation of Township ordinances; and in default of payment thereof, the violator
shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 10 days.
Editor's Note: The current Schedule of Fees is on file in the Township offices.
No person shall park a vehicle on the left-hand side of any two-way street at any time which would
result in the vehicle facing in the wrong direction against oncoming traffic.
No person shall park a vehicle in a posted bus stop zone at any time.
No person shall park a vehicle closer than 20 feet from any intersection of any road.
No person shall park a vehicle closer than 15 feet from any fire hydrant.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the following streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Abbeyville Road West From Passey Lane to School House Road
Atkins Avenue East At southeast corner 115 feet from Elm
Avenue to posted sign
Atkins Avenue East and west From Elm Street to a point 100 feet south
thereof
Atkins Avenue South From Schoolhouse Road to Spencer
Avenue
Atkins Avenue West At southwest corner 115 feet from Elm
Avenue to posted sign
Barton Drive West From Honeysuckle Lane to a point 46 feet
south thereof
Cheves Place South From Abbeyville Road to Perry Avenue
Clark Street North From Cottage Avenue to a point 49 feet
east thereof
Clark Street South From Broad Street to Bank entrance
Clark Street South From Cottage Avenue to Parkside Avenue
Clark Street South From Ranck Avenue to Broad Street
Clark Street South From Ranck Avenue to Cottage Avenue
Columbia Avenue North 20 feet east from the driveway at 1065
Columbia Avenue and posted sign
Columbia Avenue North From Race Avenue to North President
Avenue
Columbia Avenue South From Atkins Avenue to a point 73 feet west
thereof
Cottage Avenue East From East King Street to Clark Street
Cottage Avenue West From Jamaica Road to a point 40 feet
south thereof
Davis Drive North At northeast corner 30 feet from Abbeyville
Road to posted sign
Davis Drive South At southeast corner 30 feet from Abbeyville
Road to posted sign
East Orange Street North 20 feet west from the driveway at 933 East
Orange Street
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 359/520
Name of Street Side Location
East Orange Street North From Riverside Avenue to Cottage Avenue
East Orange Street South Between signs erected at 1226 East
Orange Street
East Orange Street South From Parkside Avenue to Cottage Avenue
Elm Avenue North From Abbeyville Road west to cul-de-sac
Elm Avenue South From Abbeyville Road to cul-de-sac
Elm Avenue South From Spencer Avenue to Atkins Avenue
Elmshire Drive North Entire cul-de-sac to Yorkshire Drive
Elmshire Drive Northeast At intersection with Yorkshire Drive, 100
feet south and 164 feet northeast to "No
Parking" signs
Fairview Avenue East From Penrose Avenue to Rosedale Avenue
(between signs)
Fairview Avenue West From Penrose Avenue to Rosedale Avenue
(between signs)
Fifth Street North From South West End Avenue to a point 42
feet east thereof
Fifth Street South From South West End Avenue to a point 47
feet east thereof
Grandview Avenue North From Penrose Avenue westbound 30 feet
to a posted sign "No Parking Corner To
Here"
Grandview Avenue South From Penrose Avenue westbound 30 feet
to a posted sign "No Parking Here to
Corner"
Jennings Drive East and west From Michelle Drive to Michelle Drive
Judie Lane North From Michelle Drive to Chadwick Circle
Judie Lane South From Michelle Drive to dead end
Kensington Road South From Wabank Road to a point 110 feet east
thereof
Kensington Road South From Wabank Road to Wyncroft Lane
Maple Avenue North From Abbeyville Road to a point 95 feet
east thereof
Maple Avenue North From South West End Avenue to a point 26
feet west thereof
Maple Avenue North and south Between signs erected in vicinity of
Wheatland Fire Company building
Maple Avenue South From Abbeyville Road to a point 110 feet
east thereof
Maple Avenue South From Rider Avenue to South West End
Avenue (between signs)
Maple Avenue South At southeast corner 60 feet from South
School Lane to posted sign
Michelle Drive East From St. Philips Drive to Jennings Drive
Michelle Drive West From culvert to Jennings Drive
Millersville Pike Both From West End Avenue to Grandview
Avenue
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 360/520
Name of Street Side Location
Millersville Road (SR 741) East Between any of the signs at the following
sites (as measured from the northernmost
intersection with Baron Drive): 200 feet;
400 feet; and 600 feet
Millersville Road (SR 741) West Between any of the signs at the following
sites: one sign 200 feet south of the
intersection with Honeysuckle Lane, and 2
signs at 100 feet and at 400 feet north of
the intersection with Honeysuckle Lane
Misty Drive East From Kensington Road to Wyncroft Lane
Misty Drive North From Kensington Road to a point 68 feet
west thereof
Misty Drive South At southside corner
Newton Road South 4 signs at the following sites (as measured
from the center line of Hamilton Road): 40
feet, 137 feet, 200 feet and 320 feet
North Conestoga Drive South From guardrail to end of block
North President Avenue East From Marietta Avenue to Buchanan Avenue
North President Avenue West Just north of Buchanan Avenue south to
Columbia Avenue
North President Avenue West From Columbia Avenue to a point 183 feet
north thereof
North President Avenue West From Wheatland Avenue to Columbia
Avenue
Parkside Avenue West From Clark Street to Orange Street
Passey Lane North From Schoolhouse Road to Big Bend Road
Penrose Avenue North From Fairview Avenue to Grandview
Avenue
Perthshire Drive Northeast Between Elmshire Drive and Sterling Place
Perthshire Drive Southwest Elmshire Drive northwest (approximately
110 feet) to "No Parking Here to Corner"
sign
Race Avenue North From Wheatland Avenue to a point 49 feet
from the corner of Woods Avenue
Race Avenue South From Wheatland Avenue to a point 45 feet
from the corner of Columbia Avenue
Race Avenue West From Columbia Avenue to a point 100 feet
north thereof
Ranck Avenue East From Clark Street to a point 30 feet south
thereof
Ranck Avenue East From East King Street to Clark Street
Ranck Avenue West From Clark Street to a point 125 feet south
thereof
Ranck Avenue West 200 feet from East King Street to driveway
behind 977 East King Street
Ranck Mill Road North From Riverside Avenue to a point 50 feet
west thereof
Ranck Mill Road North From Riverside Avenue to 1251 Ranck Mill
Road
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 361/520
Name of Street Side Location
Ranck Mill Road South From Ranck Avenue to Nassau Road
Ranck Mill Road South From Riverside Avenue to a point 200 feet
west thereof
Rosedale Avenue West From Roselawn Avenue to a point 97 feet
from the corner of Fairview Avenue
Roselawn Avenue North From Penrose Avenue westbound 30 feet
to a posted sign "No Parking Corner To
Here"
Roselawn Avenue South From Penrose Avenue westbound 30 feet
to a posted sign "No Parking Here To
Corner"
Roselawn Avenue South From Penrose Avenue to a point 34 feet
from the corner of Rosedale Avenue
Roselle Avenue East At northeast corner
South School Lane East At southeast corner 80 feet from Elm
Avenue to posted sign
South President Avenue West From Watson Avenue to alley
South West End Avenue West 50 feet from driveway at 616 South West
End Avenue between signs
Spring Grove Avenue South From Atkins Avenue to a point 53 feet east
thereof
Sterling Place East From Perthshire Drive north (approximately
184 feet) to "No Parking Ends" sign
Sterling Place North Perthshire Drive to Yorkshire Drive
Sterling Place Southeast From the southeast corner of Kentshire
Drive approximately 30 feet to a posted
sign "No Parking Here To Corner"
Willis Lane East At cul-de-sac
Wyncroft Lane North At northeast corner
Wyncroft Lane South From Kensington Road to Misty Drive
Yorkshire Drive East Perthshire Drive to Sterling Place
Yorkshire Drive East Starting 300 feet north of the intersection
with Sterling Place to Elmshire Drive
Yorkshire Drive North and northwest Elmshire Drive to Sterling Place
§ 263-26. Parking prohibited certain hours.
For the purposes of street cleaning and leaf collection, no person shall park a vehicle upon any of the
following streets or parts of streets during the days and hours specified:
Name of Street Side Days/Hours Location
Atkins Avenue East 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Columbia Avenue to
Hamilton Park Drive
Atkins Avenue West 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From Columbia Avenue to
Hamilton Park Drive
Atkins Avenue West Monday through Friday/7:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
From 110 feet to 150 feet
south of Maple Avenue
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 362/520
Name of Street Side Days/Hours Location
Chadwick Circle East 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From Judie Lane to Judie
Lane
Chadwick Circle West 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Judie Lane to Judie
Lane
Clark Street North 1st & 3rd Tuesday/1:00 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m.
From Broad Street to
Riverside Avenue
Clark Street South 1st & 3rd Wednesday/1:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
From Broad Street to
Riverside Avenue
Colchester Drive East 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
Judie Lane to Chadwick
Circle
Colchester Drive West 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
Judie Lane to Chadwick
Circle
Cottage Avenue East 1st & 3rd Wednesday/1:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
From Jamaica Road to East
King Street
Cottage Avenue West 1st & 3rd Tuesday/1:00 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m.
From Jamaica Road to East
King Street
East Orange Street North 1st & 3rd Wednesday/1:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
From Broad Street to
Riverside Avenue
East Orange Street North Monday through
Friday/school hours
From Ranck Avenue to
Nassau Road
East Orange Street South 1st & 3rd Tuesday/1:00 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m.
From Broad Street to
Riverside Avenue
Edgewood Avenue North 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From Rider Avenue to the
City line
Edgewood Avenue South 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Rider Avenue to the
City line
Elm Avenue North 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From Abbeyville Road to
South West End Avenue
Elm Avenue South 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Abbeyville Road to
South West End Avenue
Fifth Street North 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From City line to South West
End Avenue
Fifth Street South 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From South West End
Avenue to City line
First Street North 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Rider Avenue to the
City line
First Street South 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From Rider Avenue to the
City line
Fourth Street North 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From South West End
Avenue to 850 Fourth Street
Fourth Street South 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Common Street to
South West End Avenue
Fourth Street South 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From South West End
Avenue to 850 Fourth Street
Glenwood Avenue East 1st & 3rd Wednesday/1:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
From Clark Street to East
King Street
Glenwood Avenue West 1st & 3rd Tuesday/1:00 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m.
From Clark Street to East
King Street
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 363/520
Name of Street Side Days/Hours Location
Hamilton Park Drive North 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From South School Lane to
the school property
Hamilton Park Drive South 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From South School Lane to
the school property
Jamaica Road North 1st & 3rd Wednesday/1:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
From Nassau Road to
Riverside Avenue
Jamaica Road South 1st & 3rd Tuesday/1:00 p.m.
to 3:15 p.m.
From Nassau Road to
Riverside Avenue
Maple Avenue North 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Abbeyville Road to
South West End Avenue
Maple Avenue South 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From Abbeyville Road to
South West End Avenue
Nassau Road East 1st & 3rd Wednesday/1:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
From Ranck Mill Road to
East Orange Street
Nassau Road West 1st & 3rd Tuesday/1:00 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m.
From Ranck Mill Road to
East Orange Street
Parkside Avenue East 1st & 3rd Tuesday/1:00 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m.
From East Orange Street to
East King Street
Parkside Avenue West 1st & 3rd Wednesday/1:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
From East Orange Street to
East King Street
Perry Avenue East 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From Maple Avenue to South
School Lane
Perry Avenue West 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Maple Avenue to South
School Lane
Prangley Avenue North 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From South West End
Avenue to City line
Prangley Avenue South 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From South West End
Avenue to City line
Ranck Avenue East 1st & 3rd Wednesday/1:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
From Ranck Mill Road to
East King Street
Ranck Avenue West Monday through Friday/8:00
p.m. to 5:00 p.m.
From East Orange Street to
Ranck Mill Road
Ranck Avenue West 1st & 3rd Tuesday/1:00 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m.
From Ranck Mill Road to
East King Street
Ranck Mill Road South 1st & 3rd Wednesday/1:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
From Nassau Road to
Riverside Avenue
Rider Avenue East 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Columbia Avenue to
Maple Avenue
Rider Avenue West 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From Columbia Avenue to
Maple Avenue
Riverside Avenue East 1st & 3rd Wednesday/1:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
From East Orange Street to
East King Street
Riverside Avenue East 1st & 3rd Tuesday/1:00 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m.
From Ranck Mill Road to
Jamaica Road
Riverside Avenue West 1st & 3rd Tuesday/1:00 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m.
From East Orange Street to
East King Street
Riverside Avenue West 1st & 3rd Wednesday/1:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
From Ranck Mill Road to
Jamaica Road
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 364/520
Name of Street Side Days/Hours Location
South President Avenue East 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Watson Avenue to
Hamilton Park Drive
South President Avenue West 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From Watson Avenue to
Hamilton Park Drive
South School Lane East 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Elm Avenue to
Hamilton Park Drive
South School Lane West 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From Elm Avenue to
Hamilton Park Drive
South West End Avenue East 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From Third Street to Manor
Street
South West End Avenue West 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Elm Avenue to Manor
Street
Spencer Avenue East 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From Columbia Avenue to
Hamilton Park Drive
Spencer Avenue West 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Columbia Avenue to
Hamilton Park Drive
Spring Grove Avenue North 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From South School Lane to
Atkins Avenue
Spring Grove Avenue South 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From South School Lane to
Atkins Avenue
Watson Avenue North 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From South President
Avenue to Spencer Avenue
Watson Avenue South 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From South President
Avenue to Spencer Avenue
Woods Avenue North 1st & 3rd Tuesday/8:00 a.m.
to 11:45 a.m.
From Race Avenue to North
President Avenue
Woods Avenue South 1st & 3rd Wednesday/8:00
a.m. to 11:45 a.m.
From North President
Avenue to Race Avenue
§ 263-26.1. Stopping and standing prohibited.
Stopping and standing are prohibited at the following locations:
Street Side Between
South West End Avenue West From the southwest corner of Maple Avenue to a posted
sign approximately 20 feet southbound
§ 263-26.2. Parking prohibited in certain locations, certain days
and hours.
Parking is prohibited at the following locations, on the days and during the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Maple Avenue South side (at
Buchanan
Elementary School)
South West End
Avenue and Rider
Avenue between
posted signs
Monday-Friday,
school days,
student dropoff
zone
6:30 a.m. to 6:30
p.m.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 365/520
A.
B.
[1]
§ 263-27. Time-limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets between the hours specified, for longer than the time indicated:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
East Orange Street North 15 mins./8:30 a.m. to
3:30 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Ranck Avenue for
235 feet east
Ranck Avenue East 15 mins./8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From East Orange Street
to Ranck Mill Road
§ 263-28. Special-purpose parking zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in a loading zone, so designated by signs,
unless specifically performing the act of loading or unloading for that specific location.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, or to allow the same to remain parked, in
any signed/marked handicapped parking space or zone without displaying proof of his or her
handicapped status, such as state-issued license plate or tag.
§ 263-29. Vehicle repair or maintenance restricted.
No commercial repairing, washing, oiling or other work on vehicles shall be performed at any time on
public highways of the Township, except in the case of emergency repairs. Likewise, no
noncommercial repairs shall be made to any vehicle on the public highways of the Township of
Lancaster, except in the case of emergency repairs. The noncommercial washing, drying and waxing
of a vehicle shall not be considered a violation of this article.
§ 263-30. Penalties for parking violations.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine as established by ordinance by the Lancaster Township Board of Supervisors
and known as the "Schedule of Fees," together with costs of prosecution.[1] Such fines and costs shall
be collected in a manner provided by law for the recovery of fines and penalties for the violation of
Township ordinances; and, in default of payment thereof, the violator shall be imprisoned for a period
not exceeding 10 days.
Editor's Note: The current Schedule of Fees is on file in the Township offices.
§ 263-31. Owner responsible for nonmoving violations.
The owner of any vehicle, as determined from the vehicle registration plate, vehicle identification
number or any other reasonable means, whether or not said owner was the operator of such vehicle,
shall, nevertheless, be responsible for and liable for any penalties imposed or violations stated under
any and all sections of this article. Such responsibility shall not relieve the actual operator of such
responsibility, and all penalties may be assessed and collected from either.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 366/520
A.
B.
§ 263-32. Vehicles registered in corporate, partnership or multiple
names.
Whenever any vehicle is in violation of any section or provision of this article and such vehicle is
determined to be registered in the name of and/or owned by a corporation, the President, Vice
President, Secretary or other responsible officer of such corporation, as well as the operator
thereof, shall be absolutely liable and responsible for any penalties imposed for any violation
thereof regardless of whether or not such person was at the time the actual operator of said
vehicle.
Where any vehicle is registered in the name of a partnership, any partner shall similarly be
responsible for any violations of this article without regard to whether or not such partner was the
actual operator of the vehicle. Whenever a motor vehicle is registered jointly in the names of two
or more persons, any and all registered owners of said vehicle shall be responsible for any
violations of this article, and any and all such registered owners may be owner or operator, if the
owner is not the operator, but duplicate parties may not be collected or prosecuted therefor, and
no more than one penalty or fine shall be collected from any such owner for each violation.
Article IV. Fire Lanes
§ 263-33. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PARKING
The standing of a vehicle, except a Police or Fire Department vehicle or ambulance, whether
occupied or not, upon or within designated fire lanes otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading or in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic
signs or signals.
§ 263-34. Designation of fire lanes.
The Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township shall hereafter have the authority to designate certain
areas of both private and public property as fire lanes. Said areas shall be clearly marked and
designated as fire lanes and shall be accompanied by appropriate signs prohibiting parking in said
areas so designated. The marking and designating of said fire lanes shall be approved by an official
designated by the Board of Supervisors who, as a result of his position with the Township, shall be
qualified to determine whether the designation of said fire lanes is necessary for the promotion of
public safety and health.
§ 263-35. Obstruction of fire lanes prohibited.
The parking of motor vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles, horse-drawn carriages or otherwise obstructing
said fire lanes is hereby prohibited at all times, and the parking or obstructing of said fire lanes by
motor vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles or horse-drawn carriages is hereby deemed to be a violation of
this article, subjecting the violator to the penalties hereinafter prescribed.
§ 263-36. Fire lane penalties.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 367/520
[1]
(1)
(2)
A.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be
deemed guilty of a summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay a fine as established by ordinance
by the Lancaster Township Board of Supervisors and known as the "Schedule of Fees," together with
costs of prosecution.[1] Such fines and costs shall be collected in a manner provided by law for the
recovery of fines and penalties for the violation of Township ordinances; and in default of payment
thereof, the violator shall be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 10 days.
Editor's Note: The current Schedule of Fees is on file in the Township offices.
Article V. Immobilization of Vehicles
§ 263-37. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOOT, BOOTING or BOOTED
The act of immobilizing a motor vehicle in such a manner as to prevent its operation with a device
or by means which will cause no damage to such vehicle unless it is moved while such device is in
place or such means are employed.
UNSETTLED PARKING VIOLATION
An outstanding violation of the parking, standing or stopping regulations of the Township of
Lancaster or Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code for which a citation has been filed with a District
Justice and a summons has been issued to which either no response has been made or for which
a warrant has been issued, and including adjudicated citations where the fine and costs imposed
are unpaid.
§ 263-38. Booting of vehicle for unsettled parking violations.
A motor vehicle found parked within the Township upon any public ground at any time may, by or under
the direction of a police officer and/or parking enforcement personnel of the Township of Lancaster, be
booted if there are three or more unsettled parking violations pending against the owner of the motor
vehicle.
§ 263-39. Notice of booting.
Upon booting of such motor vehicle, the officer or employee shall cause to be placed on the vehicle, in
a conspicuous manner, notice sufficient to warn any individual that the vehicle has been immobilized,
and that any attempt to move the vehicle might result in damage to the vehicle. The notice shall also
outline the procedure for obtaining removal of the boot. As soon as practicable, the officer or employee
shall provide the owner of the booted vehicle, at his request, with a list of the prior unsettled parking
violations for which or on account of which such vehicle was booted.
§ 263-40. Boot removal; hearing.
The owner of a booted vehicle or other authorized person shall be permitted to secure release of
the vehicle upon:
Deposit of the collateral required for his or her appearance before a District Justice to answer
for each unsettled parking violation; or
Paying the amount of the fine, penalty and court costs, if any, for each unsettled parking
violation; and
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 368/520
(3)
B.
The payment of the fees as required by § 263-42 of this article.
The owner of a booted vehicle, or other authorized person, shall have the right to a postimmobilization
hearing, limited to the determination of the validity of the booting. Such hearing
must be requested within 15 days after the vehicle is booted and shall be conducted by a hearing
officer appointed by the Board of Supervisors. The hearing shall be held during normal business
hours within one business day of the demand therefor. The post-immobilization hearing will not be
determinative of or adjudicate the merits of any citation issued relative to any immobilized vehicle
but will be limited solely to whether the vehicle was properly subject to booting under the
provisions of this article.
§ 263-41. Towing and storage of vehicles.
The boot shall remain in place for 48 hours unless the owner has complied with § 263-40. If such
compliance has not occurred within 48 hours, the vehicle shall be towed or impounded. Towing and
storage fees as specified in Article VI of this chapter shall be paid, along with fees specified in § 263-
42 of this article, before the owner of such vehicle or authorized person shall be permitted to repossess
or secure the release of the vehicle. Vehicles unclaimed within 60 days of towing and storage shall be
deemed abandoned and subject to disposal as such in the manner authorized by law.
§ 263-42. Booting fee.
The owner of a booted vehicle shall be subject to a fee of $50 for such immobilization.
§ 263-43. Tampering with boot prohibited.
Any person who shall tamper with, remove or attempt to remove any device used to immobilize a
motor vehicle that has been booted pursuant to this article or who shall move or attempt to move the
vehicle booted before release of the vehicle has been officially secured shall be guilty of a summary
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $300, together
with costs of prosecution, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both.
§ 263-44. Right to hearing or trial.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to deprive any person of the constitutional right to a hearing or
trial as to the violations for which citations have been issued.
Article VI. Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 263-45. Authority to remove and impound.
Any police officer and/or parking enforcement personnel of the Township of Lancaster is authorized to
remove and/or impound or to order the removal and/or impounding of any vehicle parked on the
streets, highways or on public property of the Township in violation of any Township ordinance or of the
Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 263-46. Approved storage garages.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 369/520
A.
B.
The Board of Supervisors shall designate specified buildings or outdoor parking areas where vehicles
impounded under this article shall be taken and stored.
§ 263-47. No bond required.
No storage garage shall be required to post a bond in order to be approved as a pound.
§ 263-48. Towing and storage charges.
The owner or custodian of any vehicle removed or impounded under the provisions of this article shall
pay the standard towing and storage charges in effect in the Township at the time before the vehicle
shall be released. Payment shall be made at the office of the Township of Lancaster, which shall issue
a receipt therefor. Such payment shall be in addition to the payment of any fine levied for the violation
of any ordinance or law necessitating the towing and/or impounding.
§ 263-49. Notice of removal.
Within 24 hours from the time of the removal of any vehicle under authority granted by § 263-45, notice
of the fact that such vehicle has been impounded shall be sent by an authorized representative of the
Township to the owner of record of such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place from which
such vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding and the pound in which it shall
have been impounded.
§ 263-50. Payment of charges without protest.
The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this article shall, unless such
payment has been made under protest, be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any
right to recover the money so paid.
§ 263-51. Payment of charges under protest; refund.
If any towing and impounding charges are paid under protest, the offender shall be entitled to a
hearing before a court of record having jurisdiction. In such case, the defendant shall be
proceeded against for parking in violation of any Township ordinance or of any of the provisions of
the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), and shall
receive such notice as is provided by such Vehicle Code in other cases of summary offenses and
shall have the same rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing.
If the court of record shall find in favor of the defendant or if the alleged offender is not proceeded
against as herein provided, the Township shall refund to the alleged offender the towing and
storage charges paid under protest within five days after demand therefor.
§ 263-52. Record of impounded vehicles.
The Township of Lancaster shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall at all reasonable
times furnish the owners thereof with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
§ 263-53. Liability of owner or operator for fine or penalty.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 370/520
A.
B.
A.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not operate to relieve the owner or operator of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of any Township ordinance or of any
provision of the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, on account of which the vehicle
was removed and impounded.
§ 263-54. Restrictions upon removal.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the time of the intended removal
thereof, the owner or person for the time being in charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a
willingness and intention to remove such vehicle immediately.
§ 263-55. Retention of poundkeeper's rights.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit or change in any way any rights or remedies to
which a poundkeeper may be entitled.
Article VII. Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 263-56. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of snow and ice on the snow
emergency routes named pursuant to this article, the Board of Supervisors, in its discretion, may
declare a snow and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information on
the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Township through radio, newspaper or other
available media, and information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the
same media.
§ 263-57. Parking and driving restrictions.
For the purposes of snow removal and in an effort to make streets more passable and drivable, after
any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time during the continuance of the
emergency, for any person:
To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked anywhere on any snow
emergency route designated pursuant to this article; or
To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless that vehicle is equipped
with snow tires or chains.
§ 263-58. Snow emergency routes.
There shall be no parking, standing, etc., during any declared snow emergency.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as snow emergency routes:
Name of Street
Abbeyville Road: Schoolhouse Road to Columbia Avenue
Bean Hill Road
Jackson Drive: to River Drive
Marietta Avenue: River Drive to Race Avenue
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 371/520
B.
A.
Name of Street
North President Avenue: from Columbia Avenue to Hillcrest Road
Race Avenue: from Columbia Avenue to Buchanan Avenue
River Drive: to Hillcrest Road
Wabank Road: Millersville Road 741 to Charles Road
Wheatland: River Drive to Race Avenue
Wilson Drive: Columbia Avenue to Hillcrest Road
Woods Avenue: from Race Avenue to North President Avenue
The following culs-de-sac or dead-end roads listed are hereby designated as snow emergency
routes, and there shall be no parking, no standing, etc., during any declared emergency:
Name of Street
Barton Drive
Bentley Summit
Cold Stream Drive
Crossfield Drive
Deep Hollow Lane
Devon Drive
Drummers Lane
Elmshire Drive
Fairfax Drive
Grafton Circle
Green Spring Circle
Greythorne Road
Maple Avenue
N. Field Drive
N. Pier Drive
Pickford Drive
Rabbit Hill Lane
River Drive
Rock Ledge Court
St. Paul Circle
Spring Ridge
Stockbridge Circle
Townsend Court
Turnbridge Drive
Westmore Way
Wildflower Lane
§ 263-59. Snow emergency penalties.
If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this article, a person shall park a
motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency route,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be punishable as
provided in § 263-30 of this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 372/520
B.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
A.
If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under this article, a person shall drive
a motor vehicle upon a snow emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow
tires or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be
punishable as provided in § 263-62 of this chapter.
Article VIII. Pedestrian Regulations
§ 263-60. Traffic control signals.
At all locations in the Township of Lancaster where official traffic control signals are installed,
pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestrian control signals installed under § 263-61 of
this article, shall obey the directions of those traffic control signals as follows:
When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the roadway within a crosswalk.
When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway.
When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the roadway.
§ 263-61. Pedestrian crossing at unmarked crosswalks restricted.
Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired person authorized to direct,
control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the
following streets at the intersection with that street indicated:
Street Direction of Travel Intersection
Schoolhouse Road North, south, east or west Millersville Pike and Roselawn Avenue
Article IX. Enforcement
§ 263-62. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.), or
except as herein specified, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of this chapter, or
any supplement thereto, shall be liable for fines as established by ordinance by the Lancaster
Township Board of Supervisors and known as the "Schedule of Fees," together with penalties and
costs of prosecution.[1]
Editor's Note: The current Schedule of Fees is on file in the Township offices.
Article X. Residential Permit Parking
§ 263-63. Purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster finds and declares that it is necessary and
helpful to establish a residential permit parking zone, requiring permits for curbside parking, for the
following reasons:
To reduce parking congestion.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 373/520
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
To reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of streets in residential areas by
vehicles parked by persons not residing in the residential area.
To protect the residents of the residential areas from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to
their own residences.
To preserve the character of the residential areas as residential.
To preserve the value of properties in the residential areas.
To promote traffic safety and the safety of children and other pedestrians in these residential
districts.
To facilitate movement of traffic in the event of accidents and other disasters.
To reduce dangers arising from the blocking of fire lanes, hydrants and other facilities required by
emergency vehicles, including the ability to reach victims and transport them to health care
facilities.
To promote peace, comfort, convenience and welfare of all inhabitants of the Township.
§ 263-64. Establishment of residential parking permit zone.
The residential parking permit zone shall constitute the following:
Race Avenue between Columbia Avenue and Woods Avenue.
Wheatland Avenue between Race Avenue and President Avenue.
North side of Maple Avenue from unnamed common alley to rear of Hamilton Arms Nursing Home
to Rider Avenue.
§ 263-65. Regulation of curbside parking within the residential
parking permit zone.
Curbside parking on public streets in the residential parking permit zone for more than 30 minutes is
prohibited in the residential parking permit zone between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except on
Saturday, Sunday and holidays, unless the parked vehicle displays a residential or business parking
permit.
§ 263-66. Entitlement to residential parking permit.
A residential parking permit shall be issued only to the owner or operator of a motor vehicle who is
a resident on a street within the residential parking permit zone.
An applicant for a residential parking permit is entitled to only one residential parking permit for
each motor vehicle owned or leased by that applicant.
No more than three residential parking permits shall be issued for all the residents of any one
dwelling unit, except that only one permit may be issued per dwelling unit or efficiency unit within a
multifamily dwelling.
No more than three residential parking permits may be issued to all the residents of any one
structure or building.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 374/520
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
B.
A residential parking permit may be issued only for a vehicle bearing a valid state license plate,
registration and current inspection certificate. Should any vehicle cease to bear a valid state
license plate, registration and current inspection certificate, the residential parking permit for that
vehicle shall immediately become invalid.
No residential parking permit may be transferred to any individual other than the applicant.
No residential parking permit may be issued for an oversize vehicle, nonmotorized vehicle
including a trailer, or recreational vehicle.
No business parking permit or residential parking permit may be issued until all fines, parking
tickets, and obligations of any kind to the Township of Lancaster have been paid in full.
All prior permits must be removed from the vehicle upon receipt of a new or annually reissued
permit.
§ 263-67. Temporary business parking permit.
A person who intends to provide services to any residents at the resident's residence, or to a
building in the residential parking permit zone, shall be entitled to have the resident or owner apply
for a business parking permit.
A business parking permit shall be valid for the period during which the applicant for a business
parking permit intends to provide the services for which the application is sought, as shown on the
application for the permit, but in no case for longer than 30 days from the date when issued. A
business parking permit may be renewed in the event that the providing of services reasonably
extends for a longer period than 30 days.
No business parking permit may be issued to any resident or owner of a building in the residential
parking permit zone.
The resident (with whom the business parking permit applicant intends to provide services) shall
be considered the holder of the business parking permit and shall be responsible for the use or
misuse of the business parking permit.
The business parking permit issued by the Township shall contain the expiration date of the
business parking permit and the information required to be submitted on the application form.
§ 263-68. Application procedures.
Each property in the residential parking permit zone will receive two permit tags annually, free of
charge. Tags are transferable within the residence.
If a third tag is requested, the fee is $25, and the resident should follow the process as listed
below:
An applicant for a residential parking permit shall make an application on a form prepared by
the Township administration, providing the following information:
The name and address of the owner of the vehicle.
The name, residential address and driver's license number of the principal operator of the
vehicle.
The signature of the applicant for the residential parking permit.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 375/520
(a)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
A.
B.
C.
An applicant for a residential parking permit shall also supply the following to be photocopied
by the Township:
The applicant's current driver's license displaying an address within the residential
parking permit zone for which the permit is requested.
Annual renewal. A residential parking permit is valid for the current calendar year only. The
Township shall automatically issue two new residential parking permits valid for the calendar
year on or before the first day of January in each following year.
Business parking permit. An applicant for a business parking permit shall make an application on
a form prepared by the Township administration, providing the following information:
The name and address of the resident or owner to whom the services are to be provided.
The estimated duration of the providing of services.
The name and address of the person doing business with the resident or owner with whom
business is to be conducted.
The license plate number of the vehicle for which the business parking permit is to be issued.
The name, residential address and driver's license number of the principal operator of the
vehicle.
The make, model, registration number and license plate of the vehicle.
The signature of the applicant for the business parking permit.
No application shall be issued unless all the information required by this article has been properly
and timely provided.
§ 263-69. Requirements upon change in status.
Whenever the holder of a residential parking permit, or the vehicle for which the residential parking
permit has been issued, no longer fulfills any of the requirements for a residential parking permit
under this article, the holder must, within five days:
Notify the Township office of that fact.
Remove the residential parking permit from the vehicle.
Return the residential parking permit to the Township office.
§ 263-70. Permit fees.
Each property in the residential parking permit zone will receive two permit tags annually, free of
charge, on or before the first day of January in each following year. Tags are transferable within
the residence.
A third residential tag may be purchased for a fee of $25.
The fee for a business parking permit shall be $10 per application.
§ 263-71. Required display of permits.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 376/520
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
All parking permits shall be visible at any time that any vehicle is parked on any public street within
the residential parking permit zone.
A residential parking permit must be located on the interior rear-view mirror with the permit side
facing out.
A business parking permit shall be displayed so it is visible from either the front or rear window of
the vehicle while that vehicle is parked in the residential parking permit zone.
§ 263-72. Exemptions from permits.
The requirement of a business parking permit or residential parking permit shall not apply to any
service or delivery vehicle when used to provide services to or to make deliveries to a residence in
the residential parking permit zone, provided that the parking of the service or delivery vehicle
within the residential parking permit zone does not exceed four hours in duration on any given day.
The parking of any such vehicle within the residential parking permit zone for a longer period will
require the issuance of a business parking permit.
§ 263-73. Signs.
At least two signs shall be erected by the Township administration on each side of each block in
the residential parking permit zone.
The signs shall advise the public that curbside parking on public streets in the residential parking
permit zone for more than 30 minutes is prohibited in the residential parking permit zone between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., except on Saturday, Sunday and holidays, unless the parked
vehicle displays a residential or business parking permit.
§ 263-74. Definition.
A reference to "resident" or "residence" in this article refers to a person who occupies real estate within
the residential parking permit zone as his/her principal residence.
§ 263-75. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any violation of any of the other terms of this article, it shall be a violation of this
article for any person to:
Display a parking permit on a vehicle for which the parking permit was not issued.
Park any vehicle without a residential parking permit or business parking permit on any public
street within the residential parking permit zone for more than 30 minutes in any one day.
Falsify or forge a business parking permit or residential parking permit.
Display on any vehicle a falsified or forged business parking permit or residential parking
permit.
Duplicate or attempt to duplicate a business parking permit or residential parking permit, or to
alter either.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 377/520
(6)
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
D.
A.
Display on any vehicle a duplicate or altered residential parking permit or business parking
permit.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding, be fined not less than $50 for each violation. In default of payment in full of any fine so
imposed, any person convicted shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 10 days for each
violation.
Any person submitting false information to any police officer or any employee of the Township for
any purpose under this article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be fined
not less than $250 for each violation. In default of payment in full of any fine so imposed, any
person convicted shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 10 days for each violation.
The proper issuance of a residential parking permit or business parking permit shall not excuse
the observance of any other regulation of the Township or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Chapter 270. Vehicles, Unattended
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 5-13-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-4. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 263.
§ 270-1. Ignition lock and key removal required.
The owner or person in charge of any motor vehicle shall not permit it to stand unattended on any
street, private driveway, public or private parking lot, used or new car sales lot or any other
unattended open space which is readily accessible to any person, without having locked the
ignition of such motor vehicle and removed the ignition key from its lock.
Any police officer having jurisdiction in the Township of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, who finds a
motor vehicle left in the condition set forth in Subsection A may immediately lock such vehicle's
ignition, remove the key from the lock and deliver it to the officer in charge of any police station of
the Township of Lancaster, the Lancaster Township Municipal Building, or the official police station
of any intermunicipal police department having jurisdiction in the Township of Lancaster,
Pennsylvania. The police officer shall leave a notice of any such violation in a conspicuous place
upon said vehicle, which notice shall also state where the ignition key has been taken and held.
The registered owner of a vehicle found in violation of this article shall be prima facie responsible
for such violation.
Whoever violates any provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with the "Established
Uniform Fees" of the Township.[1]
[Amended 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-4]
Editor’s Note: The current schedule of fees, "Established Uniform Fees," is on file in the Township
offices.
§ 270-2. Parking on roadway side of unattended vehicles
prohibited.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or
parked at the edge or curb of a street.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 378/520
[1]
B.
A.
[1]
B.
Whoever violates any provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with the “Established
Uniform Fees” of the Township.[1]
[Amended 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-4]
Editor’s Note: The current schedule of fees, "Established Uniform Fees," is on file in the Township
offices.
§ 270-3. Obstruction of traffic prohibited.
No person shall park, or leave unattended, a vehicle in a traffic lane or upon any road, highway or
alley, in such a position or under such circumstances as to interfere unduly with the normal
movement of traffic or as constitutes a safety hazard.
Whoever violates any provisions of this section shall be fined in accordance with the "Established
Uniform Fees" of the Township.[1]
[Amended 6-12-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-4]
Editor’s Note: The current schedule of fees, "Established Uniform Fees," is on file in the Township
offices.
§ 270-4. Automobiles owned by corporations.
If any violation of this chapter or any other traffic ordinance of the Township of Lancaster,
Pennsylvania, is committed by the use of an automobile registered to a corporation, partnership or
association, such corporation, partnership or association shall be liable for any fine or other cost and
shall be subject to the sentence authorized by this or another traffic ordinance adopted by Lancaster
Township in the same manner as would a natural person found guilty thereof.
Chapter 276. Water
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 8-5-1955 by Res. No.
1955-5. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Sewers — See Ch. 209.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 236.
Zoning — See Ch. 280.
§ 276-1. Water rates, all metered service.
Water rates for all metered service shall be as follows: minimum quarterly charge: $6.50; for first 5,000
gallons, $0.65 per thousand gallons; for next 75,000 gallons, $0.50 per thousand gallons; for all over
80,000 gallons.
§ 276-2. Fire hydrant charge.
A charge of $1.46 per quarter is imposed on each property connected to the water line and located
within 600 airline feet of the nearest fire hydrant.
§ 276-3. Discontinuing service charge.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 379/520
[1]
A charge of $2 shall be made for shutting off service and a similar charge shall be made to restore
service.
§ 276-4. Payments.
Bills shall be rendered quarterly as of the first days of March, June, September and December of each
year. A discount of 3% shall be allowed on all bills paid on or before the 15th day of the first month of
each quarter. Bills remaining unpaid for 45 days after the first day of each quarter shall be delinquent
and the service shall be disconnected and the unpaid water rent liened against the property.
§ 276-5. Meters and connections.
The Township Supervisors shall furnish meters to all consumers and shall install a service line from the
water main to the curbline in front of each property. The property owner shall be responsible for any
damage to the meter or other water equipment, normal wear and tear excepted.
§ 276-6. Cross-connections.
No connection shall be made at any time or place between a line connected to the township water
system and any other source of water supply.
§ 276-7. Revenues.
All water revenues shall be kept separate and distinct from all other revenues in a water revenue
account and expenditures from said account shall be for the retirement of water debt, extension of
facilities and for maintenance and repairs to the water system.
Chapter 280. Zoning
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 8-20-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-04.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historical Commission — See Ch. 16.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 48.
Building construction — See Ch. 110.
Construction codes — See Ch. 126.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch. 236.
Attachment 1 - Table 12-1
Attachment 2 - Tables 12-2
Attachment 3 - Zoning Map
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 280, Zoning, adopted 2-8-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-1, as amended.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 280-101. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance."
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 380/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
§ 280-102. Purpose.
The Zoning Regulations are enacted for the following purposes:
To promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following: the public health, safety, morals, and
general welfare; coordinated and practical community development and proper density of
population; emergency management preparedness and operations, airports and national defense
facilities, the provisions of adequate light and air (clean, efficient and renewable energy), police
protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
recreational facilities, public grounds, the provision of a safe, reliable and adequate water supply
for domestic, commercial, agricultural or industrial use, and other public requirements; as well as
preservation of the natural, scenic and historic values in the environment and preservation of
forests, wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.
To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in
travel and transportation, and/or loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other
dangers.
To preserve prime agriculture and farmland considering topography, soil type and classification,
and present use.
To provide for the use of land within the municipality for residential housing of various dwelling
types encompassing all basic forms of housing, including single-family and two-family dwellings
and a reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various arrangements, mobile/manufactured
homes and mobile/manufactured home parks.
To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including population and employment
growth, and opportunities for development of a variety of residential dwelling types and
nonresidential uses.
This chapter is made in accordance with the Township's goals and strategies as set forth in the
most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended, and with
consideration for the character of the municipality, its various parts and the suitability of the
various parts for particular uses and structures.
§ 280-103. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying this chapter, the Township holds these provisions to be the minimum
requirements for promotion of the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Township. Any use
permitted subject to the regulations prescribed by the provisions of this chapter shall conform with all
regulations for the zoning district in which it is located and with all other pertinent regulations of this
chapter. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, annul, supersede or cancel any
easements, covenants, restrictions or reservations contained in deeds, or other agreements; but if this
chapter imposes more-stringent restrictions upon the use of buildings and land than are contained in
the deeds or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 280-104. Applicability.
The provisions, regulations, limitations, and restrictions of this chapter shall apply to all structures,
buildings, uses, signs, fences, walls, parking compounds, loading facilities, driveways, access drives,
and land and their accessory structures, buildings, uses and signs. Nothing in this chapter shall require
any change in plans or construction of a building for which a building permit has been issued by the
Township prior to the effective date of this chapter and which is completed within the time limits of the
permit or applicable extensions thereof.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 381/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Article II. Definitions and Terms
§ 280-200. Interpretation.
The standards and provisions of this Article II include the definitions and terms used in this chapter and
shall apply to all lands in all zoning districts unless application to specific instances is expressly stated.
In this chapter, the following rules of interpretation shall be used:
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
Words in the present tense may imply the future tense.
Words used as singular imply the plural.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders.
The word "person" includes a partnership, corporation, association, trust, estate, or any other
legally recognized entity as well as an individual.
The word "shall" is to be interpreted as mandatory; the word "may" as directory.
References to any document, official, or entity (i.e., codes, ordinances, resolutions, plans, maps,
governmental bodies, commissions, agencies, or officials) are references to Lancaster Township
documents, officials, or entities in effect at the time, unless the text indicates that another
reference is intended.
§ 280-201. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings
herein indicated. All terms not otherwise defined in this Article II or elsewhere in this chapter, the mostrecent
version of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), as amended,[1] and/or the
most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater
Management Ordinance, as amended,[2] shall have their common and ordinary meanings. Words in
the present tense include the future tense. Words in the singular include the plural, and words in the
plural include the singular.
ACCESS DRIVE
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
ACCESSORY ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM
An alternative energy system that supplies energy primarily for on-site use, except that when a
property upon which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility
company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for on-site use may be
used by the utility company. This definition shall not in any way limit or preclude those accessory
alternative energy systems conducted pursuant to and part of power purchase agreements.
ACCESSORY BUILDING
See "accessory structure," except that unroofed decks and patios shall not be considered as
accessory buildings.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT
An independent dwelling unit subordinate to and added to, created within, or detached from a
principal single-family detached dwelling.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 382/520
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
A detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal
structure, and which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal structure.
Unroofed decks and patios shall be considered as accessory structures within the meaning of this
chapter. (See also "deck" and "patio.")
ACCESSORY USE
A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or principal building
and located on the same lot with such principal use or principal building.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENT
Any one of the following areas of sales, service, or entertainment:
ADULT BOOKSTORE
Any establishment or place:
Which has a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade consisting of either:
Books, magazines or other periodicals, films or other forms of audio or visual
representation which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depiction, description or display of sexual activities or conduct or uncovered male or
female genital areas; or
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed primarily for use in
connection with sexual activities or conduct;
To which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated electronically or
mechanically controlled still- or motion-picture machines, projectors or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depiction, description or display of sexual activities or conduct or uncovered
male or female genital areas.
ADULT THEATER
Any theater, auditorium, concert hall or other place of assembly:
Presenting any form of audio or visual material, and in which a substantial portion of the
total presentation time measured over any consecutive twelve-month period is or will be
characterized by emphasis on depiction, description or display of sexual activities or
uncovered male or female genital areas; or
Featuring live performances on a regular basis which are distinguished or characterized
by emphasis on depiction, description or display of sexual activities or by exposure of
uncovered male or female genital areas for observation by patrons.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT
Any establishment or business which provides the services of massage and body
manipulation, including exercises, heat and light treatments of the body, and all forms of
physiotherapy, unless operated by a medical practitioner, chiropractor or professional physical
therapist licensed by the commonwealth. This definition does not include an athletic club,
health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage
or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service.
OTHER ADULT-ORIENTED RETAIL, COMMERCIAL SERVICE OR ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENT
Any other business or club which primarily offers its patrons or members retail goods,
commercial services, or entertainment which is characterized by an emphasis on matter or
activities relating to, depicting, describing or displaying sexual activity or conduct or
uncovered male or female genital areas.
AGRIBUSINESS
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 383/520
A.
B.
C.
Agricultural operations that involve, but are not necessarily limited to, one or more of the following
conditions:
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION (CAFO)
An agricultural operation that meets the criteria established by the Department of
Environmental Protection under authority of the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394),
known as the "Clean Streams Law."[3]
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL OPERATION (CAO)
An agricultural operation that meets the criteria established by the State Conservation
Commission in regulations under the authority of 3 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 5 (relating to nutrient
management and odor management) or in Chapter 83, Subchapter D (relating to nutrient
management).
OTHER AGRIBUSINESS
Any agricultural operation other than a CAFO or CAO, whether involving animal, animal
product, or vegetable production, which occurs within an enclosed structure exceeding 10,000
square feet.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I); includes
facilities commonly known as "riding stables" and "corrals." Agricultural operations are further
defined and regulated.
ALLEY
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II); not a local road, establishing a front
yard.
ALTERATIONS
Any interior or exterior change to a building; any renovation to a building which would change its
use or classification.
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM
Any one or more methods and facilities used in the conversion, storage, and distribution, including
electrical infrastructure, transmission lines, and other appurtenant structures and facilities, of
renewable energy sources (including but not limited to sunlight, wind, rain, tides, and geothermal
heat).
AMUSEMENT ARCADE
A commercial establishment which provides a principal use involving amusement devices and/or
games of skill or chance (e.g., pinball machines, video games, skeeball, electronic or water firing
ranges and other similar devices).
APPLICANT
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR
An establishment providing for the retail repair, maintenance, and/or reconstruction of motor
vehicles, trailers, and other similar large mechanical equipment or vehicles, including paint, body
and fender, major engine and engine part overhaul, and accessory storage.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES
An establishment providing for the retail display, sales, and/or rental of motor vehicles, trailers,
and other similar large mechanical equipment or vehicles, including accessory service, repair, and
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 384/520
A.
B.
C.
storage facilities.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE
An establishment providing for the retail servicing and/or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers,
and other similar large mechanical equipment or vehicles, including brake work, muffler work,
upholstery work, tire repair and change, inspections, oil changes and lubrication, tune-ups,
transmission work, and accessory storage.
AXIS OF A LOT
A line joining the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines. A corner lot shall have two axes, each of
which shall be defined as a line joining the midpoints of a front lot line and the opposite side lot
line. In the event that a lot line is not a straight line, the midpoint of such lot line shall be
determined as the midpoint of a straight line drawn between each terminus of such lot line. See
Figure 2-1.
AXIS OF A LOT
Figure 2-1
BABYSITTING
Any of the following types of child and/or adult day-care activities:
The temporary or occasional care of any number of children and/or adults not related to the
person giving care which takes place at the home of the person giving care.
The temporary or occasional care of any number of children and/or adults at a dwelling unit
customarily and regularly occupied by the children and/or adults as their residence.
The regular care of one, two, or three children and/or adults not related to the person giving
care which takes place at the home of the person giving care.
BANK and OTHER SIMILAR FINANCIAL INSTITUTION
An establishment in which money is kept for savings or commercial purposes, investment
purposes, supplied for loans, or exchanged, and that includes routine interactions with customers
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 385/520
and/or patrons. A bank may also provide financial counseling, planning, and services related to
money management, and includes those establishments considered savings and loans and credit
unions.
BASEMENT
That portion of a building which is completely below grade or partially below grade where the
average distance between the finished surface of the above floor and the ground level along the
perimeter of all exterior walls is less than six feet.
BASE ZONING DISTRICT
The zoning district within which a development, use, or structure is located.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT
An establishment within a residential building in which the owner offers temporary overnight
lodging accommodations and meal service, for less than 15 days in any thirty-day period, to
transient guests, visitors, or tourists for compensation; excludes "boardinghouses" and "visitor
accommodations," as defined in Article II of this chapter.
[Amended 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
BLOCK
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
BOARDINGHOUSE
An establishment operated by the owner or resident manager providing residential occupancy of a
building containing room(s) that do not meet the definition of a "dwelling unit" as defined in this
Article II of this chapter, are rented as living quarters (but not dwelling units), but that typically
provide communal kitchen/dining facilities. Boardinghouses include facilities commonly known as
"rooming houses" and "single room occupancies" but exclude "visitor accommodations," "bed-andbreakfasts,"
"group homes," "nursing homes," "retirement homes," or "personal care homes," as
defined in Article II of this chapter.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS
The Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township.
BUILDING
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended.[4] Buildings
shall include roofed porches, roofed decks, swimming pools, greenhouses, stables, garages,
roadside stands, mobile/manufactured homes, and similar structures, whether stationary or
movable, but shall exclude fences, walls, signs, awnings, unroofed decks and patios. Features
which are structurally essential and connected to the structure shall be considered as part of the
structure within the meaning of this chapter.
BUILDING AREA
The total area of the greatest outside dimensions on a horizontal plane at ground level of all
buildings on a lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended.
BUILDING LINE
A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane and a vertical plane that coincides with the
exterior surface of the principal building on any side, excluding any patios or decks. In the case of
a cantilevered or projected section of a building, except overhanging eaves, gutters and cornices,
the vertical plane will coincide with the most projected surface. All yard requirements are
measured to the building line.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 386/520
A line that is the required minimum distance from any lot line and that establishes the area within
which the principal structure must be erected or placed. Minimum front yard depth is measured
from the street right-of-way line as indicated in the zoning district regulations for each zoning
district.
CAMPGROUND
A lot or tract of ground on which may be placed tents, campers, trailers or motor homes which do
not exceed 250 square feet in floor area, where persons or families may live temporarily. For the
purpose of this definition, "temporarily" means not exceeding four continuous consecutive weeks
(i.e., every day for four consecutive weeks).
CARTWAY
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
CAR WASH
An establishment providing for the retail washing and cleaning of motor vehicles, trailers, and
other similar large mechanical equipment or vehicles.
CEMETERY
An area used or intended to be used for the burial of the deceased, including columbaria,
crematoria and mausoleums.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY
A certificate, issued by the duly authorized representative of the Township upon completion of the
construction of a new building or upon a change or conversion of the structure or use of a building,
which certifies that all requirements and regulations as provided herein, and within all other
applicable requirements, have been complied with.
CHAIRMAN
The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of Lancaster Township.
CLEAN WOOD
Natural wood that has no paint, stains, or other types of coatings and natural wood that has not
been treated with, including but not limited to, copper chromium arsenate, creosote, or
pentachlorophenol. For the purposes of this chapter, the term shall include all wood intended to be
used as fuel, including but not limited to trees, cordwood, logs, lumber, sawdust, and wood from
manufacturing processes (butt-offs, shavings, turnings, sander dust), wood pellets, slabs, bark,
chips, and waste pallets.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA
Any device used for the transmission or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager,
commercial mobile radio service or any other wireless communications signals, including, without
limitation, omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or panel antennas, owned or operated
by any person or entity licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate
such device. This definition shall not include private residence-mounted satellite dishes or
television antennas or amateur radio equipment, including, without limitation, ham or citizens'
band radio antennas.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER
A structure other than a building, such as a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower, designed
and used to support communications antennas.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 387/520
A.
B.
C.
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I), and the
most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
CONDITIONAL USE
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
CONVENIENCE STORE
Any retail sales establishment offering for sale household items, newspapers, magazines,
sandwiches, and other food and beverage products primarily for off-premises consumption. Such
establishments may include the sale of gasoline and motor vehicle washing facilities.
CONVENTIONAL RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
A residential subdivision or land development which does not comply with the open space
development criteria established in Article XV of this chapter relating to conventional residential
development, unless otherwise provided by this chapter.
DAY-CARE FACILITY
Any dwelling, building, or portion where adult day-care services or child day-care services other
than babysitting are provided, including any on-site outdoor play area. For the purposes of this
chapter, day-care facilities shall not include the care or instruction of children within places of
worship during religious services attended by adults or for periods of time less than five hours per
day when adult services are not in progress. Day-care facilities shall be further differentiated by
the following three classifications:
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME
Any premises or dwelling unit, other than the home of the child or adult, where the day-care
areas are being used as a family residence, operated for profit or not for profit, in which daycare
is provided at any one time on a regular basis to four, five, or six children or adults, who
are not relatives of the person giving care. (For differentiation, see the definition of
"babysitting.").
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME
A facility in which care is provided for more than six but fewer than 12 children or adults, at
any one time, where the day-care areas are being used as a family residence. [This definition
shall include such facilities caring for 12 children, provided that the Pennsylvania Department
of Public Welfare (PA DPW) has granted a special exception under the Department's group
day-care facility regulations.]
DAY-CARE CENTER
A facility which is licensed to provide care for seven or more children or adults at any one
time, where the child or adult care areas are not being used as a residence.
DECK
An elevated structure constructed for use as an outdoor living area. (See also "patio" and
"accessory structure.")
DEDICATION
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
DEED
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
DEED RESTRICTION
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
DENSITY
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 388/520
The number of dwelling units permitted in relation to the land area actually in use or proposed to
be used for residential purposes, exclusive of public rights-of-way, and private streets.
DEVELOPER
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved lots, including but not limited to the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of mobile/manufactured homes, streets, and other paving, and utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or
materials; and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
DRIVE-THROUGH
A structure designed for providing goods and services to drivers and patrons who remain in their
vehicles before and during the on-site activity.
DRIVEWAY
A private drive providing access between a public or private street or access drive and parking
facilities for a single unit of occupancy.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY
A building containing three or more dwelling units on one lot. See Figure 2-2.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED
A building containing three or more dwelling units, with each dwelling unit on a separate lot. See
Figure 2-3.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED
A building containing one dwelling unit, not attached to any other dwelling units. See Figure 2-4.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED
A building containing two dwelling units, with each dwelling unit on a separate lot. See Figure 2-5.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY
A building containing two dwelling units on one lot. See Figure 2-6.
DWELLING – MULTIFAMILY DIAGRAM
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 389/520
Figure 2-2
DWELLING – SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DIAGRAM
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 390/520
Figure 2-3
DWELLING – SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DIAGRAM
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 391/520
Figure 2-4
DWELLING – SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DIAGRAM
Figure 2-5
DWELLING – TWO-FAMILY DIAGRAM
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 392/520
A.
B.
Figure 2-6
DWELLING UNIT
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended. A dwelling
unit shall not be occupied by more than one family, as defined in this Article II of this chapter.
EASEMENT
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
ENGINEER
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
EROSION
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
FAMILY
Any one or more of the following:
A single individual maintaining one common household occupying a dwelling unit.
Two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal guardianship, licensed or courtappointed
foster care or legal adoption, maintaining one common household occupying a
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 393/520
C.
D.
dwelling unit.
Not more than three persons who are not related to each other by blood, marriage, legal
guardianship, licensed or court-appointed foster care, or legal adoption, occupying a dwelling
unit.
Not more than eight related or unrelated persons who are the functional equivalent of a family
in that they maintain one common household occupying a dwelling unit and who are part of a
community-based residential home which qualifies as a community living arrangement
licensed by the DPW or other appropriate federal or state agency having jurisdiction, where
the persons occupying the home are handicapped persons under the terms of the mostrecent
versions of the Fair Housing Amendments Act, as amended, and the Americans with
Disabilities Act, and where the operator of the home provides room and board, personal care,
rehabilitative services and supervision in a family environment. The presence of staff persons
in a home meeting this definition shall not disqualify the group of persons occupying the
dwelling unit as a family.
[NOTE: The Federal Fair Housing Act amendments define "handicap" as follows: "(1) a
physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's
major life activities; (2) a record of having such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as
having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or
addiction to a controlled substance as defined in Section 802 of Title 21." This definition
was subsequently adjusted by Section 512 of the Americans with Disabilities Act to
address certain situations related to substance abuse treatment.]
FLOODPLAIN-RELATED DEFINITIONS AND TERMS
See the most recent version of the Lancaster Township Floodplain Management Ordinance.[5]
[Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
FLOOR AREA, GROSS
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended.
FLOOR AREA, NET RETAIL
The sum total of all floor area space relegated to use by the customer and the retail employee to
conduct retail sales, including the display area used to indicate the variety of goods available for
customers, but not including accessory office space, storage space, and other general
administrative areas.
FORESTRY
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
FUNERAL HOME
An establishment where deceased persons are prepared for burial or cremation and where a
funeral service may also be held.
GAME ROOM
An establishment with more than two mechanical amusement devices. "Mechanical amusement
devices" shall be defined as machines designed for recreation and entertainment and shall
include, but not be limited to, pinball machines, electronic video games, pool tables, and other
amusement machines.
GARAGE, PRIVATE
An accessory building for the storage of one of more automobiles or other vehicles accessory and
incidental to the primary use of the premises; provided, however, that one commercial vehicle of
not more than one ton's capacity may be stored therein where the use of such vehicle is not
incidental to the use of the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 394/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used for servicing, repairing,
equipping, renting, selling or storing motor-driven vehicles.
GASOLINE AND SERVICE STATION
A building or lot or part thereof supplying and selling gasoline or other equivalent fuel for motor
vehicles at retail direct from pumps and storage tanks, and which may include accessory facilities
for rendering services, such as lubrication, washing, and minor repairs, and storage.
GOLF COURSE
A recreational area primarily used for playing golf, with a minimum of 2,800 yards of play in nine
holes.
GREENWAY
An open space corridor that links urban, suburban, and rural communities to natural and scenic
areas with a network of connected trails, walkways, and natural preservation areas.
GROUP HOME
A dwelling inhabited by not more than eight handicapped persons, as identified and provided for
by the Fair Housing Act and/or Americans with Disabilities Act, and complying with Subsection D
in the definition of "family." Group homes must be licensed where required by any appropriate
government agencies, and a copy of any such licenses must be delivered to the Township prior to
beginning the use. Group homes shall be subject to the same limitations and regulation by the
Township as single-family detached dwellings, except parking.
HOME OCCUPATION
An occupation or business conducted by a resident in the resident's dwelling unit or an accessory
building, as an accessory use which is incidental and clearly subordinate to the residential use and
does not change the residential character thereof. For the purpose of this chapter, a home
occupation shall not include day-care facilities, which are regulated as a separate use.
HOME OCCUPATION, MINOR
A home occupation which:
Has no exterior evidence of the home occupation;
Does not generate traffic in excess of 20 trips in 24 hours in addition to trips generated by
the residence (A "trip" is a vehicle traveling in one direction to or from a source. In other
words, 20 trips equals 10 round trips.);
Does not create a need for parking beyond normal dwelling needs; and
Is operated by and employs family members residing on the premises of the home
occupation.
HOME OCCUPATION, MAJOR
A home occupation which:
Has no exterior evidence of the home occupation, with the exception of signs permitted
by Article XII of this chapter relating to sign regulations and Article XV of this chapter
relating to performance regulations;
Is conducted within a single-family dwelling, including a single-family detached dwelling,
a single-family semidetached dwelling, or a single-family attached dwelling;
Meets the combined parking needs of both the dwelling and home occupation; and
Involves or employs no more than one person who is not a family member residing on
the premises in the operation of the home occupation.
HOSPITAL
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 395/520
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended. A hospital
shall be licensed by the Department of Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a
hospital.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA)
A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (areas) shall
include, but are not limited to: roofs, additional indoor living spaces, patios, garages, storage
sheds and similar structures, and any new streets, access drives, driveways, and sidewalks.
Decks, parking compounds, driveways, and access drives are not counted as impervious areas if
they do not prevent infiltration. Any surface area proposed to initially be gravel or crushed stone
shall be assumed to be impervious, unless designed as an infiltration BMP. This term shall also
include impervious material.
IMPROVEMENTS
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
INFILTRATION BMP
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
JUNK
Includes scrap, copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, appliances, waste
iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material, including wrecked, scrapped,
ruined, dismantled or junked motor vehicles or parts thereof.
JUNKYARD
Any area and/or structure used primarily for the collecting, storage and/or sale of those items
defined under "junk."
KENNEL
An establishment in which dogs or other domesticated animals are housed, boarded, bred, or
reared on a commercial basis.
LABORATORY FOR INDUSTRIAL OR SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
An establishment which carries on investigations, testing, and experimentation in the natural,
physical, technical, or social sciences, or engineering and development as an extension of such
investigation, with the objective of creating end products.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I), and the
most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater
Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
LANDOWNER
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL
For purposes of this chapter relating to the number of full-time-equivalent licensed medical
professionals for medical clinics and medical offices, this term shall include those individuals who
are authorized by law to examine, diagnose, and treat patients, including physicians, dentists,
opticians, psychologists, and other similar medical and dental professionals. This term shall not
include nurses other medical support and/or administrative support staff.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 396/520
LIVESTOCK
Large animals and/or farm animals, including, but not limited to, the following: horses, ponies,
donkeys, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, and poultry.
LOT
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I). A "lot"
shall include one or more contiguous pieces, parcels, or plots of land of record all under the same
ownership.
LOT AREA
The area contained within the lot lines of the individual parcels of land, excluding space within any
street or ultimate right-of-way, but including the area of any easement. Lot area shall be measured
to the legal right-of-way line of the street.
LOT, CORNER
A lot abutting two or more street rights-of-way at their intersection, in which the average center
lines of such roads along the lot frontage of the lot form an interior angle of less than 135°. See
Figure 2-7.
LOT COVERAGE
That portion or percentage of the lot area covered by impervious surfaces and/or materials.
LOT DEPTH
The average distance between the street right-of-way line and the rear lot line, measured
perpendicular or radial to the street right-of-way line. Lot depth shall be measured to the legal
right-of-way line of the street. In the case of a double-frontage lot, such distance shall be
measured from each street right-of-way. In the case of a flag lot, see Article XVI of this chapter
relating to flag lots. In the case of a corner lot, such distance shall be measured from each street
right-of-way to each side lot line and as otherwise provided herein in this definition above. See
Figure 2-7.
LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE
A lot which is not a corner lot and abuts two or more streets, with possible vehicular access to
both streets. See Figure 2-7.
LOT, FLAG
A lot, created by a subdivision, whose frontage ("pole") does not satisfy the minimum lot width
requirements for the applicable zoning district but that does have sufficient lot width away from the
lot's frontage ("flag"). Access to the "flag" portion of the lot from a public street right-of-way or an
approved private street right-of-way is provided by means of a long, narrow access strip ("pole")
which contains a driveway located between abutting lots. See Figure 2-7.
LOT FRONTAGE
Distance measured along the front lot line. When a lot fronts on a curved street, the lot frontage
shall be determined by utilizing the arc length. See Figure 2-7.
LOT TYPE DIAGRAM
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 397/520
Figure 2-7
LOT, INTERIOR
A lot which is not a corner lot. See Figure 2-7.
LOT LINE
A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another lot or from a legal right-of-way line
for a public street or private street. See Figure 2-8.
LOT LINE, COMMON
A side lot line that coincides with the line created by the shared party wall between two singlefamily
semidetached dwellings or two or more single-family attached dwellings.
LOT LINE, FRONT
A lot line separating the front of the lot from the street, measured from the right-of-way. In the case
of a corner lot or double-frontage lot, all lot lines which abut a street shall be front lot lines. In the
case of a flag lot, see Article XVI of this chapter relating to flag lots. In the case of a reversefrontage
lot, see the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land
Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II). See Figure 2-8.
LOT LINE MARKER
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
LOT LINE, REAR
A lot line which does not intersect a front lot line and is most distant from, and most nearly parallel
to, a front lot line. In the case of a corner lot, corner lots shall not have a rear lot line. For the
purposes of this chapter, where the side lot lines of an interior lot meet in a point, the rear lot line
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 398/520
shall be assumed to be a line not less than 10 feet long drawn within the lot between the two side
lot lines, which is equidistant to the front lot line. In the case of a flag lot, see Article XVI of this
chapter relating to flag lots. In the case of a reverse-frontage lot, see the most-recent version of
the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance,
as amended (Article II). See Figure 2-8.
LOT LINE, SIDE
Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line. In the case of a corner lot, all lot lines which do not
abut a street shall be side lot lines. In the case of a flag lot, see Article XVI of this chapter relating
to flag lots. In the case of a reverse-frontage lot, see the most-recent version of the Lancaster
Township Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended
(Article II). See Figure 2-8.
LOT LINE AND YARD DIAGRAM
Figure 2-8
LOT, REVERSE-FRONTAGE
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II). See Figure 2-7.
LOT WIDTH
In the case of an interior lot, the distance between the side lot lines. In the case of a corner lot, "lot
width" shall mean the distance between each front lot line and its opposite side lot line. Such
distance shall be measured along a straight line which is at right angles to the axis of a lot. When
a lot abuts on a curved street, the width shall be determined by utilizing the arc length. In the case
of a flag lot, see Article XVI of this chapter relating to flag lots. In the case of a reverse-frontage
lot, see the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II). See Figure 2-7.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
MANUFACTURING
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 399/520
A function or a use involving either the processing, conversion or production of materials, goods,
or products.
MEDICAL CLINIC
An establishment where three or more full-time-equivalent licensed medical professionals examine
and treat patients on an outpatient basis; and includes a variety of other types of medical service
uses, including but not limited to medical and dental laboratories, specialized clinics, outpatient
care facilities, blood banks, and oxygen and miscellaneous types of medical services. This use
shall not include overnight accommodation of patients. This use shall also include those
establishments commonly known as ambulatory surgical, urgent, and emergency centers, without
overnight accommodations.
MEDICAL OFFICE
An office where not more than two full-time-equivalent licensed medical professionals examine
and treat patients on an outpatient basis. This use shall not include overnight accommodation of
patients.
MINERALS
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended ("mobile home,"
Article I).
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME LOT
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended ("mobile home lot,"
Article I).
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended ("mobile home
park," Article I).
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME STAND
That part of a mobile/manufactured home lot which is being reserved for the placement of the
mobile/manufactured home.
MUNICIPAL
Pertaining to a local government unit or other similar government unit.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC)
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended.[6]
MUNICIPAL USE
Any establishment, use, facility, and/or structure that is owned and/or operated by Lancaster
Township, its municipal authorities, and/or authorized agents, including the School District of
Lancaster.
NONCOMMERCIAL KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK
An accessory use, which is clearly secondary to the principal single-family detached dwelling, in
which livestock are kept exclusively by the residents of the site, and which is not contained upon a
farm nor part of an agricultural operation.
NONCONFORMING LOT
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 400/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
NONCONFORMING USE
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
NON-PHASE-2 OUTDOOR FURNACE
An outdoor furnace that has not been certified or qualified by the EPA as meeting a particulate
matter emission limit of 0.32 pound per million British thermal units (Btu's) output or power and is
labeled accordingly.
NONPROFIT PUBLIC FACILITY
An organization or agency which is open and available for use by the general public, which is
operated by a federal, state, or local governmental body or subdivision or agency thereof, or by a
nonprofit corporation authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to which
contributions are tax-deductible for federal income tax purposes, such as libraries and museums.
NURSING HOME
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended. A nursing
home shall be licensed by the Department of Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a
nursing home.
OFFICE
A building or space within a building used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession,
service, industry, or government.
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT
A residential subdivision development in which a portion of the total tract of land is designated as
open space area, while greater flexibility and innovation in lot designs and building arrangements
are provided for a more-efficient development pattern on that portion of the tract most suitable for
development.
ORDINANCE
The most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
OUTDOOR FURNACE
A fuel-burning device:
Designed to burn clean wood, coal, natural gas, kerosene, propane, or domestic heating
oil, provided that such fuels comply with all applicable sulfur limits and are used as
starters or supplemental fuels for dual-fired outdoor furnaces, and other types of fuel
approved in writing by the DEP upon receipt of a written request;
That the manufacturer specifies for outdoor installation or for installation in structures not
normally intended for habitation by humans or domestic animals, including structures
such as garages and sheds; and
Which heats building space and/or water through the distribution, typically through pipes,
of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or a mixture of water and antifreeze.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term shall also include outdoor wood-fired boilers,
outdoor wood-fired furnaces, outdoor wood-burning appliances, or outdoor hydronic heaters,
water stoves, etc.
PARCEL
See "lot."
PARKING ACCESS AISLE
The traveled way of a parking compound through which automobiles and other similar motor
vehicles enter and depart parking spaces.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 401/520
PARKING COMPOUND
A common, paved (improved and stabilized) area (other than a public or private street, access
drive, or driveway) used exclusively for parking of vehicles. This term shall also include related
parking access aisles.
PATIO
An area consisting of natural or man-made material which is constructed at or near grade level
and intended for use as an outdoor living area. (See also "deck" and "accessory structure.")
PERMITTED USE
Any use specifically allowed by right in a particular zoning district.
PERSONAL CARE HOME
A structure situated on a lot of three acres or more in which food, shelter, personal assistance or
supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours for more than three adults
who are not relatives of the operator and who require assistance or supervision in matters of
dressing, bathing, diet or medication prescribed for self-administration but do not require
hospitalization or care in a skilled nursing or intermediate care facility, as licensed and regulated
by the Pennsylvania Department of Health (PA DH).
PERVIOUS SURFACE (PERVIOUS AREA)
Any surface (area) not defined as impervious. This term shall also include pervious material.
PHASE 2 OUTDOOR FURNACE
An outdoor furnace that has been certified or qualified by the EPA as meeting a particulate matter
emission limit of 0.32 pound per million Btu output and is labeled accordingly. Phase 2 outdoor
furnace models will be identified with a white hang tag.
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY FOR WORSHIP/EDUCATION
An establishment wherein persons regularly assemble for: religious worship and which is
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship; and/or basic
education or instruction services and which is maintained and controlled by a body organized to
sustain basic education or instruction. It includes a synagogue, temple, mosque, or other such
place for worship and religious activities, as well as an elementary school, intermediate school,
junior high school, and high school.
PLAN
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
PLANNING COMMISSION
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I); the
Planning Commission of Lancaster Township.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING
See "principal structure."
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE
The main, primary, or predominant structure on a given lot, tract, or parcel.
PRINCIPAL USE
The main, primary, or predominant use of a property or structure.
PRIVATE CLUB
An organization catering exclusively to members and their guests; or premises or buildings for a
social, recreational, and administrative purposes which are not conducted for profit, provided there
are not conducted any vending stands, merchandising or commercial activities except as required
for the membership of such club. Clubs shall include but not be limited to service and political
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 402/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
organizations as well as social and athletic clubs. Private clubs shall not include adult-oriented
establishments, as defined herein.
PROCESSING
A function or use involving the cleaning, sorting, sizing, packaging, or any combination thereof, of
products.
PUBLIC HEARING
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
PUBLIC UTILITIES
Use or expansion thereof which is operated, owned or maintained by a public utility corporation,
municipality or municipal authority or which is privately owned and approved by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission (PA PUC).
QUARRY
An establishment on a site involving removal from the surface or beneath the surface of the land
of bulk mineral resources using significant machinery. This use also includes accessory stockpiling
and processing of mineral resources. The routine movement of and replacement of topsoil during
construction shall not by itself be considered to be a quarry.
RADIO/TELEVISION BROADCASTING STUDIO/STATION
An establishment engaged in operating broadcast studios and facilities for over-the-air or satellite
delivery of radio and television programs.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, COMMERCIAL
A facility operated as a business open to the public for the purpose of public recreation or
entertainment, including but not limited to bowling alleys, swimming pools, health clubs, miniature
golf courses, etc. This does not include adult-oriented establishments or amusement arcades, as
defined herein.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, NONPROFIT PUBLIC
A nonprofit public facility open to the public for the purpose of public recreation or entertainment,
including but not limited to bowling alleys, swimming pools, health clubs, miniature golf courses,
etc. This does not include adult-oriented establishments or amusement arcades, as defined
herein.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is:
Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal projections;
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
RESIDENTIAL INFILL DEVELOPMENT
A residential development involving the subdivision of land which is designed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter to yield the same general character and dimensions of adjacent,
lawfully existing, nonconforming lots and structures. Residential infill development is a method of
allowing residential growth which is consistent with nonconforming neighborhoods which existed
prior to the effective date of this chapter.
RESTAURANT
An establishment where food is prepared and sold for on- and off-premises consumption. In those
establishments where alcohol is sold, a restaurant is further defined as having total annual food
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 403/520
sales for on-premises consumption greater than 20% of the combined gross sales of the
establishment.
RETAIL SALES/RETAIL SERVICES
An establishment in which the primary activity involves the display and retail sale and/or rental of
goods and products to the general public, and/or providing personal service to the general public.
This term shall not include adult-oriented establishments, as defined herein.
RETIREMENT HOME
Facilities designated for housing, boarding, and dining, associated with some level of personal
care and other related assistance, for the elderly who are unable to fully care for themselves
and/or do not desire to live independently.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
RUNOFF
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
SETBACK
The distance between the building line and any lot line.
SETBACK LINE
See "building setback line."
SHOPPING CENTER, COMMUNITY
A group of two or more businesses involved in retail sales/services, offices, restaurants, and other
similar uses permitted within the applicable zoning district, located either within a coordinated
grouping of buildings which may be joined together by an open or closed pedestrian mall or within
a single building, and with shared parking.
SHOPPING CENTER, NEIGHBORHOOD
A group of two or more businesses involved in retail sales/services, offices, and other similar uses
permitted within the applicable zoning district, that meet the daily and convenience-related needs
such as food, hardware, drugs, and personal services, located within a single building, and with
shared parking.
SIGHT DISTANCE
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
SIGN-RELATED DEFINITIONS AND TERMS
See Article XII of this chapter relating to sign regulations.
SOCIAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT
An organization offering aid to persons requiring assistance for psychological problems,
employment opportunities, health and physical ailments, learning disabilities, and other
circumstances.
SOLAR ENERGY PRODUCTION
A solar energy system that supplies energy primarily for off-site/off-premises use.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM
An alternative energy system which includes any solar collector consisting of one or more cell(s),
panel(s), or array(s) designed to collect and convert solar power into another form of energy, such
as electricity or heat, and other structures and buildings used in the conversion, storage, and
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 404/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
distribution, including electrical infrastructure, transmission lines, and other appurtenant structures
and facilities.
SOLID WASTE LANDFILL
An area where municipal solid waste and similar materials are deposited on land, compacted,
covered with soil and then compacted again, and which has a permit from the DEP to operate as a
sanitary landfill.
SPARK ARRESTER
A device (located at the top of a chimney) to prevent sparks, embers or other ignited material
above a given size from begin expelled to the atmosphere.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
STORM SEWER
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
STORY
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended.
STREET
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I), and the
most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater
Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II). For purposes of this chapter, streets and roads
shall conform to one of the following categories:
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL ROAD
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
MINOR ARTERIAL ROAD
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
COLLECTOR ROAD
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
LOCAL ROAD
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
ALLEY
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
STREET CENTER LINE
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 405/520
STREET, PRIVATE
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE
A line that divides and delineates an existing or proposed street right-of-way from an existing or
proposed lot.
STREETSCAPE
The visual impression of the built environment along a street created by building setbacks,
rooflines, building mass, architectural styles and elements, building materials and texture, patterns
of fenestration, sidewalks, signage, trees and landscaping.
STRUCTURE
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
SUBDIVISION
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I), and the
most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater
Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
SURVEYOR
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
TAVERN
An establishment where alcohol is sold that has total annual food sales for on-premises
consumption of less than or equal to 20% of the combined gross sales of the establishment.
TOWNSHIP
Lancaster Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
TOWNSHIP SOLICITOR
The attorney, licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, employed by the
Township, or engaged as a consultant to the Township, to furnish professional legal assistance.
TRACT
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
TRANSIENT
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended.
TRAVEL TRAILER
See the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II).
TURBINE HEIGHT
The distance measured from the highest point of the wind turbine rotor plane to the ground level.
UNIT OF OCCUPANCY
An allocation of space within a building or structure that is independent of other such space and
that constitutes a separate use. This shall include both fee-simple ownership and leaseholds.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 406/520
UNIVERSITY, COLLEGE, and OTHER ADULT EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION
An establishment wherein persons regularly assemble for general or specialized higher education
or instruction services leading to a degree, and which is maintained and controlled by a body
organized to sustain general or specialized higher education or instruction; an establishment
primarily engaged in furnishing courses and granting degrees. The requirement for admission is at
least a high school diploma or equivalent basic academic training. Instruction may be provided in
diverse settings, such as the establishment's or client's training facilities, educational institutions,
and/or the workplace, and through diverse means, such as correspondence, television, the
Internet, or other electronic and distance learning methods. The training provided by these
establishments may include the use of simulators and simulation methods.
USE
The specific purpose for which land, sign, structure or building is designed, arranged, intended or
for which it may be occupied or maintained, or any activity, occupation, business or operation
which may be carried on.
VARIANCE
See the most-recent version of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended (Article I).
VETERINARIAN OFFICE
A building used primarily for the treatment, by a veterinarian, of small domestic animals, such as
dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds or fowl and livestock. No outdoor boarding of animals is permitted.
VISITOR ACCOMMODATION
An establishment offering temporary overnight lodging accommodations for less than 30 days, but
may also offer meal service and entertainment, to transient guests, visitors, or tourists for
compensation. It includes facilities commonly known as "hotels" and "motels," but excludes
"boardinghouses" and "bed-and-breakfasts," as defined in Article II of this chapter.
WAREHOUSING, DISTRIBUTION, AND WHOLESALING
An establishment involving the storage, wholesale, and/or distribution of manufactured products,
supplies, and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or explosive
or that create a hazard or are commonly recognized offensive conditions, and also excluding any
heavy equipment or truck washing, servicing and/or repair, unless such uses are specifically
permitted in that zoning district. Wholesaling of products, supplies and equipment shall not be
open to or accessible by the general public, unless incidental to the principal warehousing
operation.
WATERSHED
All the land from which water flows into a particular point in a watercourse.
WHOLESALE
Any distribution procedure involving persons who, in the normal course of business, do not
engage in sales to the general public.
WIND CHARGER
A wind energy system direct-current generator used for charging storage batteries.
WIND ENERGY PRODUCTION
A wind energy system that supplies energy primarily for off-site/off-premises use.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM
A device, such as a wind charger, wind turbine, or other electric generation facility, designed to
convert wind power into another form of energy, such as electricity or heat, and which consists of
one or more wind turbines and other structures and buildings, including meteorological towers,
electrical infrastructure, transmission lines, and other appurtenant structures and facilities.
WINDMILL
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 407/520
A.
B.
C.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
A device that runs on the energy generated by a wheel of adjustable blades or slats rotated by the
wind.
WIND TURBINE
A device that converts wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and
includes the nacelle, rotor, tower and pad transformer, if any.
WIND TURBINE TOWER
The vertical component of a wind energy system that elevates the wind turbine generator and
attached blades above the ground.
YARD
An open space that lies between the principal building or buildings and the nearest lot line. The
minimum required yard as set forth in this chapter is unobstructed from the ground upward, except
as may be specifically provided in this chapter. Distances which represent minimum yards
throughout this chapter shall include all portions of a lot which are within such distances as
measured at right angles from the respective lot line. Porches and carports shall be considered a
part of the building. Overhanging eaves, gutters and cornices shall not be considered an
infringement of the yard requirements. See Figure 2-8.
FRONT YARD
A space extending the full width of the lot between any building and the front lot line and
measured between the front lot line and the building line nearest the front lot line. In the case
of a corner lot, corner lots shall have two front yards. In the case of a flag lot, see Article XVI
of this chapter relating to flag lots. In the case of a reverse-frontage lot, see the most-recent
version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater
Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II). See Figure 2-8.
REAR YARD
A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear
lot line and measured between the rear lot line and the building line nearest the rear lot line.
In the case of a corner lot, corner lots shall not have a rear yard. In the case of a flag lot, see
Article XVI of this chapter relating to flag lots. In the case of a reverse-frontage lot, see the
most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended (Article II). See Figure 2-8.
SIDE YARD
A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the principal building and the
side lot line and measured between the side lot line and the building line nearest the side lot
line. In the case of a corner lot, the side yard is the area between the principal building and
the side lot line, exclusive of all front yards. In the case of a flag lot, see Article XVI of this
chapter relating to flag lots. In the case of a reverse-frontage lot, see the most-recent version
of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater Management
Ordinance, as amended (Article II). See Figure 2-8.
ZONING PERMIT
A permit stating that the purpose for which a building or land is to be used is in conformity with the
use permitted and all other requirements under this chapter for the zoning district in which it is
located or is to be located.
ZONING OFFICER
The municipal official designated to administer and enforce this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall
administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 236, Subdivision and Land Development.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Building Construction, and Ch. 126, Construction Codes, Uniform.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Floodplain Management.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 408/520
[6]
[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 280-202. Abbreviations.
As used in this chapter, the following abbreviations shall have the meanings indicated:
FIA
The Federal Insurance Administration (FIA), or any successor agency.
LCCD
The Lancaster County Conservation District, or any successor agency.
LCPC
The Lancaster County Planning Commission, or any successor agency.
LIMC
The Lancaster Inter-Municipal Committee, or any successor agency.
MPC
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as reenacted and
amended.[1]
PA DEP
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or any successor agency.
PA DH
The Pennsylvania Department of Health, or any successor agency.
PA DPW
The Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare, or any successor agency.
PA FBC
The Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission, or any successor agency.
PA GC
The Pennsylvania Game Commission, or any successor agency.
PA PUC
The Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, or any successor agency.
PennDOT
The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, or any successor agency.
SRBC
The Susquehanna River Basin Commission, or any successor agency.
USACE
The United States Army Corps of Engineers, or any successor agency.
USDA
The United States Department of Agriculture, or any successor agency.
USGS
The United States Geological Survey, or any successor agency.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 409/520
[1]
Article III. Zoning Districts
§ 280-300. Applicability.
The standards and provisions of this Article III apply to the zoning districts and Zoning Map of this
chapter.
§ 280-301. Types of zoning districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township is hereby divided into the following eight zoning districts:
Residential District R-1 (See Article IV of this chapter relating to Residential District R-1 regulations)
Residential District R-2 (See Article V of this chapter relating to Residential District R-2 regulations)
Residential District R-3 (See Article VI of this chapter relating to Residential District R-3 regulations)
Local Commercial District (LC) (See Article VII of this chapter relating to Local Commercial District LC
regulations)
General Commercial District (GC) (See Article VIII of this chapter relating to General Commercial
District GC regulations)
Industrial District (I) (See Article IX of this chapter relating to Industrial District I regulations)
Floodplain District (FP) (See Article X of this chapter relating to Floodplain District FP regulations)
Campus/Open Space District (S) (See Article XI of this chapter relating to Campus/Open Space
District S regulations)
§ 280-302. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be as shown on the Official Zoning Map of Lancaster
Township, which is on file in the Township Office.[1] Said map and all notations, references, and data
shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter and shall be as much a part of
this chapter as if all were fully described herein.
Editor's Note: A copy of said map is also included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-303. Zoning district boundaries.
The boundaries between zoning districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the center lines of
public streets or other rights-of-way, or existing lot lines. Should any uncertainty exist, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall interpret the intent of this chapter and map as to the exact location of zoning
district boundaries.
Article IV. Residential District R-1 Regulations
§ 280-401. Intended purpose.
The intended purpose of this zoning district is to provide for low-density residential areas, which are
consistent with existing development densities in surrounding areas.
§ 280-402. Permitted uses.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 410/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
(1)
(2)
N.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Accessory dwelling unit, subject to § 280-1502 of this chapter.
Agricultural operation, subject to § 280-1504 of this chapter.
Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in this Article IV.
Communications antenna, subject to § 280-1603 of this chapter.
Family day-care home, subject to § 280-1511 of this chapter.
Forestry.
Group home, subject to § 280-1513 of this chapter.
Kennel, subject to § 280-1517 of this chapter.
Minor home occupation, subject to § 280-1514 of this chapter.
Noncommercial keeping of livestock, subject to § 280-1521 of this chapter.
Outdoor furnace, subject to § 280-1524 of this chapter.
Place of assembly for worship/education, provided the gross floor area is less than or equal to
40,000 square feet.
Public utility corporations and municipal uses, subject to § 280-1615 of this chapter.
Single-family detached dwelling in accordance with the following:
Conventional residential development consisting of 10 or fewer dwellings where the total area
of the proposed development is equal to or less than 15 acres prior to the proposed
subdivision or land development.
Open space development, subject to § 280-1523 of this chapter.
§ 280-403. Special exception uses.
Bed-and-breakfast establishment, subject to § 280-1505 of this chapter.
Commercial recreational facility, subject to § 280-1529 of this chapter.
Conversion of an existing building to a multifamily dwelling, subject to § 280-1605 of this chapter.
Golf course, subject to § 280-1512 of this chapter.
Group day-care home, subject to § 280-1511 of this chapter.
Major home occupation, subject to § 280-1514 of this chapter.
Nonprofit public facility, subject to § 280-1522 of this chapter.
Place of assembly for worship/education, provided the gross floor area is greater than 40,000
square feet,, subject to § 280-1525 of this chapter.
§ 280-404. Conditional uses.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 411/520
A.
B.
C.
A.
(1)
B.
All residential uses which are permitted uses in this zoning district and which are proposed within
conventional residential developments consisting of more than 10 dwellings where the total area
of the proposed development is greater than 15 acres, subject to § 280-1510 of this chapter.
Nonprofit public recreational facility, subject to § 280-1529 of this chapter.
Residential infill development, subject to § 280-1530 of this chapter.
§ 280-405. Lot, yard, and height regulations of principal
uses/structures.
Lot requirements. Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the lot requirements in Table 4-1
shall apply:
Table 4-1
Minimum Lot Width:
Residential
District R-1
Public
Utilities
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
At Street
Right-of-
Way Line
(feet)
At Building
Setback
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
Single-family
detached
dwellings
None or
public
water only
43,560 per
dwelling
unit
65 100 150 20%
Single-family
detached
dwellings
Public
sewer only
32,000 per
dwelling
unit
65 100 150 25%
Single-family
detached
dwellings
Public
sewer and
public
water
15,000 per
dwelling
unit
65 100 150 35%
All other uses
(unless
otherwise
specified)
None or
with public
water
and/or
public
sewer
43,560 65 100 150 35%
Minimum yard requirements.
Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the yard requirements in Table 4-2 shall apply:
Table 4-2
Minimum Front Yard
Residential
District R-1
Principal
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Minor
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Collector
Road
(feet)
Local
Road
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(feet)
Single-family
detached
dwellings
50 40 30 25 12 35
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 412/520
(2)
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
Table 4-2
Minimum Front Yard
Residential
District R-1
Principal
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Minor
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Collector
Road
(feet)
Local
Road
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(feet)
All other uses
(unless
otherwise
specified)
50 40 30 25 50 50
A building may be permitted closer to the street than required above when there is an
adjacent existing principal building on the same side of the street which is closer to the street
than the minimum front yard requirement and is within 100 feet of the building to be erected. If
the building to be erected is within 100 feet of only one such existing adjacent principal
building, the minimum front yard shall not be less than the average of the setback of the
existing principal building and the minimum front yard requirement; provided, however, that
this formula shall not require the placing of a building more than 10 feet back from the front
building line of the existing adjacent principal buildings. If the building to be erected is
between two such existing principal buildings within 100 feet of the building to be erected, the
minimum front yard shall not be less than the average setback of the two adjacent existing
principal buildings.
Maximum building height: 40 feet.
§ 280-406. Lot, yard and height regulations of accessory
uses/structures.
Minimum front yard. With the exception of patios and decks, accessory structures shall not be
permitted in the front yard, except for double-frontage lots, where accessory structures shall
comply with the front yard requirements for principal structures. Patios and decks shall not
encroach upon the minimum front yard specified in § 280-405 of this chapter.
Minimum setback from front yard. Accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from all front yards.
Minimum side yard: six feet.
Minimum rear yard: six feet.
Maximum height: 25 feet.
Parking and loading regulations. Parking and loading shall be provided as specified in Article XIII
of this chapter relating to parking and loading regulations. In addition, no loading facility shall be
permitted on any side of a building facing adjoining lands within a residential zoning district nor
any side of a building facing an abutting street.
Sign regulations. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article XII of this chapter relating to sign
regulations.
Driveway and access drive regulations. All driveways and access drives shall be in accordance
with § 280-1606 of this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 413/520
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
Landscaping and screening regulations. Landscaping and screening shall be provided as
specified in Article XIV of this chapter relating to landscaping and screening regulations.
Nonresidential operations regulations. All nonresidential operations shall be in compliance with
any Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or federal government regulations, as required by the
most-recent regulations made available from these governmental bodies.
Outdoor storage regulations. Within this zoning district, no outdoor storage or display of
merchandise is permitted.
Waste product regulations. Dumpsters and waste receptacles may be permitted within the side or
rear yard, in accordance with § 280-1403C of this chapter. All dumpsters shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from any adjoining property in a residential zoning district.
Lighting regulations. Lighting shall be shielded as to not impact adjoining properties. Light
emanating from any source on the property shall not be greater than two footcandles measured at
a height of three feet at the lot line.
Article V. Residential District R-2 Regulations
§ 280-501. Intended purpose.
The intended purpose of this zoning district is to provide for medium-density residential areas that are
consistent with existing development in surrounding areas. All types of residential uses are permitted in
this zoning district. Higher-density growth and development areas in this zoning district will be served
by public sewer and public water.
§ 280-502. Permitted uses.
Accessory commercial use in conjunction with residential developments, subject to § 280-1501 of
this chapter.
Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in this Article V.
Agricultural operation, subject to § 280-1504 of this chapter.
Communications antenna, subject to § 280-1603 of this chapter.
Family day-care home, subject to § 280-1511 of this chapter.
Forestry.
Group home, subject to § 280-1513 of this chapter.
Minor home occupation, subject to § 280-1514 of this chapter.
Noncommercial keeping of livestock, subject to § 280-1521 of this chapter.
Nonprofit public facility, subject to § 280-1522 of this chapter.
Place of assembly for worship/education, provided the gross floor area is less than or equal to
40,000 square feet.
Public utility corporations and municipal uses, subject to § 280-1615 of this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 414/520
(1)
(2)
M.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
A.
Single-family detached dwelling, single-family semidetached dwelling, two-family dwelling, and
multifamily dwelling not exceeding three stories in height and not more than 12 dwelling units per
building. Such residential uses shall comply with the following:
Conventional residential development consisting of 10 or fewer dwellings where the total area
of the proposed development is equal to or less than 15 acres prior to the proposed
subdivision or land development.
Open space development, subject to § 280-1523 of this chapter.
§ 280-503. Special exception uses.
Boardinghouse, subject to § 280-1506 of this chapter.
Conversion of an existing building to a multifamily dwelling, subject to § 280-1605 of this chapter.
Group day-care home, subject to § 280-1511 of this chapter.
Hospital, retirement home, nursing home, personal care home, or similar facility, subject to § 280-
1515 of this chapter.
Major home occupation, subject to § 280-1514 of this chapter.
Place of assembly for worship/education, provided the gross floor area is greater than 40,000
square feet, subject to § 280-1525 of this chapter.
Private club, subject to § 280-1527 of this chapter.
§ 280-504. Conditional uses.
All residential uses which are permitted uses in this zoning district and which are proposed within
conventional residential developments consisting of more than 10 dwellings where the total area
of the proposed development is greater than 15 acres, subject to § 280-1510 of this chapter.
Nonprofit public recreational facility, subject to § 280-1529 of this chapter.
Residential infill development, subject to § 280-1530 of this chapter.
§ 280-505. Lot, yard and height regulations of principal
uses/structures.
Lot requirements. Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the lot requirements in Table 5-1
shall apply. Note that the public utilities used for sewage disposal and water supply affect the type
of uses permitted as well as certain lot requirements (such as lot coverage and area).
Table 5-1
Minimum Lot Width:
Residential
District R-2
Public
Utilities
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
At Street
Right-of-
Way Line
(feet)
At Building
Setback
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 415/520
(1)
B.
Table 5-1
Minimum Lot Width:
Residential
District R-2
Public
Utilities
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
At Street
Right-of-
Way Line
(feet)
At Building
Setback
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
Single-family
detached
dwellings
None or
public water
only
43,560 per
dwelling
unit
65 100 150 20%
Single-family
detached
dwellings
Public
sewer only
32,000 per
dwelling
unit
65 100 150 25%
Single-family
detached
dwellings
Public
sewer and
public water
10,000 per
dwelling
unit
50 75 125 40%
Single-family
semidetached
and 2-family
dwellings
Public
sewer and
public water
6,000 per
dwelling
unit
30 per
dwelling
unit
45 per
dwelling
unit
125 45%
Multifamily
dwellings
Public
sewer and
public water
4,000 per
dwelling
unit
65 100 120 50%
All other uses
(unless
otherwise
specified)
None or
with public
water and/or
public sewer
43,560 65 100 150 45%
Minimum yard requirements.
Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the yard requirements in Table 5-2 shall apply:
Table 5-2
Minimum Front Yard
Residential
District R-2
Principal
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Minor
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Collector
Road
(feet)
Local
Road
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(feet)
Single-family
detached
dwellings
without public
sewer
50 40 30 25 12 35
Single-family
detached,
single-family
semidetached,
and 2-family
dwellings with
public water
and public
sewer
50 40 30 25 10; 0-foot
common lot
line for
singlefamily
semidetached
dwelling
25
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 416/520
(2)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
A.
Table 5-2
Minimum Front Yard
Residential
District R-2
Principal
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Minor
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Collector
Road
(feet)
Local
Road
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(feet)
Multifamily
dwellings
50 40 30 25 25 50
All other uses
(unless
otherwise
specified)
50 40 30 25 50 50
A building may be permitted closer to the street than required above when there is an
adjacent existing principal building on the same side of the street which is closer to the street
than the minimum front yard requirement and is within 100 feet of the building to be erected. If
the building to be erected is within 100 feet of only one such existing adjacent principal
building, the minimum front yard shall not be less than the average of the setback of the
existing principal building and the minimum front yard requirement; provided, however, that
this formula shall not require the placing of a building more than 10 feet back from the front
building line of the existing adjacent principal buildings. If the building to be erected is
between two such existing principal buildings within 100 feet of the building to be erected, the
minimum front yard shall not be less than the average setback of the two adjacent existing
principal buildings.
Interior yard requirements. Open areas between principal buildings located on a lot shall be
provided as follows:
Parallel buildings (front to front, rear to rear or front to rear) shall have 50 feet between faces
of the buildings for two-story buildings, plus five feet for each additional story. If the front or
rear faces are obliquely aligned, the above distances may be decreased by as much as 10
feet at one end if increased by a similar or greater distance at the other end.
A yard space of 25 feet is required between end walls of buildings for each two-story building,
plus five feet for each additional story. If the buildings are at right angles to each other, the
distance between the corners of end walls of the buildings may be reduced to a minimum of
15 feet.
A yard space of 30 feet is required between end walls and front or rear faces of buildings for
each two-story building, plus five feet for each additional story.
When two adjacent buildings differ in the number of stories, the spacing shall not be less than
1/2 the sum of the required distance between two buildings of the lower height, plus the
required distance between two buildings of the greater height.
Maximum building height: 40 feet.
§ 280-506. Lot, yard and height regulations of accessory
uses/structures.
Minimum front yard. With the exception of patios and decks, accessory structures shall not be
permitted in the front yard, except for double-frontage lots, where accessory structures shall
comply with the front yard requirements for principal structures. Patios and decks shall not
encroach upon the minimum front yard specified in § 280-505 of this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 417/520
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
Minimum setback from front yard. Accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from all front yards.
Minimum side yard.
Single-family detached dwelling lots: six feet.
Single-family semidetached dwelling lots and two-family dwelling lots: two feet, and zero feet
at the common lot line for a single-family semidetached dwelling.
All other lots: 15 feet.
Minimum rear yard: six feet.
Maximum height: 25 feet.
Parking and loading regulations. Parking and loading shall be provided as specified in Article XIII
of this chapter relating to parking and loading regulations. In addition, no loading facility shall be
permitted on any side of a building facing adjoining lands within a residential zoning district nor
any side of a building facing an abutting street.
Sign regulations. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article XII of this chapter relating to sign
regulations.
Driveway and access drive regulations. All driveways and access drives shall be in accordance
with § 280-1606 of this chapter.
Landscaping and screening regulations. Landscaping and screening shall be provided as
specified in Article XIV of this chapter relating to landscaping and screening regulations.
Nonresidential operations and regulations. All nonresidential operations shall be in compliance
with any Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or federal government regulations, as required by
the most-recent regulations made available from these governmental bodies.
Outdoor storage regulations. Within this zoning district, no outdoor storage or display of
merchandise is permitted.
Waste product regulations. Dumpsters and waste receptacles may be permitted within the side or
rear yard, in accordance with § 280-1403C of this chapter. All dumpsters shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from any adjoining property in a residential zoning district.
Lighting regulations. Lighting shall be shielded as to not impact adjoining properties. Light
emanating from any source on the property shall not be greater than two footcandles measured at
a height of three feet at the lot line.
Article VI. Residential District R-3 Regulations
§ 280-601. Intended purpose.
The intended purpose of this zoning district is to provide for high-density residential areas that are
consistent with existing development densities in surrounding areas. All types of residential uses are
permitted in this zoning district. The highest-density development in this zoning district shall be
contingent upon the provision of public sewer and public water.
§ 280-602. Permitted uses.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 418/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
(1)
(2)
N.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Accessory commercial use in conjunction with residential developments, subject to § 280-1501 of
this chapter.
Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in this Article VI.
Communications antenna, subject to § 280-1603 of this chapter.
Family day-care home, subject to § 280-1511 of this chapter.
Forestry.
Group home, subject to § 280-1513 of this chapter.
Hospital, retirement home, nursing home, personal care home, or similar facility, subject to § 280-
1515 of this chapter.
Medical office.
Minor home occupation, subject to § 280-1514 of this chapter.
Noncommercial keeping of livestock, subject to § 280-1521 of this chapter.
Nonprofit public facility, subject to § 280-1522 of this chapter.
Place of assembly for worship/education, provided the gross floor area is less than or equal to
40,000 square feet.
Public utility corporations and municipal uses, subject to § 280-1615 of this chapter.
Single-family detached dwelling, single-family semidetached dwelling, two-family dwelling, singlefamily
attached dwelling, and multifamily dwelling. Such residential uses shall comply with the
following:
Conventional residential development consisting of 10 or fewer dwellings where the total area
of the proposed development is equal to or less than 15 acres prior to the proposed
subdivision or land development.
Open space development, subject to § 280-1523 of this chapter.
§ 280-603. Special exception uses.
Boardinghouse, subject to § 280-1506 of this chapter.
Conversion of an existing building to a multifamily dwelling, subject to § 280-1605 of this chapter.
Group day-care home, subject to § 280-1511 of this chapter.
Major home occupation, subject to § 280-1514 of this chapter.
Place of assembly for worship/education, provided the gross floor area is greater than 40,000
square feet, subject to § 280-1525 of this chapter.
Private club, subject to § 280-1527 of this chapter.
§ 280-604. Conditional uses.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 419/520
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
All residential uses which are permitted uses in this zoning district and which are proposed within
conventional residential developments consisting of more than 10 dwellings where the total area
of the proposed development is greater than 15 acres, subject to § 280-1510 of this chapter.
Nonprofit public recreational facility, subject to § 280-1529 of this chapter.
Residential infill development, subject to § 280-1530 of this chapter.
§ 280-605. Lot, yard and height regulations of principal
uses/structures.
Lot requirements. Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the lot requirements in Table 6-1
shall apply. Note that the public utilities used for sewage disposal and water supply affect the type
of uses permitted as well as certain lot requirements (such as lot coverage and area).
Table 6-1
Minimum Lot Width:
Residential
District R-3
Public
Utilities
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
At Street
Right-of-
Way Line
(feet)
At Building
Setback
Line
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
Single-family
detached
dwellings
None or
public water
only
43,560 per
dwelling
unit
65 100 150 20%
Single-family
detached
dwellings
Public
sewer only
32,000 per
dwelling
unit
65 100 150 25%
Single-family
detached
dwellings
Public
sewer and
public water
10,000 per
dwelling
unit
50 75 125 40%
Single-family
semidetached
and 2-family
dwellings
Public
sewer and
public water
5,000 per
dwelling
unit
25 per
dwelling
unit
40 per
dwelling
unit
125 50%
Multifamily
dwellings with
12 or fewer
dwellings
Public
sewer and
public water
3,000 per
dwelling
unit
65 100 125 65%
Multifamily
dwellings with
more than 12
dwellings
Public
sewer and
public water
3,000 per
dwelling
unit
100 150 200 65%
Single-family
attached
dwellings
Public
sewer and
public water
2,500 per
dwelling
unit
13 20 125 65%
All other uses
(unless
otherwise
specified)
None or
with public
water and/or
public sewer
43,560 65 100 150 50%
Minimum yard requirements.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 420/520
(1)
(2)
(1)
C.
Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the yard requirements in Table 6-2 shall apply:
Table 6-2
Minimum Front Yard
Residential
District R-3
Principal
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Minor
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Collector
Road
(feet)
Local
Road
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(feet)
Single-family
detached
dwellings
without public
sewer
50 40 30 25 12 35
Single-family
detached,
single-family
semidetached,
2-family
dwellings, and
single-family
attached
dwellings with
public water
and public
sewer
50 40 30 25 10 feet; 0-
foot
common lot
line singlefamily
semidetached
dwelling or
singlefamily
attached
dwelling
25
Multifamily
dwelling with
12 or fewer
dwelling units
50 40 30 25 25 35
All other uses
(unless
otherwise
specified)
50 40 30 25 50 50
A building may be permitted closer to the street than required above when there is an
adjacent existing principal building on the same side of the street which is closer to the street
than the minimum front yard requirement and is within 100 feet of the building to be erected. If
the building to be erected is within 100 feet from only one such existing adjacent principal
building, the minimum front yard requirement shall not be less than the average of the
setback of the existing principal building and the minimum front yard requirement; provided,
however, that this formula shall not require the placing of a building more than 10 feet back of
the front building line of the existing adjacent principal buildings. If the building to be erected
is between two such existing principal buildings within 100 feet of the building to be erected,
the minimum front yard shall not be less than the average setback of the two adjacent existing
principal buildings.
Interior yard requirements. Open areas between principal buildings located on a lot shall be
provided as follows:
Parallel buildings (front to front, rear to rear or front to rear) shall have 50 feet between faces
of the buildings for two-story buildings, plus five feet for each additional story. If the front or
rear faces are obliquely aligned, the above distances may be decreased by as much as 10
feet at one end if increased by a similar or greater distance at the other end.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 421/520
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
C.
A yard space of 25 feet is required between end walls of buildings for each two-story building,
plus five feet for each additional story. If the buildings are at right angles to each other, the
distance between the corners of end walls of the buildings may be reduced to a minimum of
15 feet.
A yard space of 30 feet is required between end walls and front or rear faces of buildings for
each two-story building, plus five feet for each additional story.
When two adjacent buildings differ in the number of stories, the spacing shall not be less than
1 1/2 times the sum of the required distance between two buildings of the lower height, plus
the required distance between two buildings of the greater height.
Maximum building height: 40 feet, except that multifamily dwellings with more than 12 units per
building shall not exceed 75 feet.
Parking and loading regulations. Parking and loading shall be provided as specified in Article XIII
of this chapter relating to parking and loading regulations. In addition, no loading facility shall be
permitted on any side of a building facing adjoining lands within a residential zoning district nor
any side of a building facing an abutting street.
Sign regulations. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article XII of this chapter relating to sign
regulations.
Driveway and access drive regulations. All driveways and access drives shall be in accordance
with § 280-1606 of this chapter.
Landscaping and screening regulations. Landscaping and screening shall be provided as
specified in Article XIV of this chapter relating to landscaping and screening regulations.
Nonresidential operations regulations. All nonresidential operations shall be in compliance with
any Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or federal government regulations, as required by the
most-recent regulations made available from these governmental bodies.
Outdoor storage regulations. Within this zoning district, no outdoor storage or display of
merchandise is permitted.
Waste product regulations. Dumpsters and waste receptacles may be permitted within the side or
rear yard, in accordance with § 280-1403C of this chapter. All dumpsters shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from any adjoining property in a residential zoning district.
Lighting regulations. Lighting shall be shielded as to not impact adjoining properties. Light
emanating from any source on the property shall not be greater than two footcandles measured at
a height of three feet at the lot line.
§ 280-606. Lot, yard and height regulations of accessory
uses/structures.
Minimum front yard. With the exception of patios and decks, accessory structures shall not be
permitted in the front yard, except for double-frontage lots, where accessory structures shall
comply with the front yard requirements for principal structures. Patios and decks shall not
encroach upon the minimum front yard specified in § 280-605 of this chapter.
Minimum setback from front yard. Accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from all front yards.
Minimum side yard.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 422/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
Single-family detached dwelling lots: six feet.
Single-family semidetached dwelling lots, two-family dwelling lots, and single-family attached
dwelling lots: two feet, and zero feet at the common lot line for single-family semidetached
dwellings or single-family attached dwellings.
All other lots: 15 feet.
Minimum rear yard: six feet.
Maximum height: 25 feet.
Article VII. Local Commercial District (LC) Regulations
§ 280-701. Intended purpose.
The intended purpose of this zoning district is to provide basic convenience, commercial goods and
services to local residents. Uses have been limited to those that residents are likely to need on a daily
or regular basis. Overall, retail size has been restricted to prevent the establishment of intensive
commercial uses that exceed the local orientation of this zoning district. This zoning district has been
sized to permit a grouping of several businesses; lot areas may vary depending upon the use of public
utilities. This zoning district has been located amid the various residential concentrations to facilitate
convenient access to these services without creating additional congestion to and from larger
commercial centers. Strict design standards have been imposed to keep uses in this zoning district
compatible with nearby homes and neighborhoods.
§ 280-702. Permitted uses.
Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in this Article VII.
Bank and other financial institution.
Commercial recreational facility, subject to § 280-1529 of this chapter.
Communications antenna, subject to § 280-1603 of this chapter.
Day-care facility, subject to § 280-1511 of this chapter. Family day-care homes and group daycare
homes shall be permitted subject to § 280-1511 of this chapter only in residential structures
that lawfully represent preexisting nonconforming uses.
Dwelling unit when in combination with a commercial use in the principal building.
Forestry.
Funeral home.
Medical office.
Nonprofit public facility, subject to § 280-1522 of this chapter.
Office.
Place of assembly for worship/education, provided the gross floor area is less than or equal to
40,000 square feet.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 423/520
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
Public utility corporations and municipal uses, subject to § 280-1615 of this chapter.
Radio/television broadcasting studio/station.
Restaurant, excluding drive-through facility.
Retail sales/service, provided the total net retail floor area is less than or equal to 20,000 square
feet.
Veterinarian's office, provided no outdoor keeping of animals is permitted.
§ 280-703. Special exception uses.
Bed-and-breakfast establishment, subject to § 280-1505 of this chapter.
Commercial parking garage or lot, subject to § 280-1507 of this chapter.
Communications tower for radio/television signal reception and transmission in conjunction with a
broadcasting station or studio, subject to § 280-1604 of this chapter.
Convenience store, subject to § 280-1509 of this chapter.
Hospital, retirement home, nursing home, personal care home, or similar facility, subject to § 280-
1515 of this chapter.
Medical clinic, subject to § 280-1518 of this chapter.
Mobile/manufactured home park, subject to § 280-1519 of this chapter.
Neighborhood shopping center, subject to § 280-1520 of this chapter.
Place of assembly for worship/education, provided the gross floor area is greater than 40,000
square feet, subject to § 280-1525 of this chapter.
Retail sales/service, provided the total net retail floor area is greater than 20,000 square feet,
subject to § 280-1531 of this chapter.
Social service establishment, subject to § 280-1532 of this chapter.
University, college, and other adult education institution, subject to § 280-1525 of this chapter.
§ 280-704. Lot, yard, and height regulations of principal
uses/structures.
Minimum requirements for all existing permitted residential uses shall comply with the Residential
District R-2 requirements.
Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the lot requirements in Table 7-1 shall apply:
Table 7-1
Minimum Lot Width:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 424/520
(1)
(2)
C.
Local
Commercial
District (LC)
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
At Street
Right-of-Way
Line
(feet)
At Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Depth
(feet)
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
Table 7-1
Minimum Lot Width:
Local
Commercial
District (LC)
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
At Street
Right-of-Way
Line
(feet)
At Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Depth
(feet)
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
All uses (unless
otherwise
specified), no
public water and
no public sewer;
or public water
only
43,560 65 100 150 35%
All uses (unless
otherwise
specified), public
sewer and no
public water
32,000 65 100 150 50%
All uses (unless
otherwise
specified), public
sewer and public
water
6,000 40 60 100 70%
Minimum yard requirements.
Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the yard requirements in Table 7-2 shall apply:
Table 7-2
Minimum Front Yard
Local
Commercial
District
(LC)
Principal
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Minor
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Collector
Road
(feet)
Local Road
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(feet)
All uses
(unless
otherwise
specified)
50 40 30 25 6 feet (see
exceptions
in § 280-
704C(3) of
this
chapter)
30
A building may be permitted closer to the street than required above when there is an
adjacent existing principal building on the same side of the street which is closer to the street
than the minimum front yard requirement and is within 100 feet of the building to be erected. If
the building to be erected is within 100 feet of only one such existing adjacent principal
building, the minimum front yard shall not be less than the average of the setback of the
existing principal building and the minimum front yard requirement; provided, however, that
this formula shall not require the placing of a building more than 10 feet back from the front
building line of the existing adjacent principal buildings. If the building to be erected is
between two such existing principal buildings within 100 feet of the building to be erected, the
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 425/520
(3)
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
minimum front yard shall not be less than the average setback of the two adjacent existing
principal buildings.
The minimum side yard shall be six feet, except where adjoining a residential zoning district,
in which case the side yard shall be as required for "all other (nonresidential) uses" as
required in the adjoining residential zoning district.
Maximum building height: 40 feet.
§ 280-705. Lot, yard and height regulations of accessory
uses/structures.
Minimum front yard. With the exception of patios and decks, accessory structures shall not be
permitted in the front yard, except for double-frontage lots, where accessory structures shall
comply with the front yard requirements for principal structures. Patios and decks shall not
encroach on the minimum front yard specified by § 280-704 of this chapter.
Minimum setback from front yard. Accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from all front yards.
Minimum side yard: six feet.
Minimum rear yard: 10 feet.
Maximum height: 25 feet.
Parking and loading regulations. Parking and loading shall be provided as specified in Article XIII
of this chapter relating to parking and loading regulations. In addition, no loading facility shall be
permitted on any side of a building facing adjoining lands within a residential zoning district nor
any side of a building facing an abutting street.
Sign regulations. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article XII of this chapter relating to sign
regulations.
Driveway and access drive regulations. All driveways and access drives shall be in accordance
with § 280-1606 of this chapter.
Landscaping and screening regulations. Landscaping and screening shall be provided as
specified in Article XIV of this chapter relating to landscaping and screening regulations.
Nonresidential operations regulations. All nonresidential operations shall be in compliance with
any Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or federal government regulations, as required by the
most-recent regulations made available from these governmental bodies.
Outdoor storage regulations. Within this zoning district, no outdoor storage or display of
merchandise is permitted.
Waste product regulations. Dumpsters and waste receptacles may be permitted within the side or
rear yard, in accordance with § 280-1403C of this chapter. All dumpsters shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from any adjoining property in a residential zoning district.
Lighting regulations. Lighting shall be shielded as to not impact adjoining properties. Light
emanating from any source on the property shall not be greater than two footcandles measured at
a height of three feet at the lot line.
Article VIII. General Commercial District (GC) Regulations
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 426/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
§ 280-801. Intended purpose.
The intended purpose of this zoning district is to provide for commercial uses that generate high
automobile traffic volumes in areas within the Township where existing roads can accommodate such
traffic.
§ 280-802. Permitted uses.
Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in this Article VIII.
Adult-oriented establishment, subject to § 280-1503 of this chapter.
Amusement arcade.
Automotive sales and automotive service.
Bank and other financial institution.
Bed-and-breakfast establishment, subject to § 280-1505 of this chapter.
Car wash.
Commercial recreational facility, subject to § 280-1529 of this chapter.
Communications antenna, subject to § 280-1603 of this chapter.
Convenience store.
Day-care facility, subject to § 280-1511 of this chapter. Family day-care homes and group daycare
homes shall be permitted subject to § 280-1511 of this chapter only in residential structures
that lawfully represent preexisting nonconforming uses.
Dwelling unit when in combination with a commercial use in the principal building.
Forestry.
Funeral home.
Gasoline and service station.
Medical clinic, subject to § 280-1518 of this chapter.
Medical office.
Nonprofit public facility, subject to § 280-1522 of this chapter.
Office.
Place of assembly for worship/education, provided the gross floor area is less than or equal to
40,000 square feet.
Public utility corporations and municipal uses, subject to § 280-1615 of this chapter.
Radio/television broadcasting studio/station.
Restaurant and tavern (including drive-through facility).
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 427/520
X.
Y.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
(1)
B.
Retail sales/service.
Veterinarian office, provided no outdoor keeping of animals is permitted.
§ 280-803. Special exception uses.
Communications tower for radio/television signal reception and transmission in conjunction with a
broadcasting station or studio or other commercial use, subject to § 280-1604 of this chapter.
Community shopping center, subject to § 280-1508 of this chapter.
Place of assembly for worship/education, provided the gross floor area is greater than 40,000
square feet, subject to § 280-1525 of this chapter.
University, college, and other adult education institution, subject to § 280-1525 of this chapter.
Visitor accommodation, subject to § 280-1533 of this chapter.
§ 280-804. Lot, yard, and height regulations of principal
uses/structures.
Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the lot requirements in Table 8-1 shall apply:
Table 8-1
Minimum Lot Width:
General
Commercial
District (GC)
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
At Street
Right-of-Way
Line
(feet)
At Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Depth
(feet)
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
All uses (unless
otherwise
specified), no
public water and
no public sewer;
or public water
only
43,560 65 100 150 35%
All uses (unless
otherwise
specified),
public sewer
and no public
water
32,000 65 100 150 50%
All uses (unless
otherwise
specified),
public sewer
and public water
10,000 50 80 125 70%
Minimum yard requirements.
Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the yard requirements in Table 8-2 shall apply:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 428/520
(2)
(3)
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Table 8-2
Minimum Front Yard
General
Commercial
District (GC)
Principal
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Minor
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Collector
Road
(feet)
Local
Road
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(feet)
All uses
(unless
otherwise
specified)
50 40 30 25 6 [see
exceptions
in § 280-
804B(3) of
this
chapter]
30
A building may be permitted closer to the street than required above when there is an
adjacent existing principal building on the same side of the street which is closer to the street
than the minimum front yard requirement and is within 100 feet of the building to be erected. If
the building to be erected is within 100 feet of only one such existing adjacent principal
building, the minimum front yard shall not be less than the average of the setback of the
existing principal building and the minimum front yard requirement; provided, however, that
this formula shall not require the placing of a building more than 10 feet back from the front
building line of the existing adjacent principal buildings. If the building to be erected is
between two such existing principal buildings within 100 feet of the building to be erected, the
minimum front yard shall not be less than the average setback of the two adjacent existing
principal buildings.
The minimum side yard shall be six feet, except where adjoining a residential zoning district,
in which case the side yard shall be as required for "all other (nonresidential) uses" as
required in the adjoining residential zoning district.
Maximum building height: 40 feet.
§ 280-805. Lot, yard and height regulations of accessory
uses/structures.
Minimum front yard. With the exception of patios and decks, accessory structures shall not be
permitted in the front yard, except for double-frontage lots, where accessory structures shall
comply with the front yard requirements for principal structures. Patios and decks shall not
encroach on the minimum front yard specified by § 280-804 of this chapter.
Minimum setback from front yard. Accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from all front yards.
Minimum side yard: six feet.
Minimum rear yard: 10 feet.
Maximum height: 25 feet.
Parking and loading regulations. Parking and loading shall be provided as specified in Article XIII
of this chapter relating to parking and loading regulations. In addition, no loading facility shall be
permitted on any side of a building facing adjoining lands within a residential zoning district, nor
any side of a building facing an abutting street.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 429/520
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
Sign regulations. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article XII of this chapter relating to sign
regulations.
Driveway and access drive regulations. All driveways and access drives shall be in accordance
with § 280-1606 of this chapter.
Landscaping and screening regulations. Landscaping and screening shall be provided as
specified in Article XIV of this chapter.
Nonresidential operations regulations. All nonresidential operations shall be in compliance with
any Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or federal government regulations, as required by the
most-recent regulations made available from these governmental bodies.
Outdoor storage regulations. Within this zoning district, no outdoor storage or display of
merchandise is permitted.
Waste product regulations. Dumpsters and waste receptacles may be permitted within the side or
rear yard, in accordance with § 280-1403C of this chapter. All dumpsters shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from any adjoining property in a residential zoning district.
Lighting regulations. Lighting shall be shielded as to not impact adjoining properties. Light
emanating from any source on the property shall not be greater than two footcandles measured at
a height of three feet at the lot line.
Article IX. Industrial District (I) Regulations
§ 280-901. Intended purpose.
The intended purpose of this zoning district is to provide areas for a variety of industrial uses.
§ 280-902. Permitted uses.
Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in this Article IX.
Agricultural operation, subject to § 280-1504 of this chapter.
Automotive repair, sales, servicing, and storage (excluding junk vehicles).
Commercial recreational facility, subject to § 280-1529 of this chapter.
Communications antenna, subject to § 280-1603 of this chapter.
Forestry.
Laboratory for industrial or scientific research and development.
Manufacturing.
Place of assembly for worship/education, provided the gross floor area is less than or equal to
40,000 square feet.
Processing and assembling.
Public utility corporations and municipal uses, subject to § 280-1615 of this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 430/520
L.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
Warehousing, distribution, and wholesaling without outdoor storage.
§ 280-903. Special exception uses.
Agribusiness, subject to § 280-1504 of this chapter.
Communications tower, subject to § 280-1604 of this chapter.
Place of assembly for worship/education, provided the gross floor area is greater than 40,000
square feet, subject to § 280-1525 of this chapter.
Principal alternative energy production facility, subject to § 280-1526 of this chapter.
Quarry, subject to § 280-1528 of this chapter.
University, college, and other adult education institution, subject to § 280-1525 of this chapter.
The Zoning Hearing Board may permit any other use which it considers to be of the same general
character as any of the permitted uses, subject to § 280-1516 of this chapter.
If, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, any proposed use could create a fire hazard, emit smoke,
dust, or other air pollutants, or could produce other results which could be obnoxious or
detrimental to other properties, either because of the production process or the suitability of the
site, he shall refer the proposed use to the Zoning Hearing Board. In order to guarantee that all of
the standards and requirements of this Article IX will be complied with, the Board may, in its
absolute discretion, require the posting of a performance bond, in an amount to be determined by
the Board. The Zoning Hearing Board may also attach such other reasonable conditions as
deemed appropriate.
§ 280-904. Lot, yard, and height regulations of principal
uses/structures.
Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the lot requirements in Table 9-1 shall apply:
Table 9-1
Minimum Lot Width:
Industrial
District (I)
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
At Street
Right-of-Way
Line
(feet)
At Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Depth
(feet)
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
All uses (unless
otherwise
specified), no
public water and
no public sewer
43,560 65 100 200 50%
All uses (unless
otherwise
specified), public
water and/or
public sewer
43,560 65 100 200 80%
Minimum yard requirements.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 431/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the following yard requirements shall apply:
Front yard. The minimum front yard shall be 80 feet.
A building may be permitted closer to the street than required above when there is an
adjacent existing principal building on the same side of the street which is closer to the
street than the minimum front yard requirement and is within 100 feet of the building to be
erected. If the building to be erected is within 100 feet from only one such existing
adjacent principal building, the minimum front yard shall not be less than the average of
the setback of the existing principal building and the minimum front yard requirement;
provided, however, that this formula shall not require the placing of a building more than
10 feet back of the front building line of the existing adjacent principal buildings. If the
building to be erected is between two such existing principal buildings within 100 feet of
the building to be erected, the minimum front yard shall not be less than the average
setback of the two adjacent existing principal buildings.
Side yard. The minimum side yard shall be 15 feet, except as provided in § 280-904B(1)
(e) of this chapter.
Rear yard. The minimum rear yard shall be 20 feet, except as provided in § 280-904B(1)
(e) of this chapter.
Where an industrial use is to be developed adjoining another zoning district, the minimum
side yard and minimum rear yard shall be 25 feet, or shall be as required for "all other
(nonresidential) uses" in the adjoining zoning district, whichever is greater.
Maximum building height: 75 feet.
§ 280-905. Industrial use development and performance
standards.
Industrial uses shall also be subject to the applicable performance regulations in § 280-1516 of this
chapter.
§ 280-906. Lot, yard and height regulations of accessory
uses/structures.
Minimum front yard. Accessory structures shall not be permitted in the front yard, except for
double-frontage lots, where accessory structures shall comply with the front yard requirements for
principal structures.
Minimum setback from front yard. Accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from all front yards.
Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
Maximum height: 35 feet.
Parking and loading regulations. Parking and loading shall be provided as specified in Article XIII
of this chapter relating to parking and loading regulations. In addition, no loading facility shall be
permitted on any side of a building facing adjoining lands within a residential zoning district nor
any side of a building facing an abutting street.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 432/520
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
Sign regulations. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article XII of this chapter relating to sign
regulations.
Driveway and access drive regulations. All driveways and access drives shall be in accordance
with § 280-1606 of this chapter.
Landscaping and screening regulations. Landscaping and screening shall be provided as
specified in Article XIV of this chapter relating to landscaping and screening regulations.
Waste product regulations. Dumpsters and waste receptacles may be permitted within the side or
rear yard, in accordance with § 280-1403C of this chapter. All dumpsters shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from any adjoining property in a residential zoning district.
Lighting regulations. Lighting shall be shielded as to not impact adjoining properties. Light
emanating from any source on the property shall not be greater than two footcandles measured at
a height of three feet at the lot line.
Article X. (Reserved)
Editor’s Note: Former Art. X, Floodplain District (FP) Regulations, was repealed 4-11-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-02. See now Ch. 160, Floodplain Management.
§ 280-1001. through § 280-1012. (Reserved)
Article XI. Campus/Open Space District (S) Regulations
§ 280-1101. Intended purpose.
The intended purpose of this zoning district is to conserve open lands and to provide educational and
recreational opportunities for the community. It is the intent of these regulations to provide for such
areas where they would be most convenient to the Township populace and harmonious with the
surrounding land uses.
§ 280-1102. Permitted uses.
Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the uses permitted in this Article XI.
Cemetery.
Commercial recreation facility, subject to § 280-1529 of this chapter.
Communications antenna, subject to § 280-1603 of this chapter.
Forestry.
Nonprofit pubic recreational facility, subject to § 280-1529 of this chapter.
Nonprofit public facility.
Place of assembly for worship/education.
Public utility corporations and municipal uses, subject to § 280-1615 of this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 433/520
J.
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
University, college, and other adult education institution.
§ 280-1103. Special exception uses.
Communications tower and related equipment on property owned or operated by the municipality
or a municipal authority, subject to § 280-1604.
Principal alternative energy production facility, subject to § 280-1526 of this chapter.
§ 280-1104. Lot, yard and height regulations of principal
uses/structures.
Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the lot requirements in Table 11-1 shall apply:
Table 11-1
Minimum Lot Width:
Campus/Open
Space District
(s)
Minimum Lot
Area
At Street
Right-of-Way
Line
(feet)
At Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(impervious
surfaces)
All uses (unless
otherwise
specified),
regardless of
public
sewer/public
water availability
3 acres 130 200 175 40%
Minimum yard requirements.
Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the yard requirements in Table 11-2 shall apply:
Table 11-2
Minimum Front Yard
Campus/Open
Space
District(s)
Principal
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Minor
Arterial
Road
(feet)
Collector
Road
(feet)
Local
Road
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(feet)
All uses
(unless
otherwise
specified)
50 40 30 25 50 50
A building may be permitted closer to the street than required above when there is an
adjacent existing principal building on the same side of the street which is closer to the street
than the minimum front yard requirement and is within 100 feet of the building to be erected. If
the building to be erected is within 100 feet of only one such existing adjacent principal
building, the minimum front yard shall not be less than the average of the setback of the
existing principal building and the minimum front yard requirement; provided, however, that
this formula shall not require the placing of a building more than 10 feet back from the front
building line of the existing adjacent principal buildings. If the building to be erected is
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 434/520
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
between two such existing principal buildings within 100 feet of the building to be erected, the
minimum front yard shall not be less than the average setback of the two adjacent existing
principal buildings.
Maximum building height: 40 feet.
§ 280-1105. Lot, yard and height regulations of accessory
uses/structures.
Minimum front yard. With the exception of patios and decks, accessory structures shall not be
permitted in the front yard, except for double-frontage lots, where accessory structures shall
comply with the front yard requirements for principal structures. Patios and decks shall not
encroach on the minimum front yard specified by § 280-1104 of this chapter.
Minimum setback from front yard. Accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet
from all front yards.
Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
Maximum height: 25 feet.
Parking and loading regulations. Loading shall be provided as specified in Article XIII of this
chapter relating to parking and loading regulations. In addition, no loading facility shall be
permitted on any side of a building facing adjoining lands within a residential zoning district nor
any side of a building facing an abutting street.
Sign regulations. Signs shall be permitted as specified in Article XII of this chapter relating to sign
regulations.
Driveway and access drive regulations. All driveways and access drives shall be in accordance
with § 280-1606 of this chapter.
Landscaping and screening regulations. Landscaping and screening shall be provided as
specified in Article XIV of this chapter relating to landscaping and screening regulations.
Nonresidential operations regulations. All nonresidential operations shall be in compliance with
any Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or federal government regulations, as required by the
most-recent regulations made available from these governmental bodies.
Outdoor storage regulations. Within this zoning district, no outdoor storage or display of
merchandise is permitted.
Waste product regulations. Dumpsters and waste receptacles may be permitted within the side or
rear yard, in accordance with § 280-1403C of this chapter. All dumpsters shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from any adjoining property in a residential zoning district.
Lighting regulations. Lighting shall be shielded as to not impact adjoining properties. Light
emanating from any source on the property shall not be greater than two footcandles measured at
a height of three feet at the lot line.
Article XII. Sign Regulations
§ 280-1200. Applicability.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 435/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
B.
The requirements and provisions of this Article XII shall apply to all signs unless application to specific
zoning districts is expressly stated.
§ 280-1201. Statement of purpose.
The purposes of this Article XII are as follows:
To provide for signs as a means of effective visual communication.
To promote adopted comprehensive planning and zoning objectives.
To assure compatibility of signs with land uses and buildings in the vicinity of the signs and in the
community as a whole.
To improve the safety of pedestrians, vehicular traffic, and property.
To enhance the economic value of the community.
To enhance the aesthetic environment.
To minimize adverse effects of signs on nearby property.
To otherwise promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community.
To regulate the use of signs through a sign permitting process.
To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations.
§ 280-1202. Sign-related definitions and terms.
The following definitions and terms of "sign" and various types of signs shall apply to those terms
whenever they appear in this Article XII:
SIGN
A device for visual communication that is used to bring the subject to the attention of the public.
Signs do include:
Lettering, logos, trademarks, or other symbols that are an integral part of the architectural
design of a building, that are applied to a building, or that are located elsewhere on the
premises;
Signs affixed to windows or glass doors or otherwise internally mounted such that they
are obviously intended to be seen and understood by vehicular or pedestrian traffic
outside the building;
Flags and insignia of civic, charitable, religious, fraternal, patriotic, or similar
organizations;
Insignia of governments or government agencies;
Banners, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, and similar materials;
and
Inflatable objects.
Signs do not include:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 436/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Architectural features which may be identified with a particular business;
Backlit awnings that include no lettering, logos, or other symbols;
Signs within a building that are obviously intended to be seen primarily from within the
building;
Outdoor signs intended for use within a property, such as menu signs by fast-food
restaurant drive-through lanes, signs with regulations within a park, and building
identification signs within a campus;
Flags of governments or government agencies;
Decorative seasonal and holiday banners on residential properties; and
Displays of merchandise either behind store windows or outdoors.
BILLBOARD
An off-premises, permanent sign which directs attention to a product, service, business, or cause.
BUILDING SIGN
A sign attached to or painted on a building which has a use in addition to supporting the sign; this
includes wall signs and roof signs.
BUSINESS SIGN
A sign which directs attention to any business, professional, commercial, or industrial activity
occurring on the premises on which the sign is located, but not including a home occupation sign
(also see "center sign").
CENTER SIGN
A business sign that provides identification at the entrance to a center such as a shopping center,
office complex, or industrial park. (Refer to "business sign" in Table 12-1-B and "center sign" in
Table 12-2-B,[1] and in § 280-1206C.)
CONTRACTOR SIGN
A temporary sign that carries the name and information about a contractor who is involved in
construction work occurring on the premises on which the sign is located.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN
An identification sign at the entrance to a residential development. (Refer to "identification sign" in
Table 12-1-B and "development sign" in Table 12-2-B,[2] and in § 280-1206H.)
ELECTION SIGN
A temporary sign which directs attention to a candidate or candidates for public office, a political
party, or a ballot issue.
FREESTANDING SIGN
A sign not attached to or painted on a building, or a sign attached to or painted on a building which
has no use in addition to supporting the sign.
GARAGE/YARD SALE SIGN
A temporary sign which directs attention to the sale of personal goods on the premises on which
the sign is located.
GOVERNMENT SIGN
An off-premises sign placed by a governmental unit, such as a traffic, directional, informational, or
street name sign, or an historical marker.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 437/520
A sign providing information about a business activity conducted within a dwelling unit on the
premises on which the sign is located.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN
A sign used to identify the name and display information about the individual, organization,
agency, institution, facility, or development located on the premises on which the sign is located,
but not including a business sign. (Also see "development sign" and "public use sign.").
INCIDENTAL SIGN
An informational sign, no more than two square feet in size and not including any commercial
message or logo, which carries a message such as "enter," "open," "telephone," "rest rooms," "no
parking," "no trespassing," "warning," a listing of hours when open, an on-site direction, or
anything similar.
LOT
When used in this Article XII, Signs, the word "lot" shall mean a designated parcel, tract or area of
land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit (e.g., the area used by a dwelling unit in a single-family attached dwelling
structure).
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION SIGN
An off-premises sign displaying information about a place of worship, service club, or other
organization that does not operate for the purpose of making a profit.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN
A sign that does not apply to the property on which it is displayed.
ON-PREMISES SIGN
A sign that applies to the property on which it is displayed.
OPEN HOUSE SIGN
A temporary sign which provides information about a real estate open house, including the words
"open house," the day and time of the open house, and the name of the realtor.
OVERHEAD SIGN
A sign located such that pedestrian or vehicular traffic might pass beneath any part of it.
PERMANENT SIGN
A sign intended to be displayed for an unlimited period of time.
PUBLIC USE SIGN
An identification sign used to identify the name and display information about a public use such as
a government building, school, park, firehouse, or place of worship. (Refer to "identification sign"
in Table 12-1-B and "public use sign" in Table 12-2-B.[3])
PUBLIC UTILITY SIGN
A sign with a message relating to a business organization performing a public service and subject
to special governmental regulations (e.g., an electric company, sewer authority, or telephone
company).
REAL ESTATE SIGN
A temporary sign which provides information about a real estate activity on the premises on which
the sign is located, such as a sign advertising a sale, rental, or property available for or in the
process of development, but not including an open house sign.
ROOF SIGN
A sign attached to or painted on a roof.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 438/520
[1]
[2]
[3]
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
SIDEWALK SIGN
A temporary sign placed on the sidewalk adjacent to the commercial activity it advertises, but not
including a contractor sign, a garage/yard sale sign, a home occupation sign, an open house sign,
a real estate sign, or a special event sign.
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN
A temporary sign which carries information about a special event such as an auction, flea market,
festival, carnival, meal, or fund-raising event, but not including any business sign, such as a "sale"
sign at a store.
TEMPORARY SIGN
A sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.
WALL SIGN
A sign attached to or painted on the wall of a building.
WINDOW DISPLAY
An exhibit behind a window that is intended to draw attention to a product, service, business, or
cause.
Editor's Note: Tables 12-1-B and 12-2-B are included at the end of this chapter.
Editor's Note: Tables 12-1-B and 12-2-B are included at the end of this chapter.
Editor's Note: Tables 12-1-B and 12-2-B are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-1203. Sign area and sign height.
The following regulations shall apply when interpreting sign area and sign height regulations in this
Article XII:
Sign area. The area of a sign shall be the area of the smallest rectangle, triangle, or circle that will
encompass all elements of the sign, such as letters, figures, symbols, designs, or other display.
When the sign is a separate unit, the area shall include any borders, framing, trim, decorative
attachments, background, and space between elements; it shall not include any supporting
structure unless that structure is illuminated, is in the form of a symbol, or contains advertising
elements.
When the sign is applied to a wall or otherwise has no definable edges, the area shall include
all color, artwork, or other means used to differentiate the sign from the surface upon which it
is placed.
When a single sign structure has more than one face with the same message, and no two
sign faces are more than three feet apart at any point, the area shall be computed by
determining the greatest total area of all sign faces visible from any single location.
Sign height. The height of a sign shall be measured from the average ground level beneath the
sign to the highest point of the sign. The ground level shall be the lower of the ground level
existing at the time of construction or the ground level existing prior to construction and prior to
any earth disturbance at the site. This prior ground level may be established by any reliable
source, including, without limitation, existing topographic maps, aerial photographs, photographs
of the site, or affidavits of people who are personally familiar with the site. No person(s) shall
artificially increase the maximum height of a sign by altering the grade at the base of the sign by
any means.
No sign shall be higher than the height limitation of the zoning district in which it is located.
The height of freestanding signs shall be controlled by the standards in Tables 12-1 and 12-2.
[1]
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 439/520
[1]
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
Editor's Note: Tables 12-1 and 12-2 are included at the end of this chapter.
Wall signs may be at any height on the wall to which they are attached, except that they may
not extend higher than the top of the wall.
Roof signs may extend no more than five feet above the lowest point where they are attached
to the building and may not extend above the highest point of the roof.
§ 280-1204. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all signs, in addition to the specific regulations and
supplemental regulations contained in the following provisions of this Article XII. Where the general
regulations are contradicted by the specific or supplementary regulations, the specific or
supplementary regulations shall control.
All signs shall reflect the general character of the neighborhood.
All signs shall be constructed of durable materials and maintained in good condition.
When a sign becomes unsafe, the Zoning Officer shall give written notice to the owner of the
premises on which the sign is located that the sign must be made safe or removed immediately.
The areas surrounding all signs shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and attractive condition.
All signs shall be removed within three months if the purpose for which they were erected no
longer exists.
Each property which displays one or more permanent freestanding signs and which is in an area
where street addresses have been assigned must prominently display the address on one
permanent freestanding sign visible from the street. The address must include the street number;
the street name is optional. The address must be of a size and design which is easily identifiable
and legible from moving traffic in the street at a distance of 100 feet (three-inch-high
lettering/numerals with a three-quarter-inch stroke). The area taken up by the address does not
count as part of the sign area. Center signs are exempt from this requirement.
No temporary signs shall be permitted except as authorized elsewhere in this Article XII.
No sign shall be located within a street right-of-way, except a government sign, a public utility sign,
a sidewalk sign, a nonprofit organization sign, or another sign approved by the governing body or
PennDOT.
No sign shall be permitted within the clear sight triangle as required in § 280-1617 of this chapter.
No signs shall be painted, pasted, nailed, stapled, or otherwise attached to utility poles, trees,
fences, fire hydrants, or in an unauthorized manner to walls or other signs, except insofar as such
signs comply with generally applicable rules, regulations, or policies formally adopted by the
governing body.
Any freestanding sign within a floodplain must receive approval as a special exception.
No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct any door, stairway, window, fire escape, or other means
of egress or ingress.
No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct ventilation or light from a building.
No overhead sign shall have a clearance of less than eight feet between any pedestrian walk and
the lowest part of the sign.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 440/520
O.
P.
Q.
(1)
(2)
R.
S.
T.
U.
V.
W.
X.
Y.
Z.
AA.
BB.
CC.
DD.
EE.
(1)
(2)
FF.
No sign that is parallel to and attached to the face of a building shall project more than 18 inches
over a public sidewalk.
No sign that is perpendicular to and attached to the face of a building shall project more than 48
inches from the building.
No sign shall have lights or other illuminating devices that constitute a public safety or traffic
hazard.
No sign shall be permitted which imitates or which might be confused with an official traffic sign or
signal, such as:
By containing the word "stop" or "danger"; or
By including red, green, or yellow lights.
No sign or window display shall include a revolving beam or beacon of light resembling an
emergency vehicle or facility.
No sign shall advertise activities or products which are illegal under federal, state, or local
municipal laws or regulations.
No sign shall include statements, words, or pictures that are considered to be vulgar, obscene, or
pornographic.
No streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, or similar materials shall be
displayed outside a building. (See § 280-1206N of this chapter for regulations which apply to
banners used as special events signs.)
In addition to any other signage permitted by this Article XII, each commercial or industrial
property may display one flag, not to exceed 35 square feet, with a company or corporate
identification logo on premises on an approved, standard flagpole.
No animated, sequential, intermittent, flashing, rotating, or oscillating signs shall be permitted
except for time-and-temperature signs.
No sign shall emit smoke, visible vapors, particles, sound, or odor.
No sign shall be placed on an automobile, truck, or other vehicle if that vehicle is being used
primarily for displaying such sign.
No inflatable signs shall be permitted.
No open flames shall be permitted as part of a sign or in any other way to attract attention.
Advertising painted upon or displayed upon a barn or other structure shall be considered a sign
and shall comply with the regulations of this Article XII.
Any sign which has been authenticated as historically significant and accurate for its specific
location, whether original or a replica, shall be exempt from the regulations of this Article XII.
Signs may be interior lighted with nonglaring lights; signs may be externally lighted by lights which
are shielded so there is no direct light transmitted to other properties or public rights-of-way.
The light from any illuminated sign shall not adversely affect:
Safe vision of operators of vehicles moving on public or private streets or parking compounds;
Any residential zoning district; or
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 441/520
(3)
GG.
HH.
II.
A.
B.
[1]
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
Any part of a building or property used for residential purposes.
No lighting shall be permitted to outline buildings or structures, or parts thereof, through the use of
exposed neon tubing, strings of lights, or other means, with the exception of customary holiday
decorations, that may be installed 30 days prior to and be removed not later than 21 days after the
holiday.
Business signs in other than commercial zoning districts or industrial zoning districts shall not be
illuminated when the business is closed.
All electrically illuminated signs shall be constructed to the standards/listing of Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., and the most-recent version of the National Electrical Code, as part of the
most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended.
§ 280-1205. Specific regulations.
Tables 12-1 and Tables 12-2 provide regulations for specific types of signs in each zoning district. Note
that there are also supplemental regulations in § 280-1206 of this chapter which also regulate most
types of signs; these are referenced in the second column of Tables 12-1, the note at the top of Table
12-2-A, and the second column of Table 12-2-B.[1]
Permitted signs and sign permit requirements. Tables 12-1 indicate, for each zoning district, which
types of signs are permitted and not permitted and which types of signs require permits. Table 12-
1-A applies to signs on residential properties; Table 12-1-B applies to signs on nonresidential
properties. In those parts, an "N" indicates that the sign is not permitted; a "P-Y" indicates that the
sign is permitted and a permit is required; a "P-N" indicates that the sign is permitted and a permit
is not required. Table 12-1-C applies to signs in rights-of-way; these are approved through special
processes rather than through the regular permit procedure.
Permitted number, area, height, and setback for signs. Tables 12-2 indicate, for each zoning
district, information about the permitted number, maximum area, maximum height, and minimum
setback for each type of sign. Table 12-2-A has standards for the following types of signs:
business signs (except center signs), home occupation signs, and identification signs (except
development signs and public use signs). Table 12-2-B has standards for other types of signs.
Editor's Note: Tables 12-1 and 12-2 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-1206. Supplemental regulations.
In addition to the regulations contained elsewhere in this Article XII, the following shall apply to specific
types of signs. The regulations in Tables 12-1 and Tables 12-2 apply in addition to the following
supplemental regulations.[1] Where the provisions in the supplemental regulations and Tables 12-1 and
Tables 12-2 are contradictory, the provisions contained in the supplemental regulations shall control.
Billboards.
There may be no more than one billboard structure at any point; it may have two surfaces
with a total of two messages, as long as the surfaces are back-to-back or at an angle of 45°
or less. Each surface may have an area of 300 square feet, whether or not the messages are
the same. The minimum yard for each billboard structure shall be in accordance with the
following:
Minimum front yard: 30 feet;
Minimum side yard: 15 feet;
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 442/520
(c)
(d)
(2)
[2]
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
[3]
G.
H.
I.
Minimum rear yard: 15 feet; or
The minimum yard requirements in the zoning district, whichever is greater.
Each billboard structure must be at least 1,200 feet from any other billboard structure and at
least 300 feet from any residential, rural, agricultural, or open space zoning district.
Business signs. Business signs are generally regulated in accordance with Table 12-1-B and Table
12-2-A. Business signs for individual businesses which are permitted by Table 12-2-A must be
located so that they are identified with the individual business, i.e., rather than being at the lot
(street) frontage of a large center, away from the business they are advertising. One specific type
of business sign is regulated in accordance with Tables 12-1-B and 12-2-B.[2]
Editor's Note: Tables 12-1-B, 12-2-A and 12-2-B are included at the end of this chapter.
Center signs. Center signs are allowed for centers such as shopping centers, office complexes,
and industrial parks which meet at least two of the following three minimums:
Five units;
Twenty thousand square feet of building area; and
Five acres of land.
Contractor signs.
Each contractor sign must be set back at least 10 feet from the cartway or at the building line,
whichever is less, may not be in the required minimum side yard, and may not be illuminated.
Contractor signs must be removed promptly upon completion of the project; signs that are not
removed promptly may be removed and impounded by the municipality, and the municipality
may recover a fee equal to the cost of removal and storage. No off-premises contractor signs
are permitted.
If there are four or more contractor signs on a single lot, they must be combined in a single
display by attaching them to a single background panel or frame as large as necessary to
accommodate one sign per contractor. The background is not included in calculating the sign
area, the height of the display may not exceed 10 feet, and the display may project a
maximum of 12 inches from the wall if attached parallel to the building.
Garage/yard sale signs. Garage/yard sale signs may be placed no more than 48 hours before the
sale and must be removed before the end of the day of the sale. Signs that are not removed within
the time limit may be removed and impounded by the Township, and the municipality may recover
a fee equal to the cost of removal and storage. No off-premises garage/yard sale signs are
permitted.
Home occupation signs. A home occupation sign may include a name, an address, an occupation
or activity, and a logo or trademark. There may be no illumination, except that a sign for a medical
office or emergency service may be illuminated when the business is open.
Identification signs. Identification signs are generally regulated in accordance with Tables 12-1 and
Table 12-2-A. However, two specific types of identification sign are regulated in accordance with
Table 12-2-B: development signs and public use signs.[3]
Editor's Note: Tables 12-1, 12-2-A and 12-2-B are included at the end of this chapter.
Development signs. Development signs are allowed for residential developments. They may
include only the name of the development and may not include any commercial advertising.
Incidental signs. Incidental signs must have a setback of 10 feet from the right-of-way, unless they
are 30 inches or less in height, in which case no setback is required.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 443/520
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
[1]
[1]
A.
B.
C.
Nonprofit organization signs. Nonprofit organization signs may be placed in street rights-of-way
with the approval of the Township. The governing body may require that they be placed at
designated entrances to the community or on common display panels.
Open house signs. Open house signs must include the words "open house," the day and time of
the open house, and the name of the realtor. They may be displayed no more than 72 hours in
advance of the open house and must be removed within two hours of the end of the open house.
The open house must be attended by the seller or his representative during the entire advertised
time of the open house. Signs that are not removed within the time limits may be removed and
impounded by the Township, and the Township may recover a fee equal to the cost of removal and
storage. There may be no more than two off-premises open house signs for each open house,
with not more than one sign per intersection. Open house signs shall be limited to use for six days
per month per lot. The placement of open house signs may not interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic and must comply with all applicable general regulations in § 280-1204 of this
chapter.
Real estate signs. Real estate signs must be removed within five days of the completion of the
activity that they advertise. Signs that are not removed within the time limits may be removed and
impounded by the Township, and the Township may recover a fee equal to the cost of removal and
storage. No off-premises real estate signs are permitted.
Sidewalk signs. Sidewalk signs shall not be more than 24 inches wide and 48 inches high if placed
next to the curb; if placed next to buildings having obstructions such as steps, they shall not be
more than 42 inches wide and 72 inches high. The distance between sidewalk signs shall be at
least 15 feet. A minimum of four feet of unobstructed walkway shall be maintained.
Special event signs. Special event signs shall comply with any generally applicable rules,
regulations, or policies of the governing body; and, if a special event has a specific date, signs for
that event may be displayed no more than 21 days in advance. All special event signs must be
removed within five days of the end of the event. Signs that are not removed within the time limits
may be removed and impounded by the Township, and the Township may recover a fee equal to
the cost of removal and storage.
Editor's Note: Tables 12-1 and 12-2 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-1207. Permitting procedures and fees.
Permits for the placement of signs are required as indicated by Tables 12-1.[1] Sign permit application
requirements, such as forms, plans, and fees, shall be established by the governing body.
Editor's Note: Tables 12-1 are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 280-1208. Nonconforming signs.
Nonconforming signs may continue to be displayed, as long as there is compliance with the following
limitations and conditions:
There may be no expansion or increase in the nonconformity in any way.
Maintenance and repair of the sign are permitted; if necessary, up to 50% of the sign and its
supporting structure may be replaced in the event of damage; any such replacement must be
completed within six months of the damage occurring.
The sign must be brought into conformity if, for a period of at least three months, the message has
no longer applied to an activity on the premises (this does not apply to billboards).[1]
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 444/520
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Editor's Note: Tables 12-1 and 12-2, which immediately followed this section, are included at the
end of this chapter.
Article XIII. Parking and Loading Regulations
§ 280-1300. Applicability.
The requirements and provisions of this Article XIII shall apply to all parking and loading facilities in all
zoning districts unless application to specific zoning districts is expressly stated.
§ 280-1301. Intent.
It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking and loading facilities be provided for each
use of land. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use. These
parking and loading requirements shall apply to all uses in all zoning districts.
§ 280-1302. Design requirements for parking facilities.
Size. Each parking space shall have a minimum area of 180 square feet, a minimum width of nine
feet, and a minimum depth of 18 feet.
Access. Parking facilities for more than four spaces shall be designed so that each vehicle may
proceed to and from the parking space without requiring the moving of any other vehicle.
Surface. Parking facilities shall be designed to prevent dust, erosion, and excessive water flow
across streets or adjoining property. Parking facilities shall be graded for proper drainage and shall
be improved with a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or bituminous concrete
surface, unless an alternative material and/or design as part of a readily accepted stormwater
BMP, in accordance with the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land
Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended.
Location. All parking spaces shall be provided on the premises; except that, after Zoning Hearing
Board approval, all or part of the required number of spaces may be provided on a separate lot or
lots within 500 feet of the premises as a special exception.
§ 280-1303. Minimum parking requirements.
Computation of spaces. When determination of the number of required parking spaces results in a
requirement of a fractional space greater than or equal to 1/2, the fraction shall be interpreted as
one parking space.
Dwelling and conversion of existing building to multifamily dwellings, and other dwellings: two
spaces for each dwelling unit.
Visitor accommodation: 1 1/2 spaces for each unit.
Boardinghouse and bed-and-breakfast establishment: one space for each sleeping room or guest
room.
Stadium, private club, funeral home, theater, auditorium, recreational facilities, and similar place of
public assembly: except as otherwise provided below, one space for each four seats.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 445/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
(1)
(2)
(3)
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
R.
S.
Bowling alley: one space per lane and one space for each two employees on duty.
Swimming pools and health clubs: one space per four persons of legal occupancy.
Miniature golf: two spaces per hole, and one space for each two employees on duty.
Restaurant or tavern: one space for each four seats of planned capacity, plus one space for each
two employees on duty.
Medical clinic and medical office: four spaces for each licensed medical professional engaged in
practice at the clinic, plus one space for each employee on duty at any one time.
Nursing home, retirement home, personal care home, rehabilitation center: one space for each
five beds, plus one space for each two employees; where individual dwelling units are provided in
the form of a multifamily or other type of unit, two spaces for each unit is required.
Hospital: two spaces for each patient bed, plus 1 1/2 spaces for each employee and staff person
on duty during the largest working shift.
Office establishment: one space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area.
Industrial establishment: 1 1/2 spaces for each two employees in the largest working shift.
Additionally, one space for each 200 square feet of gross office floor area or four spaces,
whichever is greater, shall be provided.
Place of assembly for worship/education:
Place of assembly for worship: one space per four persons based on design capacity.
Elementary school, intermediate school, and junior high school: two spaces per classroom,
but not less than one space per employee; plus one space per every 30 seats for auditorium,
gymnasium, or multipurpose room.
High school: one space per each five students based on design capacity, plus one space per
employee, plus one space per every 30 seats for auditorium, gymnasium, or multipurpose
room.
University, college, and other adult education institution: one space per each five students based
on design capacity, plus one space per employee, plus one space per every 30 seats for
auditorium, gymnasium, or multipurpose room, plus one space per four occupants in a dormitory.
Game room: one space to accommodate each vehicle of all employees on the premises at any
given time, plus the greater of one space for every 200 square feet of floor space (other than
warehouse or storage) area or one space for every two machines in operation on the premises.
Nonprofit public facility: one space per four persons of planned capacity.
Group home: two spaces per dwelling unit, plus space for each four occupants/residents.
Accessory dwelling unit: one space per accessory dwelling unit, in addition to the parking required
for the principal single-family detached dwelling use.
Group day-care home: one space per nonresident employee, plus one safe passenger loading
area per six persons receiving care, or any fraction thereof.
Convenience store: one space for each 100 square feet of net retail floor area, plus one space for
each employee based on the maximum number of employees to be on the premises at one time,
plus one space per gasoline pump.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 446/520
T.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
U.
V.
W.
X.
Y.
A.
B.
Communications tower: two spaces per site if fully automated; if not automated, one space for
each employee based on the number of employees on the largest shift; but in no case shall there
be less than two spaces required.
Neighborhood shopping center and community shopping center:
Less than or equal to 50,000 square feet of gross floor area: one space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area.
Greater than 50,000 square feet but less than 100,000 square feet of gross floor area: one
space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
Greater than 100,000 square feet but less than 400,000 square feet of gross floor area: one
space per 350 square feet of gross floor area.
Greater than 400,000 square feet of gross floor area: one space per 350 square feet of gross
floor area.
Residential uses other than those specifically required in this section: two spaces for each
dwelling unit.
Commercial establishment other than those specifically mentioned in this section: one space for
each 200 square feet of net retail floor area, plus one space for each employee based on the
maximum number of employees to be on the premises at one time.
Forestry/agriculture/horticulture other than those specifically required in this section: one space for
each employee based on the maximum number of employees to be on the premises at one time.
All other uses other than those specifically required in this section: for other uses which do not fit
into one of the categories herein in this section, a determination of the required number of parking
spaces shall be made by the Zoning Hearing Board. It is the intent of these regulations that
adequate parking facilities be provided for each use.
§ 280-1304. Off-site parking permitted by special exception in
certain zoning districts.
For uses within all zoning districts except the residential zoning districts, if the vehicle parking spaces
required above cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is
conducted, the Zoning Hearing Board may, as a special exception, permit such spaces to be provided
on another lot. Such off-site spaces shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner.
The same off-site space may not be claimed by more than one user for use at the same time.
§ 280-1305. Loading facilities.
Adequate loading facilities shall be provided on the same premises with every building or part
thereof hereafter erected or occupied for any use which involves the receipt or distribution of
materials or merchandise by motor vehicle. This facility shall be so placed and arranged as not to
interfere with the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a public road. In all zoning
districts, except for industrial zoning districts, loading facilities shall not be provided in the front
yard. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a special exception where hardship would result when
an existing use is expanded and the loading requirements of this chapter would otherwise have to
be met.
Loading facilities shall be designed to prevent dust, erosion, and excessive water flow across
streets or adjoining property. Loading facilities shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 447/520
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
improved with a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or bituminous concrete surface,
unless an alternative material and/or design as part of a readily accepted stormwater BMP, in
accordance with the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land
Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended.
§ 280-1306. Parking and storage of vehicles.
Automotive vehicles are not allowed to be parked in the front yards except in driveways, access
drives, or similarly improved areas. Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without
current license plates or current inspection stickers shall not be parked or stored on any property
within a residential zoning district, other than in completely enclosed buildings.
All campers, boats, trailers, travel trailers, motor homes and other types of recreational vehicles
are permitted on the property, provided they are parked or stored in accordance with one or more
of the following criteria:
Within a completely enclosed building;
If stored outside of a completely enclosed building, such vehicles shall not be permitted within
minimum required front yards or minimum required side yards;
Their placement shall be subject to the minimum yard requirements that are applicable to the
placement of accessory buildings; and
Provided, however, that they are permitted on any part of the property for a period of time
which does not exceed 96 hours in any one thirty-day period.
§ 280-1307. Minimum setback requirements for parking
compounds and loading facilities.
Residential zoning districts. In residential zoning districts, a parking compound with more than four
spaces and all loading facilities shall not be permitted closer than 10 feet to any lot line.
Commercial and other zoning districts. In commercial zoning districts and other zoning districts
(except for industrial zoning districts), no parking compound or loading facility shall be permitted
closer than 10 feet to any lot line.
Industrial zoning districts. In industrial zoning districts, no parking compound or loading facility
shall be permitted closer than 10 feet to any lot line or 40 feet to any street right-of-way line.
Article XIV. Landscaping and Screening Regulations
§ 280-1400. Applicability.
The requirements and provisions of this Article XIV shall apply to all landscaping and screening
treatments in all zoning districts unless application to specific zoning districts is expressly stated.
§ 280-1401. Planting strip.
Planting strip required. All multifamily dwelling, commercial, industrial, and other nonresidential
uses shall be separated from all side and rear lot lines and all street right-of-way lines by a
planting strip having a minimum width of 10 feet measured from the lot line.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 448/520
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
Said planting strip shall be planted in grass, shrubbery, trees or other plant material, but in no
case shall these areas be paved or covered by an impervious surface.
Said planting strip may only be broken by approved:
Driveway or access drive entrances or exits; and
Joint parking compounds and/or loading area shared by adjoining uses.
Accessory structures shall be permitted, provided they conform with the specific pertinent
zoning district requirements of this chapter.
§ 280-1402. Screening and landscaping of parking compounds.
Screening along street right-of-way. All parking compounds with more than 10 spaces shall be
screened from any street right-of-way by a landscape screen to be installed within a ten-foot-wide
planting strip measured from the right-of-way line.
The landscape screen shall be composed of a combination of shrubs, deciduous trees and
earthen berms.
Shrubs shall have a minimum height of two feet, measured from ground level, at the time
of planting.
Deciduous trees shall have a minimum height of 10 feet above finished ground level and
a trunk caliper of at least 1 1/2 inches taken six inches above finished ground level.
Earthen berms shall have a minimum height of one foot.
The plants selected for use in the landscape screen shall be suited for such plantings and be
arranged in such manner as to provide an effective visual barrier within two years of planting.
The Township encourages naturalistic planting designs, which enhance the visual effect of the
landscape along public streets.
The landscape screen shall be broken only at points of vehicular or pedestrian access.
In order for the Zoning Officer to determine compliance with the requirements of this section,
a plan shall be submitted showing the proposed design of the landscape screen. Said plan
shall include a plant schedule and sufficient information as required for the installation of the
screen. The plan shall be sealed by a landscape architect licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Screening of residential parking compounds from adjoining residential uses. All residential parking
compounds with more than four spaces shall be screened from adjoining residential uses by a
landscape screen.
The landscape screen shall be composed of shrubs that have a minimum height of at least
four feet, measured from ground level at the time of planting. The plants shall be arranged in
such manner as to provide an effective visual barrier.
The Zoning Officer may require the submittal of such information necessary to determine
compliance with the requirements of this section.
Parking compound interior landscaping. All parking compounds with 20 or more spaces shall be
provided with interior landscaped areas equal to 10 square feet for each parking space, excluding
those spaces located directly along the perimeter for which landscape screens have been
provided. The intent of this section is to require landscaping within parking compounds; therefore,
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 449/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
landscaping screens, planting strips and landscaping surrounding buildings shall not be
considered as interior landscaping.
The interior landscaping shall be provided within curbed island planters having a minimum
area of 50 square feet. The interior parking compound landscaping shall be placed so as to
delineate driving lanes, define rows of parking compound and generally to mitigate the visual
impact of parking compounds.
The interior parking compound landscaping shall be composed of a combination of shrubs
and trees. At least one shade or ornamental tree shall be required for each 20 parking
spaces.
In order for the Zoning Officer to determine compliance with the requirements of this section,
a plan shall be submitted showing the proposed design of the interior landscaping. Said plan
shall include a plant schedule and sufficient information as required for the installation of the
landscaping. The plan shall be sealed by a landscape architect licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 280-1403. Screening of nonresidential uses and other specific
facilities.
All commercial, industrial, and nonresidential uses shall be screened from adjoining residential
uses and residential zoning districts by a landscape screen to be installed within the required
planting strip as required in § 280-1401A of this chapter. The landscape screen shall be
composed of a combination of trees and shrubs.
Shrubs shall have a minimum height of four feet, measured from ground level, at the time of
planting.
Trees shall have a minimum height of 10 feet above finished ground level and a trunk caliper
of 1 1/2 inches taken six inches above finished ground level.
Additional screening for outdoor storage. All nonresidential uses with outdoor storage shall be
screened from adjoining residential uses and residential zoning districts, commercial zoning
districts, or to a public right-of-way by a landscape screen or other visual barrier with plantings.
The landscape screen shall be composed of evergreen plants and trees arranged to form both a
low-level and a high-level screen.
The high-level screen shall consist of evergreen trees planted at an initial height of not less
than four feet and planted at intervals of not more than 10 feet.
The low-level screen shall consist of two rows of evergreen shrubs or hedges planted at an
initial height of not less than two feet and spaced at intervals of not more than five feet. The
low-level screen plantings shall be placed in an alternating or staggered pattern to produce a
more-effective visual barrier.
An alternative visual barrier shall be a six-foot-high opaque fence or wall with plantings of
trees, shrubs and/or vines along the outside surfaces of the fence or wall.
Dumpsters and waste receptacles for nonresidential uses and multifamily dwelling uses shall be
completely enclosed and shall be screened from any adjoining public rights-of-way and/or
properties by a fence, wall or plant screen at least as high as the container.
The plants selected for use in any required landscape screen shall be suited for such plantings
and be arranged in such manner as to provide an effective visual barrier within two years of
planting.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 450/520
E.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
D.
In order for the Zoning Officer to determine compliance with the requirements of this section, a
plan shall be submitted showing the proposed design of the plating strip and landscape screen.
Said plan shall include a plant schedule and include sufficient information as required for the
installation of the plating strip and screen. The plan shall be sealed by a landscape architect
licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 280-1404. Landscaping.
Any part or portion of the site that is not used for buildings, other structures, driveways, access drives,
loading or parking spaces, aisles, sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be provided with an
all-season natural vegetative ground cover and ornamental plantings. All existing vegetation on and
around the site shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
Article XV. Performance Regulations
§ 280-1500. Applicability.
In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, the following performance standards shall apply to
specific uses permitted in the various zoning districts.
§ 280-1501. Accessory commercial use.
Accessory commercial uses shall comply with the following requirements.
Such accessory commercial uses shall only be permitted as part of a subdivision or land
development plan proposing the construction of at least 150 dwelling units.
No outdoor storage of equipment, supplies, or merchandise shall be permitted.
The total area of the accessory commercial use or uses shall not exceed 5% of the total gross
floor area of the dwellings in the development.
The following commercial uses are permitted, provided that the gross floor area of any such use
does not exceed 3,500 square feet:
Cafes, restaurants and snack bars.
Delicatessens.
Pharmacies.
Automatic laundry or dry cleaners.
Gift shops.
Newsstands, stationary stores and bookstores.
Barbershops or beauty shops.
Convenience stores.
§ 280-1502. Accessory dwelling unit.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 451/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
A.
Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the following requirements.
The accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 40% of the total square footage of the principal
single-family detached dwelling structure.
There is a limit of one accessory dwelling unit per lot.
The lot shall comply with all other single-family detached dwelling dimensional requirements of the
pertinent zoning district.
The owner of the property must maintain principal residency in either the principal single-family
detached dwelling structure or the accessory dwelling unit.
The total number of occupants in both the principal single-family detached dwelling use and the
accessory dwelling unit combined may not exceed the maximum number established by the
definition of "family" as set forth in Article II of this chapter relating to definitions and terms.
An accessory dwelling unit shall be architecturally consistent with the primary structure.
A building permit for an accessory dwelling unit must be approved and issued prior to its
construction.
§ 280-1503. Adult-oriented establishment.
Adult-oriented establishments shall comply with the following requirements.
No lot line of an adult-oriented establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any residential
zoning district or Campus/Open Space District.
No lot line of an adult-oriented establishment shall be located within 500 feet of a lot line of any
religious structure, school, day-care center, nonprofit public facility, or nursing home, retirement
home, or rehabilitation center.
No lot line of an adult-oriented establishment shall be located within 500 feet of the lot line of
another adult-oriented establishment.
There shall be no display of adult-oriented materials or merchandise that can be seen from the
exterior of the building.
Not more than one adult-oriented establishment or activity shall be permitted within any one
building or lot.
No unlawful sexual activity or conduct shall be performed or permitted.
§ 280-1504. Agricultural operation.
Agricultural operations shall comply with the following requirements.
The following yards and setbacks are required:
Except for dwellings and residential accessory uses and structures, which shall comply with
the lot and yard regulations of the applicable zoning district, and except for the special yard
and setback requirements set forth in § 280-1504A(2) of this chapter, all structures shall be
set back a minimum of 50 feet from any lot line.
Special yard and setback requirements. Slaughter areas, areas for the storage or processing
of spent mushroom compost, structures for the cultivation of mushrooms or the raising of
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 452/520
[1]
(a)
[2]
[3]
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
livestock, and any building housing livestock, except as set forth in § 280-1504A(3) of this
chapter, shall be set back from the lot line of any adjoining residential zoning district or
existing residential use at least 300 feet.
The Zoning Hearing Board may, as a special exception, however, reduce the above
special yard and setback requirements where it is shown that, because of the nature of
the agricultural operation, prevailing winds, unusual obstructions, topography, or other
conditions, a lesser distance would protect adjoining lands from odor, dust, or other
hazards; or that the agricultural operation is in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rightto-
Farm Law.[1] In no case, however, shall the Zoning Hearing Board reduce the special
yard and setback requirement to less than 100 feet. The burden shall be upon the
applicant to prove that a lesser distance would not be detrimental to the health, safety,
and general welfare of the community.
Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 951 et seq.
Any manure storage facility shall be located in accordance with the yard and/or setback
requirements established by Act 38 of 2005, known as "ACRE,"[2] and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Act, as amended.[3] All applications for manure storage
facilities shall include evidence indicating compliance with Act 38 of 2005, known as "ACRE,"
and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Act.
Editor's Note: See 3 Pa.C.S.A § 311 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 3 Pa.C.S.A. § 519.
All areas utilized for grazing or pasture areas shall be securely fenced to prevent the escape
of animals and be set back a minimum of 10 feet from all lot lines.
All agricultural operations shall be designed and maintained so that water and fertilizer will not
drain onto adjacent lots.
All agricultural operations shall allow for the safe and efficient movement of all vehicles associated
with the operation.
All agricultural operations shall comply with applicable standards of the most-recent version of the
Pennsylvania Manure Management Manual, as amended.
All agribusiness operations shall require the submission and approval of a land development plan
in accordance with the requirements of the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township
Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended.
All applications for agribusiness operations shall include evidence indicating compliance with Act
38 of 2005, known as "ACRE," and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Nutrient Management
Act, as amended, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania CAFO and/or CAO regulations under the
Federal Clean Water Act, and copies of all other required state and or federal permits.
§ 280-1505. Bed-and-breakfast establishment.
[Amended 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-03]
Bed-and-breakfast establishments shall comply with the following requirements:
Bed-and-breakfast establishments shall only be permitted in single-family detached dwelling units.
The owner shall be the primary occupant of the establishment. There shall be no external
alteration to the building except as may be necessary for safety facilities such as fire escapes.
No more than four guest bedrooms shall be permitted if located in the Residential District R-1, and
no more than eight guest bedrooms if located in the Local Commercial District (LC) or the General
Commercial District (GC).
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 453/520
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
Meals may be served to guests as part of the room fee, but in no case shall meals be served to
persons not staying in a guest bedroom.
No cooking facilities shall be permitted in any guest bedroom.
Signs shall comply with the professional, name or address sign regulations and other applicable
sign regulations in Article XII of this chapter relating to sign regulations.
Guest bedrooms shall be rented for periods not to exceed 14 consecutive nights in a thirty-day
period.
The applicant for a zoning permit and certificate of use and occupancy shall demonstrate that
adequate public sewer and public water service will be provided to the establishment.
§ 280-1506. Boardinghouse.
Boardinghouses shall comply with the following requirements.
Boardinghouses shall only be permitted in single-family detached dwelling units. The
owner/operator shall be the primary occupant of the establishment. There shall be no external
alteration to the building except as may be necessary for safety facilities such as fire escapes.
At least five, but not more than 10, boarding rooms shall be available in a boardinghouse.
Meals may be served for compensation only to boarders; in no case shall meals be served for
compensation to persons who are not boarders of the establishment.
No cooking facilities shall be permitted in any boarding room.
Signs shall comply with the professional, name or address sign regulations and other applicable
sign regulations in Article XII of this chapter relating to sign regulations.
Rooms shall be rented on a weekly or monthly basis.
The applicant for a zoning permit and certificate of use and occupancy shall demonstrate that
adequate public sewer and public water service will be provided to the establishment.
§ 280-1507. Commercial parking garage or compound.
Commercial parking garages or lots shall comply with the following requirements.
The facility shall have lot frontage on, and provide access to, an arterial or collector road.
All commercial parking compounds shall be set back from the lot line of any adjoining residential
zoning district or existing residential use at least 50 feet. Otherwise, all commercial parking
compounds shall comply with Article XIII of this chapter relating to parking and loading regulations
and Article XIV of this chapter relating to landscaping and screening regulations.
All commercial parking garages shall comply with all provisions for principal buildings and uses in
the zoning district where the parking compound is proposed.
§ 280-1508. Community shopping center.
Community shopping centers shall comply with the following requirements.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 454/520
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
H.
A.
B.
The development shall have lot frontage on, and provide access to, an arterial or collector road.
Minimum lot width: 500 feet at the building setback line.
Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
Minimum front yard:
For buildings and structures, except signs: 125 feet; however, along principal arterial roads,
the minimum front yard shall be 200 feet.
For parking compounds and loading facilities: 40 feet.
Minimum side yard: 100 feet.
For buildings and structures, except signs: 50 feet.
For parking compounds and loading facilities: 25 feet.
Minimum rear yard: 100 feet.
For buildings and structures, except signs: 50 feet.
For parking compounds and loading facilities: 25 feet.
Signage shall comply with all business sign regulations, center sign regulations, and other
applicable sign regulations in Article XII of this chapter relating to sign regulations.
In addition to the regulations set forth above in this section, developments greater than 100,000
square feet shall comply with the following requirements:
Public sewer and public water service shall be provided.
The development shall have lot frontage on, and provide access to, an arterial road.
Access drives shall be set back at least 1,000 feet from any entrance to or exit from a limited
access highway, at least 2,000 feet from the intersection of any street right-of-way lines, and
at least 100 feet from any other lot line.
Setback from the lot line of any adjoining residential zoning district or existing residential use:
100 feet for buildings, structures, loading facilities, and dumpsters; 50 feet for parking
compounds.
There shall be pedestrian linkages to all adjacent properties and greenways.
There shall be an improved bus stop which would be convenient for patrons and employees
to travel to and from the development by bus. It must include a shelter, seating, a waste
receptacle, and at least one shade tree.
At least 2% of the required parking spaces shall be designated for park-and-ride use.
§ 280-1509. Convenience store.
Convenience stores shall comply with the following requirements.
Minimum lot width: 60 feet at the street right-of-way line.
The facility shall have lot frontage on, and provide access to, an arterial road.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 455/520
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
No arcade machines or games, such as video machines, pinball machines, or similar devices,
shall be permitted.
§ 280-1510. Conventional residential development.
Conventional residential developments shall comply with the following requirements.
The applicant shall prepare conceptual plans for conventional residential development and open
space development in accordance with § 280-1523 of this chapter. Such conceptual plans shall
comply with the minimum requirements for sketch plans as stated in Article IV of the most-recent
version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater Management
Ordinance, as amended.
The applicant shall provide a narrative description of the two development options and shall
demonstrate that the conventional residential development option is clearly superior to the open
space development option based on the following:
The unique physical characteristics of the property proposed for subdivision, which inhibit the
open space design;
The extent to which the open space development option is not feasible;
The adequacy of existing recreational and open space areas to meet existing and projected
demands with the proposed development; and
The extent to which the conventional residential development further advances the objectives
of the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
The applicant shall provide such conceptual plans and narrative description to the Lancaster
Township Planning Commission and shall request comments from the Planning Commission.
The applicant shall provide the Board of Supervisors with the conceptual plans and narrative
description required in this section and the applicant's written response to the Lancaster Township
Planning Commission's comments.
A greenway shall be provided if required in accordance with § 280-1614 of this chapter.
§ 280-1511. Day-care facility.
Day-care facilities shall comply with the following requirements.
Purpose. Recognizing the growing need for day-care facilities, it is the intent of the Township to
encourage the establishment of such facilities in a manner which will preserve the character of
residential neighborhoods while meeting the operational and physical standards of the PA DPW.
Day-care facilities operated within a residence are not subject to the requirements for home
occupations contained in § 280-1514 of this chapter.
Application of regulations. The provisions of this section shall apply to day-care facilities providing
service for part of a twenty-four-hour day for children under 16 years of age, or for persons who
are otherwise disabled, by persons giving care (excluding care provided by relatives). Day-care
facilities shall include family day-care homes, group day-care homes, and day-care centers, all of
which are subject to Chapter II, Sections 8A, 8B, and 8C, of the DPW Social Services Manual
Regulations. This section does not apply to babysitting (as defined by this chapter) or child daycare
service furnished in places of worship during religious services or related activities.
General provisions. The following general provisions apply to all day-care facilities.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 456/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
All child day-care facilities shall comply with all current DPW regulations.
Hours of outside play shall be limited to between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and sunset, as
defined by the National Weather Service.
An outdoor play area, as required by DPW regulations, shall be provided for child day-care
facilities and shall not be located in the front yard.
Day-care facilities utilizing, or proposing to utilize, an on-lot sewage disposal system shall
obtain a written statement from the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer certifying that the
system is properly designed to accommodate the use and that there are no apparent signs of
system failure.
Fencing shall be provided to restrict children from hazardous areas, such as open drainage
ditches, wells, holes, and arterial roads. Natural or physical barriers may be used in place of
fencing so long as such barriers functionally restrict children from these areas.
The expansion of a family day-care home to a group day-care home or the expansion of a
group day-care home to a day-care center shall require a special exception.
When applying for a special exception, the applicant shall submit a plan showing any existing
or proposed outdoor play areas, outdoor play equipment, fencing, access drives, adjacent
streets, adjacent hazardous land uses, on-site hazardous areas (as previously defined),
merchandise delivery areas, on-lot sewage disposal facilities, parking spaces, and the child or
adult dropoff circulation pattern.
Family day-care home. In addition to the other provisions of this section, family day-care homes
shall comply with the following requirements:
The facility must have a current DPW registration certificate.
Any external evidence of such use shall be limited to one nonilluminated sign, subject to
Article XII relating to sign regulations.
Family day-care homes shall only be permitted in single-family detached dwellings or singlefamily
semidetached dwellings.
Group day-care home. In addition to the other provisions of this section, group day-care homes
shall comply with the following requirements:
The facility must have a current DPW license.
Any external evidence of such use shall be limited to one nonilluminated sign, subject to
Article XII relating to sign regulations.
A fence with a minimum height of four feet shall physically contain the children within the
outdoor play area.
Group day-care homes shall be permitted in only single-family detached dwellings.
Day-care center. In addition to the other provisions of this section, day-care centers shall comply
with the following requirements:
The facility must have an approved and currently valid DPW license.
A fence with a minimum height of four feet shall physically contain the children within the
outdoor play area.
Play equipment shall be located at least 10 feet from a lot line.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 457/520
(4)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
G.
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
B.
All pedestrian pathways shall be adequately lit for safety if utilized during nondaylight hours.
Specific areas for lighting are entranceways, pedestrian access to the outdoor play areas,
sidewalks, dropoff areas, merchandise delivery areas, and all parking compounds. Such
lighting shall not produce objectionable glare on adjacent properties.
Application and permitting procedure. Family day-care homes and group day-care homes shall be
subject to the following application and approval process. (Day-care centers shall not be subject to
an application and permit procedure due to their location within nonresidential zoning districts.)
Family day-care homes. Any individual proposing a family day-care home shall submit an
application for a family day-care home permit to the Zoning Officer, who will review the
application for compliance with this chapter. If the application demonstrates compliance with
this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall grant the permit.
Group day-care homes. All group day-care homes shall be subject to the following application
and approval process:
The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter and
shall request a special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board.
If a special exception is granted, the applicant shall submit an application for a group
day-care home permit to the Zoning Officer. After confirming that the conditions of the
Zoning Hearing Board have been satisfied, the Zoning Officer shall issue the permit.
Such review of the application may require the Zoning Officer to visit the dwelling if
deemed necessary.
§ 280-1512. Golf course.
Golf courses shall comply with the following requirements:
In no case shall the design of a golf course permit or encourage a golf ball to be driven across any
building, building lot, parking compound, or public street right-of-way.
Golf cart paths.
In order to prevent dust, erosion, and excessive water flow across streets or adjoining
property, all golf course paths shall be graded for proper drainage and shall be improved with
a durable and dustless surface, such as concrete or bituminous concrete surface, unless an
alternative material and/or design is part of a readily accepted stormwater BMP, in
accordance with the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land
Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended.
The golf course design shall minimize golf cart path crossings of streets and access drives.
Easily identifiable golf cart paths must be provided for crossings of streets and access drives.
The golf course design shall both discourage random crossing and require use of the golf cart
path crossings of streets and access drives. Golf cart path crossings shall conform to the
following:
Each crossing shall be perpendicular to the traffic movement.
Only one street may be crossed at each location.
No crossing is permitted between a point 15 feet and 150 feet from the cartway edge of a
street or access drive.
Clear sight triangles and safe stopping sight distances shall be provided in accordance
with the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development
and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 458/520
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
A.
The golf cart path shall not exceed a slope of 8% within 25 feet of the cartway crossing.
Golf cart path crossings shall be signed, warning motorists and pedestrians and golfers.
The surface of the golf cart path shall be brightly painted with angle stripes.
Golf cart path crossings on collector or arterial streets shall consist of a tunnel that is
located below street grade. The golf course design shall both prohibit on-grade crossing
of collector or arterial streets and require the use of the tunnel. The construction of the
collector or arterial roadway crossing of the tunnel shall comply with PennDOT
standards.
The following accessory uses, customarily incidental to the use of a golf course, are permitted,
including:
Clubhouse, which may consist of:
Restaurant, snack bar, lounge, and banquet facilities.
Locker rooms and rest rooms.
Pro shop.
Offices.
Golf cart and course maintenance equipment storage and service facilities.
Recreational facilities.
Greenways and related permitted uses.
Golf course buildings and accessory structures shall be set back from the lot line of any adjoining
residential zoning district or existing residential use or street right-of-way at least 75 feet.
§ 280-1513. Group home.
Group homes shall comply with the following requirements.
Common kitchen and dining facilities may be provided; however, no cooking or dining facilities
shall be provided in individual residents' rooms.
A group home shall be affiliated with a parent organization which provides for the administration of
the group home through the direction of a professional staff.
The applicant shall also demonstrate that the facility will comply with all applicable Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania requirements for such uses.
§ 280-1514. Home occupation.
Home occupations shall comply with the following requirements.
Background. The Township recognizes the need to establish regulations pertaining to home-based
occupations as a result of increased opportunities and requirements to work at home. Home
occupations will particularly benefit individuals with physical disabilities, as well as those having to
care for children or the elderly within their homes. The Township also recognizes the potential
benefits to the local community that could be realized by those seeking services or goods supplied
through home occupations.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 459/520
B.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
(q)
(r)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
C.
D.
Purpose. It is the intent of this section to establish regulations which will permit home occupations
in a manner which will preserve the peace, quiet, and tranquility of residential neighborhoods and
ensure the compatibility of such uses with other uses permitted within the same zoning district.
Classifications of home occupations. All home occupations shall be classified as either "minor
home occupations" or "major home occupations," as defined in Article II of this chapter relating to
definitions and terms.
To the extent that such uses are consistent with the definition of a "minor home occupation"
found in Article II of this chapter relating to definitions and terms, minor home occupations
shall include but are not limited to the following uses:
Professional office uses, including realtors and insurance sales (medical/dental).
Artists, craftsmen and sculptors.
Cake baking and decorating.
Dance instruction.
Dress making, sewing, tailoring contract sewing (maximum one tailor/seamstress).
Grooming of dogs and cats.
Gun repair.
Computer programming and word processing.
Laundry and ironing services.
Locksmith.
Mail order or phone order.
Millinery.
Music composing or instruction.
Saw, scissors, and blade sharpening.
Telephone-related services.
Television, radio, electronics, and small appliance repair.
Tutoring (limited to a maximum of four students at any one time).
Wallpapering.
Major home occupations shall include the following:
Any use listed above as a minor home occupation that exceeds the performance
standards specified in § 280-1514C(1) of this chapter.
Any home occupation that satisfies the definition of a "major home occupation" as
defined in Article II of this chapter relating to definitions and terms.
Uses not permitted as home occupations. The following uses, by the nature of the investment or
operation, have a pronounced tendency, once started, to rapidly increase beyond the limits
permitted for home occupations and thereby impair the use and values of an area intended for
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 460/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
residence purposes within a residential zoning and are more suited to nonresidential zoning
districts. Therefore, the following uses shall not be permitted as home occupations in residential
zoning districts:
Ambulance services.
Animal boarding/kennels or veterinary services.
Appliance repair (major appliances).
Gift or antique shop.
Health salon, gym, dance studio, aerobic exercise studio, or massage parlor.
Helicopter service.
Limousine, hearse, or cab service.
Minor or major repair, detailing, or painting of engines (small or large), vehicles, trailers, or
boats.
Mortician or funeral home.
Palm reading/fortune telling.
Material or metal fabrication shops or machine shops.
Photo development.
Private club.
Private school with organized classes.
Production woodworking and cabinet making.
Rental services, businesses, or sales from the site (except direct distribution).
Restaurants or taverns.
Towing.
Welding shop.
Well drilling.
Other similar uses which may, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, result in an adverse impact
on a residential neighborhood.
Conditions. All dwellings containing a home occupation shall comply with the following:
The person conducting the home occupation shall be a full-time resident of the dwelling in
which the home occupation is being conducted.
A maximum of 25% of the gross floor area of the dwelling, excluding attics, garages, and
basements, shall be used for any home occupation(s).
Not more than one major home occupation shall be permitted within any single dwelling unit.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 461/520
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
F.
No displays or change in the building facade, including the dwelling and all accessory
buildings, shall indicate from the exterior that the dwelling is being utilized for purposes other
than a dwelling, except for a permitted home occupation sign as provided in Article XII of this
chapter relating to sign regulations.
Storage of materials, products, or machinery used for the home occupation shall be wholly
enclosed by the dwelling or accessory building, within the maximum floor area previously
defined.
The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling or accessory building.
The attached garage or detached garage area may be used for the home occupation
purposes, provided that such use does not cause the elimination of the required parking
spaces for the dwelling.
Deliveries from commercial suppliers shall comply with the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code
and shall not restrict traffic circulation.
A home occupation shall not produce noise, obnoxious odors, vibrations, lighting glare,
fumes, smoke, or electrical interference detectable to normal sensory perception on any
adjacent lots or streets.
There shall be no illegal discharge of any materials, fluids, or gases into the sewage disposal
facilities or in any other manner that would be in violation of any applicable governmental law,
rule, or regulation.
Sales of goods on the premises shall be limited to goods lawfully made on the premises;
goods relating to services performed on the premises; and goods ordered previously by
telephone or at a prior sales meeting, that are not made on the premises and that do not
relate to services performed on the premises.
Home occupations shall not involve the use or storage of explosive, highly combustible, or
hazardous materials.
"Parties" for the purpose of taking orders for the selling of merchandise shall not be held more
than one time per week.
The size of commercial vehicles used for the home occupation shall not exceed 20 feet in
overall length or seven feet in height and shall not have a load capacity in excess of one ton.
Application and permitting procedure. Home occupations shall be subject to the following
application and approval process:
Minor home occupations. No application required.
Major home occupations. All major home occupations shall be subject to the following
application and approval process:
The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter and
shall request a special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board.
If a special exception is granted, the applicant shall submit an application for a major
home occupation permit to the Zoning Officer. After confirming that the conditions of the
Zoning Hearing Board have been satisfied, the Zoning Officer shall issue the permit.
Such review of the application may require the Zoning Officer to visit the dwelling if
deemed necessary.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 462/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 280-1515. Hospital, retirement home, nursing home, personal
care home, or other similar facilities.
Hospitals, retirement homes, nursing homes, personal care homes, or other similar facilities shall
comply with the following requirements:
The facility shall have lot frontage on, and provide access to, an arterial or collector road.
All off-street parking compounds shall be set back from the lot line of any adjoining residential
zoning district or existing residential use at least 50 feet.
All buildings shall be set back from the lot line of any adjoining residential zoning district or existing
residential use at least 75 feet.
Emergency entrances shall not be located or oriented directly toward any adjacent residential
zoning district or existing residential use.
To the greatest extent possible, passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be provided and
arranged so that patients and visitors do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site.
The applicant shall also demonstrate that the facility will comply with all applicable Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania requirements for such uses.
§ 280-1516. Industrial use.
All industrial uses shall comply with the following requirements:
All industrial operations shall be in compliance with all applicable Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and federal government regulations as required by the most-recent regulations made available by
these governmental bodies, including but not limited to noise, air pollution, vibration, radiation, and
the pollution of groundwater, surface water, and soils.
Odor. Emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at
any lot lines shall not be permitted.
Toxic gases. All industrial uses shall emit no noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases.
Glare and heat. All industrial uses shall carry on no operations that would produce heat or glare
beyond the lot line of the lot on which the industrial operation is located.
Waste products. Storage of waste materials shall not be permitted except in an enclosed building
or approved containers. No potentially dangerous effluent shall be discharged.
§ 280-1517. Kennel.
Kennels shall comply with the following requirements.
The following yards and setbacks are required:
Special yard and setback requirements. All animal shelters, buildings, outdoor stalls and/or
runways shall be set back from the lot line at least 300 feet.
The Zoning Hearing Board may, as a special exception, however, reduce the above
special yard and setback requirements where it is shown that, because of the nature of
the operation, design and construction of the structures proposed to accommodate
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 463/520
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
animals, relating prevailing winds, unusual obstructions, topography, or other conditions,
a lesser distance would protect adjoining lands from noise, odor, dust, or other hazards.
In no case, however, shall the Zoning Hearing Board reduce the special yard and setback
requirement to less than 100 feet. The burden shall be upon the applicant to prove that a
lesser distance would not be detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare of the
community.
All animal shelters, buildings, outdoor stalls and/or runways shall be located within the rear yard.
All areas utilized for outdoor exercise of animals and outdoor stalls and/or runways to which
animals have access shall be completely enclosed by a six-foot-high fence to prevent the escape
of animals.
No animals shall be permitted to use outdoor exercise areas or outdoor stalls and/or runs that are
located within 300 feet of a lot line between the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
Emission of any offensive odors is not permitted at any time.
The applicant shall also demonstrate that the facility will comply with all applicable Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania requirements for such uses.
§ 280-1518. Medical clinic.
Medical clinics shall comply with the following requirements.
The facility shall have lot frontage on, and provide access to, an arterial or collector road.
Emergency entrances shall not be located or oriented directly toward any adjacent residential
zoning district or existing residential use.
To the greatest extent possible, passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be provided and
arranged so that patients and visitors do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site.
The applicant shall also demonstrate that the facility will comply with all applicable Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania requirements for such uses.
§ 280-1519. Mobile/manufactured home park.
Mobile/manufactured home parks shall comply with the following requirements:
Minimum tract area: five acres served by public sewer and water.
Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet for each mobile/manufactured home.
Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
Maximum density: seven mobile/manufactured home lots per acre.
Distance between buildings. Mobile/manufactured homes shall be separated by a minimum of 20
feet.
Minimum tract setback. All mobile/manufactured homes shall be set back from a public street
right-of-way as required by the applicable zoning district and at least 25 feet from all other tract
boundaries.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 464/520
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
A.
Minimum floor space. Each mobile/manufactured home shall have a minimum of 400 square feet
of floor area, excluding storage area, porches and the like.
Storage space. Each mobile/manufactured home lot shall be provided with a minimum of 150
cubic feet of enclosed storage space.
All mobile/manufactured home lots shall abut on a mobile/manufactured home park access drive.
Access to mobile/manufactured home lots shall be by the drives and not public streets.
Each mobile/manufactured home lot shall be provided with a hard-surfaced mobile/manufactured
home stand which has a foundation that will not heave, shift, or settle unevenly because of frost
action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the superstructure. Each
mobile/manufactured home stand shall be equipped with properly designed and approved water,
sewer and electrical connections.
Each mobile/manufactured home shall be skirted with an all-weather material from the bottom of
the mobile/manufactured home to the ground surface.
Service and accessory buildings located in a mobile/manufactured home park shall be used only
by the occupants and guests of the mobile/manufactured home park.
Mobile/manufactured home parks shall comply with all of the requirements of Article VII of the
most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater
Management Ordinance.
§ 280-1520. Neighborhood shopping center.
Neighborhood shopping centers shall comply with the following requirements.
No single unit of occupancy shall exceed 20,000 square feet of net retail floor area.
Minimum lot width: 250 feet at the building setback line.
Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
Minimum front yard: 90 feet; however, along principal arterial roads, the minimum front yard shall
be 100 feet.
Minimum side yard: 50 feet.
Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
Signage shall comply with all business sign regulations, center sign regulations, and other
applicable sign regulations in Article XII of this chapter relating to sign regulations.
§ 280-1521. Noncommercial keeping of livestock.
Noncommercial keeping of livestock shall comply with the following requirements.
The following list specifies the maximum permitted animal density and total number of livestock,
by livestock type:
Group 1: Livestock whose average adult weight is less than 10 pounds shall be permitted at
an animal density of two livestock per gross acre, with a maximum number of six livestock.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 465/520
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Group 2: Livestock whose average adult weight is greater than or equal to 10 but less than 65
(64.99) pounds shall be permitted at an animal density of one livestock per gross acre, with a
maximum number of six livestock. In addition to the minimum required lot area in the
applicable zoning district, there shall be an additional one acre dedicated to the livestock
area.
Group 3: Livestock whose average adult weight is greater than 65 pounds shall be permitted
at an animal density of one livestock per gross acre, with a maximum number of 10 livestock.
In addition to the minimum required lot area in the applicable zoning district, there shall be an
additional two acres dedicated to the livestock area.
The keeping of a combination of livestock types (Groups 1, 2 and 3) shall require an animal
density equal to the ratio of the number of livestock, by type. In no case shall a lot contain more
than 20 total livestock.
Structures directly related to and used as part of keeping the noncommercial livestock shall not be
permitted in the front yard.
The following lists minimum setbacks (from all lot lines) imposed upon the placement of any
structure used in the raising or housing of livestock. Should one structure be used in the raising or
housing of a combination of livestock types, the most-restrictive setback shall apply.
Group 1: a twenty-five-foot setback.
Group 2: a forty-foot setback.
Group 3: a fifty-foot setback.
Any manure storage facility shall be located in accordance with the yard and/or setback
requirements established by Act 38 of 2005, known as "ACRE," and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Act, as amended. All applications for manure storage facilities
shall include evidence indicating compliance with Act 38 of 2005, known as "ACRE," and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Act.
All livestock areas utilized for grazing or pasture areas shall be securely fenced to prevent the
escape of animals and be set back a minimum of 10 feet from all lot lines.
The applicant shall furnish evidence of an effective means of livestock waste disposal which shall
be implemented. All livestock areas shall be designed and maintained so that water and animal
waste will not drain onto adjacent lots. All manure management practices and operations shall
comply with the provisions set forth in the Pennsylvania Nutrient Management Act, as amended.
§ 280-1522. Nonprofit public facility.
Nonprofit public facilities shall comply with the following requirements.
The facility shall have lot frontage on, and provide access to, an arterial or collector road.
To the greatest extent possible, passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be provided and
arranged so that patrons and visitors do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to the site.
The facility shall be affiliated with a parent organization which provides for the administration of the
facility through the direction of a professional staff.
The applicant shall also demonstrate that the facility will comply with all applicable Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania requirements for such uses.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 466/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
§ 280-1523. Open space development.
Open space developments shall comply with the following requirements.
Purpose. It is the intent of this section to implement the most-recent version of the Lancaster
Township Comprehensive Plan, as amended, and promote desirable community development by:
Maintaining a healthy residential environment with adequate open space and recreational
amenities;
Supporting the most-recent version of the Lancaster Inter-Municipal Committee (LIMC)
Comprehensive Plan by integrating open space within future development and in areas which
are of strategic importance to potential greenway corridors throughout the Township;
Encouraging land use and development patterns which complement and accentuate the
distinctive features of the Township's landscapes and natural environment, including prime
agricultural soils, woodlands, wetlands, stream corridors, steep slopes, and scenic views;
Directing growth to areas of the Township which are the most appropriate for development;
Reducing infrastructure costs by minimizing the amount of infrastructure required for future
growth;
Providing an opportunity for flexibility in lot designs and building arrangement not afforded by
conventional lot-by-lot development;
Providing for a more varied, innovative, and efficient development pattern;
Promoting new development that is compatible with existing uses, architecture, landscapes
and community character;
Creating neighborhoods with direct visual access to open land, with amenities such as
neighborhood open space, and with a strong neighborhood identity; and
Allowing limited commercial development within large-scale residential developments to
reduce the need for automobiles.
Eligibility.
Areas permitted. Open space development shall be permitted in the Residential Districts R-1,
R-2, and R-3. The applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors,
compliance with all design standards and criteria of this section, as well as all other applicable
provisions of this chapter.
Water supply. Open space developments shall be served by a public water supply system in
accordance with the provisions of Article VI of the most-recent version of the Lancaster
Township Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as
amended. The applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors,
that an adequate water supply exists for the intended residential and open space uses. The
Board of Supervisors may also require agreements and financial assurances to ensure proper
long-term operation, maintenance, and ownership of the water system.
Sewage disposal. Open space developments shall be served by a public sewer system
consistent with the Lancaster Township Sewage Facilities (Act 537) Plan and in accordance
with the provisions of Article VI of the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township
Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended,
subject to demonstration of compliance with all applicable regulations of the PA DEP.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 467/520
(4)
(5)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(1)
C.
(1)
D.
Consistency with municipal planning program. The proposed development shall be consistent
with the goals and strategies of the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township
Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
Plan processing. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or, if in multiple
ownership, shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and
responsibility. The applicant is strongly encouraged to submit a sketch plan to the Lancaster
Township Planning Commission and to discuss community development and open space
resource conservation objectives with the Planning Commission prior to the preparation of a
preliminary plan.
General regulations.
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within an open space development:
Within the Residential District R-1:
Single-family detached dwellings.
Residential conversion units in accordance with the provisions of § 280-1605 of this
chapter.
Open space uses as set forth in § 280-1523A of this chapter.
Within the Residential District R-2:
Any use permitted in the Residential District R-1 listed in § 280-1523C(1)(a) of this
chapter.
Single-family semidetached dwellings.
Two-family detached dwellings.
Accessory commercial uses in conjunction with residential developments, subject to
§ 280-1501 of this chapter.
Multifamily dwellings.
Within the Residential District R-3:
Any use permitted in the Residential District R-2 listed in § 280-1523C(1)(b) of this
chapter.
Single-family attached dwellings.
Area and bulk regulations.
Minimum restricted open space. The minimum restricted open space shall not be less than
the percentage of the gross acreage of the tract, as stipulated for the appropriate zoning
district in Table 15-1. Designated restricted open space shall comply with all standards and
criteria for restricted open space established in this section.
Table 15-1
Zoning District Minimum Restricted Open Space
Residential District R-1 45%
Residential District R-2 35%
Residential District R-3 25%
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 468/520
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(3)
Permitted density calculation. To determine the potential number of dwelling units permitted
for open space developments, the applicant shall prepare a conceptual "yield plan" depicting
the conventional development of the parent tract according to the design standards of the
base zoning district. The yield plan shall comply with the minimum requirements for sketch
plans as stated in Article IV of the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision,
Land Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended, as well as any
other applicable Township ordinances. The applicant shall then prepare a conceptual open
space development plan with a maximum number of dwellings not to exceed the number of
dwellings depicted on the yield plan. The Lancaster Township Planning Commission shall
review the yield plan and provide comments to the Board of Supervisors regarding
compliance with this section. Applicants are strongly encouraged to present the yield plan to
the Planning Commission as early as possible to obtain input regarding the calculation of the
number of dwellings permitted in the open space development.
Residential area and bulk regulations. The following lot and yard area regulations shall apply
to any principal residential structure or any other building. Proposed lots are not subject to a
minimum lot area. The applicant shall indicate for each permitted use, including potential
accessory uses, the limits of the building envelope within which compliance with these
provisions is feasible.
The minimum separation between principal structures at any point shall be 20 feet,
except that the minimum separation measured perpendicularly from the rear wall of any
dwelling to any point on any other building not accessory to such residential structure
shall be 50 feet.
Accessory structures shall be set back at least five feet from any lot line and shall be
permitted only in rear yards.
No exterior windows, doors, or other openings shall be permitted in any portion of any
principal or accessory structure located less than five feet from any lot line.
Where any portion of any principal or accessory structure is located less than five feet
from any lot line, a perpetual easement providing for maintenance of such structure, and
measuring no less than five feet in width from the affected walls, shall be provided on the
adjacent lot(s). This provision shall not apply to lot lines which separate two-family or
multifamily dwelling units on the interior of the same principal structure.
The minimum front yard for principal buildings shall not be less than 10 feet, except as
provided under § 280-1523D(3)(f) of this chapter.
All proposed dwelling units in an open space development shall be situated so that they
are set back a minimum distance from the predevelopment perimeter boundary of the
tract equal to the applicable minimum yard dimension under the base zoning district
provisions. Existing dwellings and dwellings resulting from the conversion of existing
structures shall be exempt from this requirement, except that additions to such existing
structures shall not further reduce required yards.
The maximum length of any residential building, including rows of single-family attached
dwellings or buildings containing multifamily dwellings, shall not exceed 160 feet.
The maximum building heights for principal and accessory structures shall be the same
as stated in the base zoning district.
The maximum lot coverage (including all impervious surfaces) for all building lots shall be
20% greater than the base zoning district according to the dwelling type. The maximum
lot coverage for all restricted open space parcels shall be 30%.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 469/520
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
E.
Although conformance to these area and bulk regulations is not dependent upon any
specific minimum lot area or dimensions, the applicant shall be required to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that all lots established under the
provisions of this section are of appropriate size and shape relative to provide for the
establishment of suitable private yard areas for all dwellings and adequate access for the
management of any adjacent open space areas.
Flag lots may be utilized where appropriate; however, no more than 10% of the total
number of lots may be designed as flag lots, and each flag lot shall have a minimum area
of 10,000 square feet. Otherwise, flag lots shall comply with § 280-1608 of this chapter.
No dwelling units within the open space development shall have direct driveway access
to surrounding existing Township or state roads. All driveways shall access internal street
systems as designed for the project.
All open space developments with single-family attached dwellings or multifamily
dwellings shall include adequate parking for visitors. Such visitor parking compounds
shall provide a minimum of one parking space per two dwellings or fraction thereof.
On-street parking will be permitted, provided that such parking spaces are painted and
designed in accordance with the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township
Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended.
Where adjacent curb cuts accessing separate residential properties are separated by
less than 25 feet, one additional parking space shall be provided on each property which
abuts the curb cut or in a common parking compound.
As a condition of approval, the Board of Supervisors, at its sole discretion, may agree to
vary any of the standards stipulated in this section where the applicant has demonstrated
to the satisfaction of the Board that the purposes of this section are better served through
such variation.
Conservation and development design standards.
General development standards.
Except where this section specifies otherwise, all design and performance standards and
other regulations applicable in the base zoning district shall apply to any open space
development.
The placement of buildings and design of internal circulation systems shall minimize the
number of intersections and traffic on Township and state roads.
The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with applicable state and/or federal
regulation of streams and wetlands. For any proposed activity requiring the submission of
a wetland delineation report, stream or wetland encroachment permit or mitigation plan to
the PA DEP and/or USACE, a copy of all such documentation shall be submitted to
Lancaster Township by the applicant.
Architectural design. It is not the intention of the Township to govern specific architectural
design nor to link approval to any specific architectural design criteria. Open space
developments proposing residential buildings other than single-family detached and twofamily
dwellings shall comply with the following:
The applicant shall provide drawings illustrating the general character of the intended
exterior design of all principal structures.
Where the Board determines that the architectural design, as presented by the applicant,
is an essential means by which the proposed development complies with the objectives
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 470/520
(a)
(3)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(1)
F.
of this section, the Board may require, as a condition of approval, the establishment of
appropriate means to guarantee general adherence to the intended architectural
character.
Special provisions for conservation of historic resources.
Historic resources shall be preserved to the greatest degree practicable, through
incorporation into development plans and design, including historic structures, ruins or
sites, historic roads or other transport traces, paths and trails, and any other historic
landscape features. Applicants are encouraged to contact the Historic Preservation Trust
of Lancaster County for information regarding historic resources.
Open space designation and management standards.
General standards for open space designation.
Areas designated as restricted open space shall be consistent with the goals and
strategies of the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Comprehensive Plan, as
amended. The location and layout of restricted open space shall be configured so as to
serve residents adequately and conveniently and to promote the conservation of the
following resources to the greatest extent practicable:
Any area designated for "conservation/open space" on the Future Land Use Map in
the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Comprehensive Plan, as
amended;
Prime agricultural soils;
Scenic views from public roads and neighboring residential properties;
Mature trees and woodland tree masses, hedgerows, native flowering trees and
shrubs, fence rows, rock outcroppings, steep slopes (in excess of 25%) and other
noted landscape features;
Lands adjoining and within 150 feet of any historic structure listed on the National
Registration of Historic Places;
Existing open space areas; and
Any greenways or other natural resources identified in the most-recent version of the
LIMC Comprehensive Plan.
Within the designated restricted open space area, the total area of all areas comprised of
the Floodplain District (FP), slopes in excess of 25%, and wetlands, shall not exceed
15% of the gross tract area.
The following areas shall not be measured as contributing to the minimum required
restricted open space:
Areas within 25 feet of any structure, except structures devoted to permitted open
space uses;
Open space areas extending less than 100 feet in the narrowest dimension at any
point;
Stormwater management facilities. At the discretion of the Board of Supervisors,
areas devoted to stormwater management facilities may be included within the
minimum required restricted open space area where the applicant can demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Board that such facilities are designed to:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 471/520
[a]
[b]
[c]
[4]
(d)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Promote recharge of the groundwater system;
Be available and appropriate for active or passive recreational use or scenic
enjoyment; and
Otherwise conform to the purposes, standards, and criteria for open space set
forth in this section.
For example, a long, low berm graded to reflect natural contours could be
designed to: blend into the scenic landscape or permit passive recreational
use over the top of it, while providing a relatively large linear area for seepage
of stormwater into the groundwater system.
Streets and access drives.
Subject to the provisions of the measurement of the minimum required open space
stipulated herein, sewage service, stormwater management, and/or water supply facilities
may be located entirely or partially within restricted open space areas. Where such
facilities are so located, maintenance agreements and easements satisfactory to the
Board of Supervisors shall be established to require and enable maintenance of such
facilities by the appropriate parties.
Areas designated for open space purposes may be used for any of the following:
Crop or pasture land, subject to submission of a conservation plan approved by the
LCCD;
Woodland, meadow, wetland, wildlife habitat, game preserve, or similar
conservation-oriented area;
Public, common, or private park or outdoor recreation area;
Sewage disposal facilities, provided that the Board of Supervisors is satisfied that
adequate provision(s) for the long-term management and maintenance of the
facilities are guaranteed;
Parking for the exclusive use of individuals using recreational areas within the
required open space where deemed appropriate by the Board of Supervisors. Such
parking compounds shall not be used as overflow parking for adjacent dwellings.
Open space shall be interconnected with open space areas on adjoining parcels
wherever possible, including, where appropriate, provisions for pedestrian pathways for
general public use to create linked systems within the Township, including linkages to
schools and commercial areas.
Where deemed appropriate by the Board of Supervisors, open space areas shall be
provided with sufficient perimeter parking and with safe and convenient access by
adjoining street (lot) frontage or other right-of-way or easement capable of
accommodating pedestrian, bicycle, and maintenance and vehicle traffic and containing
appropriate access improvements.
Where open space development is planned to occur in two or more development phases,
a proportionate amount of designated restricted open space and required parking shall
be permanently recorded with each phase.
Open space shall incorporate greenways if required in accordance with § 280-1614 of
this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 472/520
[a]
[b]
[c]
[1]
[2]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(b)
(2) Standards for ownership of restricted open space. Except to provide for permitted open space
uses, designated open space shall be restricted from further subdivision and land
development by deed restriction, conservation easement, or other agreement in a form
acceptable to the Township and duly recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Lancaster County. Subject to such permanent restrictions, restricted open space land in any
open space development may be owned by a homeowners' association, the Township, a land
trust or other conservation organization recognized by the Township, or may remain in private
ownership.
Offer of dedication.
The Township may, but shall not be required to, accept dedication in the form of feesimple
ownership of restricted open space land, provided that:
Such land is accessible to the residents of the Township;
There is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental to the transfer of
ownership, such as title insurance and recording fees; and
The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such lands.
Where the Township accepts dedication of restricted open space land that contains
improvements, the Board of Supervisors may require the posting of financial security
to ensure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said
improvements for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. The amount of financial security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost
of installation of said improvements.
Homeowners' association. The restricted open space land and associated facilities may
be held in common ownership by a homeowners' association through the use of a
declaration and other documents approved by the Board of Supervisors. Such
documents shall be in conformance with the Uniform Planned Community Act of 1996, as
amended.[1] The association shall be formed and operated under the following
provisions:
The developer shall provide a description of the association, including its bylaws and
methods for maintaining the open space.
The association shall be organized by the developer and operate with financial
subsidization by the developer before the sale of any lots within the development.
Membership in the association is mandatory for all purchasers of homes therein and
their successors. The conditions and timing of transferring control of the association
from the developer to the homeowners shall be identified.
The association shall be responsible for maintenance and insurance on common
open space land, enforceable by liens placed by the homeowners' association.
Maintenance obligations also may be enforced by the Township, which may place
liens to recover its costs. Any governmental body with jurisdiction in the area where
the development is located may place liens on the owners of the open space to
collect unpaid taxes.
The members of the association shall share equitably the costs of maintaining and
developing such common land. Shares shall be defined within the association
bylaws. Association dues shall be structured to provide for both annual operating
costs and to cover projected long-range costs relating to the repair of any capital
facilities (which shall be deposited in a sinking fund reserved for just such purposes).
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 473/520
[6]
[7]
[a]
[b]
[c]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[1]
[2]
(c)
[1]
[2]
(d)
In the event of a proposed transfer, within the methods here permitted, of common
open space land by the homeowners' association or of the assumption of
maintenance of such land by the Township, notice of such action shall be given to all
property owners within the development.
The association shall have or hire adequate staff to administer common facilities and
properly and continually maintain the common open space land.
The homeowners' association may lease open space lands to any other qualified
person, or corporation, for operation and maintenance of such lands, but such a
lease agreement shall provide:
That the residents of the development shall at all times have access to the open
space lands contained therein (except that access to land that is actively farmed
shall be limited to times of the year when the fields are fallow);
That the common open space land to be leased shall be maintained for the
purposes set forth in this chapter; and
That the operation of open space facilities may be for the benefit of the
residents only, or may be open to the residents of the Township, at the election
of the developer and/or homeowners' association, as the case may be.
The lease shall be subject to the approval of the Board, and any transfer or
assignment of the lease shall be further subject to the approval of the Board. Lease
agreements so entered upon shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of
Lancaster County within 30 days of their execution, and a copy of the recorded lease
shall be filed with the Zoning Officer.
Homeowners' association documentation demonstrating compliance with the
provisions herein shall be filed with the final subdivision and land development plans.
At the time of preliminary plan submission, the applicant shall provide draft
homeowners' association documentation with sufficient detail to demonstrate
feasible compliance with this section.
Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
Condominiums. The restricted open space land and associated facilities may be held in
common through the use of condominium, declaration and other documents, approved
by the Board of Supervisors. Such documents shall be in conformance with the Uniform
Condominium Act of 1980.[2] All common open space land shall be held as "common
elements" or "limited common elements." To the degree applicable, condominium
agreement(s) shall comply with the provisions of § 280-1523 of this chapter, set forth for
homeowners' associations. Condominium agreement(s) shall be filed with the final
subdivision and land development plans. At the time of preliminary plan submission, the
applicant shall provide a draft condominium agreement(s) with sufficient detail to
demonstrate feasible compliance with this section.
Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
Dedication of easements. The Township may, but shall not be required to, accept
easements for public use of any portion or portions of restricted open space land. The
title of such land shall remain in common ownership by a condominium or homeowners'
association, provided:
Such land is accessible to Township residents;
There is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental to the transfer of
ownership, such as title insurance; and
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 474/520
[3]
[1]
[2]
[3]
(e)
[1]
[2]
(f)
[i]
[ii]
[iii]
[iv]
[v]
[a]
[b]
[1]
(g)
A satisfactory maintenance agreement is reached between the developer,
condominium or homeowners' association and the Township.
Transfer of easements to a private conservation organization. With the permission of the
Township, an owner may transfer easements to a private, nonprofit organization
recognized by the Township, among whose purposes it is to conserve open space and/or
natural resources, provided that:
The organization is acceptable to the Board of Supervisors and is a bona fide
conservation organization with perpetual existence;
The conveyance contains appropriate provision for proper reverter or transfer in the
event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its
functions; and
A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Board of Supervisors is entered into by
the developer and the organization.
Private ownership of restricted open space.
Restricted open space may be retained in ownership by the applicant or may be
transferred to other private parties, subject to compliance with all standards and
criteria for restricted open space herein.
All or portions of the designated restricted open space, where permitted by the
Board of Supervisors, may be included within or divided among one or more of the
individual lots. Where deemed appropriate, the Board of Supervisors may require
that responsibility for maintenance of restricted open space be conferred upon
and/or divided among the owners of one or more individual lots.
Required open space management plan.
All open space development plans shall be accompanied by a conceptual plan for
the long-term management of the restricted open space that is to be created as part
of the development.
Such plan shall include a discussion of:
The manner in which the restricted open space will be owned and by whom
it will be managed and maintained;
The conservation, land management and agricultural techniques and
practices which will be used to conserve, plan(s) approved by the LCCD
where applicable;
The professional and personnel resources that will be necessary in order to
maintain and manage the property;
The nature of public or private access that is planned for the restricted open
space; and
The source of money that will be available for such management,
preservation and maintenance on a perpetual basis.
The adequacy and feasibility of this conceptual management plan as well as its
compatibility with the open space resource protection objectives stated in this
section shall be factors in the approval or denial of the open space development
plan by the Board of Supervisors.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 475/520
[2]
[1]
[2]
(h)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
F.
G.
The conceptual management plan shall be transformed into a more-detailed open
space management plan and presented to the Township for review and approval
with the preliminary subdivision and land development plan. The Board of
Supervisors may require that the management plan be recorded, with the final
subdivision and land development plans, in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Lancaster County. In order to allow for the changing needs inherent in the perpetual
management of land, the management plan shall contain a provision to the effect
that it may be changed by written application to the Board of Supervisors, so long as
the proposed change is feasible and consistent with the purposes of preservation of
open space set forth in this section and so long as the plan for such change avoids a
likelihood of the obligation of management and maintenance of the land falling upon
the Township without the consent of the Board of Supervisors. The Board's approval
of such application shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.
Open space performance bond.
All landscape improvements, plantings, access points, and recreational facilities
within designated open space areas shall be provided by the developer as
applicable. A performance bond or other security shall be in the same form and
adhere to the same conditions as otherwise required for proposed improvements
under Article V of the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision,
Land Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended.
An appropriate portion of the performance bond or other security will be applied by
the Township should the developer fail to install the planting or recreational facilities.
§ 280-1524. Outdoor furnace.
Outdoor furnaces shall comply with the following requirements.
The design and installation of outdoor furnaces shall conform to the EPA Phase 2 emission
standards, other applicable industry standards, and the manufacturer's specifications. The
manufacturer's specifications shall be submitted as part of the application.
There shall not be more than one outdoor furnace permitted per lot.
Outdoor furnaces shall not be located in the front yard.
No outdoor furnace shall be located within:
One hundred fifty feet of any front lot line; nor
One hundred feet from any side lot line or rear lot line; nor
Two hundred fifty feet from the lot line of any adjoining residential zoning district or existing
residential use.
All on-site utility and transmission lines that are part of the outdoor furnace shall be placed
underground.
All outdoor furnaces shall be inconspicuously sited when viewed from adjacent street rights-ofway.
Outdoor furnaces shall have a permanently installed stack that extends at least 12 feet above the
ground and is installed according to manufacturer's specifications.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 476/520
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
The use of starter fluids, such as lighter fluid, gasoline, and other chemicals, to ignite an outdoor
furnace is prohibited.
Outdoor furnaces shall be equipped with a properly functioning spark arrestor.
Waste associated with outdoor furnaces shall be properly stored and disposed of in accordance
with the regulations of the applicable zoning district.
§ 280-1525. Place of assembly for worship/education and
university, college, and other adult education institutions.
Places of assembly for worship/education and university, college, and other adult education institutions
shall comply with the following requirements.
The facility shall have lot frontage on, and provide access to, an arterial or collector road.
All outdoor recreation/activity areas shall be set back from lot line of any adjoining residential
zoning district or existing residential use at least 75 feet.
For extensive outdoor activities, the facility shall provide sufficient screening and/or landscaping
measures to mitigate any visual and/or audible impacts on adjoining properties.
To the greatest extent possible, passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be provided and
arranged so that attendees/students and visitors do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent
to the site.
§ 280-1526. Principal alternative energy production facility.
Principal alternative energy production facilities shall comply with the following requirements.
Solar energy production facilities.
The design and installation of solar energy production facilities shall conform to the mostrecent
version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended, and with all other
applicable Township electrical, fire, life safety, and other similar standards.
The design and installation of solar energy production facilities shall conform to applicable
industry standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI),
Underwriters' Laboratories, the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), or other
similar certifying organizations. The manufacturer's specifications shall be submitted as part
of the application.
All solar energy production facilities shall be designed and located to ensure solar access
without reliance on and/or interference from adjacent properties.
All solar energy production facilities shall be designed and located to prevent reflective glare
toward any inhabited structure on adjacent properties as well as adjacent street rights-of-way.
All on-site utility and transmission lines as part of the solar energy production facilities shall be
placed underground.
All solar energy production facilities shall be inconspicuously sited when viewed from adjacent
street rights-of-way.
All solar energy production facilities shall be sited so that tree removal is not required. If any
trees are to be removed, the applicant shall submit a plan demonstrating the need to remove
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 477/520
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(8)
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
[1]
[2]
(d)
(9)
(10)
trees and replacement of the trees.
Roof- and wall-mounted solar energy production facilities shall be sited in accordance with the
following:
Solar energy production facilities located on the roof of any structure shall not extend
beyond the existing overhangs of the structure's roof.
Solar energy production facilities located on a pitched roof of any structure shall not
extend vertically above the highest point (peak) of the pitched roof of the structure, as
viewed from the lot line.
Solar energy production facilities located on a roof of any structure shall be the same
slope as, or parallel to, the pitched roof.
Solar energy production facilities located on a flat roof shall not exceed 15 feet in height
above the height of the roof. In the Campus/Open Space District, such facilities shall be
screened by parapets, walls, fences, or other approved means as viewed from the lot
line.
All solar energy production facilities mounted on roofs and walls of any structure shall be
subject to the maximum height regulations specified within the applicable zoning district.
No solar energy production facilities shall be attached to, nor otherwise sited along, the
front facade (wall) or front building line of any principal building.
Freestanding, ground-mounted solar energy production facilities shall be provided in
accordance with the following:
All freestanding, ground-mounted solar energy production facilities shall comply with the
front, side, and rear yard requirements in the applicable zoning district.
All freestanding, ground-mounted solar energy production facilities shall be subject to the
maximum height regulations specified within the applicable zoning district.
For all freestanding, ground-mounted solar energy production facilities, the following
components shall be considered lot coverage and calculated as part of the lot coverage
limitations for the applicable zoning district:
Foundation systems, typically consisting of driven piles or monopoles or helical
screws with or without small concrete collars.
All mechanical equipment of freestanding, ground-mounted solar energy production
facilities, including any buildings, and structures for batteries or storage cells.
In addition requirements set forth in Article XIV of this chapter relating to landscaping and
screening regulations, all freestanding, ground-mounted solar energy production facilities
shall:
Be surrounded by a fence or wall at least six feet in height and not more than eight
feet; and
Contain, at all entrances, gates, which shall be locked, except during such times as
the site is manned by authorized operations or maintenance personnel.
All applications for solar energy production facilities shall include the information required for
a plot plan approval pursuant to Article XVIII of this chapter relating to permits. In addition, the
applicant shall submit:
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 478/520
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
B.
A completed glare study ensuring that reflective glare is not directed towards nor upon
any adjacent properties as well as any adjacent street rights-of-way. The glare study shall
include:
The angle of the solar energy production facility panels, arrays, cells, etc., at the
location;
A diagram showing the maximum and minimum angles of reflective glare from the
solar energy production facilities' panels, arrays, cells, etc., at the location and the
relationship of that glare to adjacent properties, structures and rights-of-way; and
A mitigation plan that limits or eliminates reflective glare on adjacent properties,
structures, and rights-of-way.
Certification from a professional engineer registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania that the proposed installation of solar energy production facilities will not
exceed the structural capacity of the building or other structure, considering wind and
other loads associated with any solar energy production facilities, and applicable
requirements of the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as
amended; and
Prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of a solar energy production facility,
the applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with written confirmation that the public
utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected
customer-owned generator and also approves of such connection.
Wind energy production facilities.
The design and installation of wind energy production facilities shall be in strict accordance
with the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended, and with
all other applicable Township electrical, fire, life safety, and other similar standards.
The design and installation of all wind energy production facilities shall conform to applicable
industry standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI),
Underwriters' Laboratories, Det Norske Veritas, Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energies, the
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), or other similar certifying organizations,
or as approved under an emerging technology program such as the California Energy
Commission, International Electrotechnical Commission, or any other wind certification
program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the United States
Department of Energy. The manufacturer's specifications shall be submitted as part of the
application.
All on-site utility and transmission lines as part of the wind energy production facility system
shall be placed underground.
All wind turbines shall have a flat finish and nonobtrusive colors, such as white, off-white, or
gray, as applied by the manufacturer in order to reduce the visual impact.
All wind turbine towers shall be painted silver or have a galvanized finish retained in order to
reduce the visual impact. Towers may be painted green or brown up the height of nearby
trees.
All wind energy production facilities shall be equipped with manual (electronic or mechanical)
and automatic over-speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design limits
of the wind energy production facility.
Wind energy production facilities shall not be installed in any location where they would
interfere with existing fixed broadcast, retransmission, or reception antennas. This includes
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 479/520
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(a)
(b)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(18)
interference with residential radio, television, wireless phone, or other personal
communications system reception. No wind energy production facilities shall be installed in
any location along the major axis of an existing microwave communication link where its
operation is likely to produce electromagnetic interference in the link's operation.
All wind energy production facility shall be sited to prevent shadow flicker on any adjacent
properties as well as any adjacent street rights-of-way.
Wind turbines shall be set back a distance equal to the total height of the wind turbine from all
lot lines, streets and other rights-of-way, and overhead utility lines.
The maximum height of any wind turbine shall be 140 feet.
For all wind energy production facilities, unauthorized access to the turbine and tower shall be
prevented by design, with a minimum of 12 feet from the ground to the bottom of the ladder.
All doors to the turbine and tower shall be locked.
In addition requirements set forth in Article XIV of this chapter relating to landscaping and
screening regulations, all wind energy production facilities shall:
Be surrounded by a fence or wall at least six feet in height and not more than eight feet;
and
Contain, at all entrances, gates, which shall be locked, except during such times as the
site is manned by authorized operations or maintenance personnel.
The minimum height of the lowest position of the wind turbine shall be 15 feet above the
ground. If the wind turbine proposed is a vertical-axis wind turbine (also referred to as a "helix
type turbine" or "VAT"), the height between the lowest point of the turbine and the ground may
be reduced to eight feet.
Wind energy production facilities shall not be lighted, except to comply with applicable
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations.
No portion of any wind energy production facilities shall extend over parking compounds,
access drives, driveways, or sidewalks.
Wind energy production facilities shall not display advertising, except for reasonable
identification of the wind energy production facility's manufacturer. Such sign shall have an
area of less than four square feet.
When an accessory building or structure is necessary for storage cells or related mechanical
equipment, the accessory building shall comply with the accessory building and structure
requirements specified within the applicable zoning district.
All applications for wind energy production facilities shall include the information required for a
plot plan approval pursuant to Article XVIII of this chapter relating to permits. In addition, the
applicant shall submit:
A plot plan showing:
Property lines and physical dimensions of all areas of the subject property that are
within a distance equal to two times the total height from the wind energy production
system.
Location, dimensions, and types of existing principal and accessory structures on the
property.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 480/520
[3]
[4]
[5]
(b)
(c)
(19)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(a)
(7)
A.
Location of the proposed wind energy production facilities tower, foundations, guy
anchors, and associated equipment.
The rights-of-way of any public street abutting the property.
Any overhead utility lines.
Wind energy production facilities system specifications, including manufacturer and
model, rotor diameter, tower height, and tower type — freestanding or guyed.
Certification from a professional engineer registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania that the tower has been designed and will be constructed in accordance
with the current industry standards and applicable requirements of the most-recent
version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended. A copy of the foundation
analysis shall also be provided.
Prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of a wind energy production facility, the
applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with written confirmation that the public utility
company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customerowned
generator and also approves of such connection.
§ 280-1527. Private club.
Private clubs shall comply with the following requirements.
The facility shall have lot frontage on, and provide access to, an arterial or collector road.
All outdoor recreation/activity areas shall be set back from the lot line of any adjoining residential
zoning district or existing residential use at least 75 feet.
For extensive outdoor activities, the facility shall provide sufficient screening and/or landscaping
measures to mitigate any visual and/or audible impacts on adjoining properties.
§ 280-1528. Quarry.
Quarries shall comply with the following requirements.
A plan drawing or drawings, at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, shall be
presented, which shall show the following:
Existing surface contours at five-foot intervals;
Lot lines;
All existing structures within the property;
All occupied structures and homes within 150 feet of the lot line;
The locations of structures to be used for the manufacture and processing of quarried
material and overburden, service and office buildings and scale facilities;
Traffic routes in and out of the property and parking compounds; and
The limits of the pit following the reclamation of the walls after abandonment of quarrying.
The drawing or drawings shall be accompanied by a number of cross sections, but not
less than two oriented at right angles to each other, which shall show the existing
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 481/520
(b)
[1]
(c)
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
(1)
A.
surface, the maximum horizontal and vertical limits of the pit, the existing groundwater
table and the anticipated water level in the pit after abandonment.
The plan drawing or drawings shall also include the groundwater table contoured at fivefoot
intervals and based upon a sufficient number of observation points, but not less than
four, to establish such elevation or elevations.
Copies of all materials submitted to the PA DEP under the Noncoal Surface Mining
Conservation and Reclamation Act, Act No. 1984-219, Section 7, in its most-recent
revision,[1] shall also be submitted to the Zoning Hearing Board.
Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 331 et seq.
No portion of the pit, during operations, or after reclamation and abandonment, shall extend closer
than 250 feet from any lot line; or, in the alternative, may extend no closer than 200 feet to the
previously stated limits during operations and after reclamation and abandonment, provided that a
screening berm composed of clean fill is constructed between the previously stated limits and the
final pit limits. The screening berm shall be 20 feet high, 10 feet wide on the top and have 1:4
slopes on both sides. The outside edge of the berm shall be no closer than 20 feet to the
previously stated limits and no closer than 10 feet to the final pit limits. A vegetative cover shall be
maintained upon the fill surface for the purposes of erosion control and suitable appearance.
All accessory structures and uses, such as crushers, maintenance buildings, truck storage,
weighing scales, etc., shall not be closer than 100 feet from any property or street right-of-way
line.
All state and federal laws governing the operation of quarries shall be obeyed.
The pit shall be enclosed within a chain-link fence which is at least six feet in height.
§ 280-1529. Commercial recreational facility and nonprofit public
recreational facility.
Commercial recreational facilities and nonprofit public recreational facilities shall comply with the
following requirements.
If the subject property contains more than two acres, the facility shall have lot frontage on, and
provide access to, an arterial or collector road.
For extensive outdoor activities, the facility shall provide sufficient screening and/or landscaping
measures to mitigate any visual and/or audible impacts on adjoining properties.
§ 280-1530. Residential infill development.
Residential infill developments shall comply with the following requirements.
Purpose. Residential infill developments are intended to allow growth within neighborhoods that
existed prior to the effective date of this chapter and therefore contain lawfully existing,
nonconforming lots and structures. The Township desires to allow residential infill development to:
Support the objectives of the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Comprehensive
Plan, as amended, by reducing suburban sprawl, minimizing future negative impacts on the
transportation system, and encouraging development patterns which accentuate the existing
cultural environment.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 482/520
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
C.
D.
E.
Support the most-recent version of the Lancaster County Comprehensive Plan, as amended,
by encouraging compact growth within the urban growth boundaries.
Promote the efficient use of utilities.
Maintain the historic setbacks of buildings and yards, which is necessary to retain a
consistent streetscape.
Increase opportunities for affordable housing.
Eligibility. Residential infill development shall be permitted on any tract of land which:
Is in existence as a single tract as of the effective date of this chapter amendment;
Has an area of five acres or less; and
Is within the Residential District R-1, R-2, or R-3.
Area, bulk, and design standards. Residential infill developments shall comply with the regulations
of the pertinent zoning district to the greatest extent possible. However, the Township may allow
deviations from such regulations for residential infill developments in instances where the
requirements of the pertinent zoning district are not consistent with the existing neighborhood. All
lot area, bulk, and design standards shall be consistent with the characteristics of the existing
neighborhood, which shall be limited to the properties on the same block and properties
contiguous to the block within the same zoning district. The applicant shall conduct a study of the
neighborhood to determine such characteristics and establish appropriate standards for the
proposed residential infill development. Neighborhood characteristics which must be considered in
the development of such standards shall include but are not limited to the following:
Dwelling type.
Lot area, width, and depth.
Minimum yards.
Building height.
Vehicular access to properties, including the use of alleys.
Street and alley design.
Parking, driveway or access drive widths, and the location and orientation of garages.
Architecture.
Alignment and orientation of porches.
Lot coverage.
Landscaping, including existing street trees.
Common open space. Residential infill developments that include common open space shall
comply with the open space designation, management, and ownership standards contained in
§ 280-1523 of this chapter.
Required dedication of land for parks and recreation. No portion of this section shall be construed
to exempt any subdivision from the mandatory dedication of land (or fees in lieu of land) for
recreational purposes as required by the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township
Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 483/520
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
Plan processing. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or, if in multiple
ownership, shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and
responsibility.
Conditional use application. The applicant shall submit to the Board of Supervisors all necessary
data, plans, photographs, narratives, and any other pertinent documentation which demonstrates
that the proposed residential infill development is consistent with the existing neighborhood based
on the above criteria. The Board of Supervisors may allow variations between the existing
community and the residential infill development if it determines that such variations are
advantageous to the existing neighborhood.
§ 280-1531. Retail sales/service with a total net retail floor area
greater than 20,000 square feet.
Retail sales/service, provided that the total net retail floor area is greater than 20,000 square feet, shall
comply with the following requirements.
Minimum lot width: 250 feet at the building setback line.
Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
Minimum front yard: 90 feet; however, along principal arterial roads, the minimum front yard shall
be 100 feet.
Minimum side yard: 50 feet.
Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
Signage shall comply with all business sign regulations and other applicable sign regulations in
Article XII of this chapter relating to sign regulations.
§ 280-1532. Social service establishment.
Social service establishments shall comply with the following requirements.
The facility shall have lot frontage on, and provide access to, an arterial or collector road.
To the greatest extent possible, passenger dropoff and pickup areas shall be provided and
arranged so that patients, clients and visitors do not have to cross traffic lanes on or adjacent to
the site.
The facility shall be affiliated with a parent organization which provides for the administration of the
facility through the direction of a professional staff.
The applicant shall also demonstrate that the facility will comply with all applicable Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania requirements for such uses.
§ 280-1533. Visitor accommodation.
Visitor accommodations shall comply with the following requirements.
Public sewer and public water service shall be provided.
Minimum lot width: 250 feet at the building setback line.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 484/520
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(8)
A.
Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
Minimum front yard: 100 feet.
Minimum side yard: 50 feet.
Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
Maximum lot coverage: 70%.
Article XVI. Supplemental Regulations
§ 280-1600. Applicability.
The requirements and provisions of this Article XVI shall apply to all lands in all zoning districts unless
application to specific zoning districts is expressly stated.
§ 280-1601. Accessory alternative energy systems.
Accessory alternative energy systems shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following
conditions:
Solar energy systems.
The design and installation of solar energy systems shall conform to the most-recent version
of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended, and with all other applicable Township
electrical, fire, life safety, and other similar standards.
The design and installation of solar energy systems shall conform to applicable industry
standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters'
Laboratories, the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), or other similar
certifying organizations. The manufacturer's specifications shall be submitted as part of the
application.
All solar energy systems shall be designed and located to ensure solar access without
reliance on or interference from adjacent properties.
All solar energy systems shall be designed and located to prevent reflective glare toward any
inhabited structure on adjacent properties as well as adjacent street rights-of-way.
All on-site utility and transmission lines that are part of the solar energy system shall, to the
maximum extent feasible, be placed underground.
All solar energy systems shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be inconspicuously sited
when viewed from adjacent street rights-of-way.
All solar energy systems shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be sited so that tree removal
is not required. If any trees are to be removed, the applicant shall submit a plan
demonstrating the need to remove trees and a plan for the replacement of the trees.
Roof- and wall-mounted solar energy systems shall be sited in accordance with the following:
Solar energy systems located on the roof of any structure shall not extend beyond the
existing overhangs of the structure's roof.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 485/520
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(a)
(b)
(c)
[a]
[b]
[1]
[2]
(d)
(9)
[1]
[2]
(a)
(10)
Solar energy systems located on a pitched roof of any structure shall not extend vertically
above the highest point (peak) of the pitched roof of the structure, as viewed from the lot
line.
Solar energy systems located on a roof of any structure shall be the same slope as, or
parallel to, the pitched roof.
Solar energy systems located on a flat roof shall not exceed 15 feet in height above the
height of the roof. In all zoning districts, such facilities shall be screened by parapets,
walls, fences, or other approved means, as viewed from the lot line, except for the
industrial zoning district.
All solar energy systems mounted on roofs and walls of any structure shall be subject to
the maximum height regulations specified within the applicable zoning district.
No solar energy system shall be attached to, or sited along, the front facade (wall) or
front building line of any principal building.
If the solar energy system is unable to be located on a roof or a wall of a structure as is
preferred, then placement of freestanding, ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be
provided in accordance with the following:
In addition to any yard and setback requirements set forth in this section, all freestanding,
ground-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with all yard requirements for
accessory structures in the applicable zoning district.
All freestanding, ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be set back from all lot lines
and street rights-of-way a distance equal to the total height of the solar energy system.
Freestanding, ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
For purposes of determining the maximum surface area of all freestanding, groundmounted
solar energy systems, the maximum surface area shall be considered the total
surface area of the cumulative solar panels; where two or more panels are grouped
together, the total dimensions (length and/or width) of each panel shall be the cumulative
dimension of the panels.
The maximum surface area of all freestanding, ground-mounted solar energy
systems on any lot in:
Residential use shall not exceed 10% of the total lot area.
Nonresidential use, except for the industrial zoning districts, shall not exceed
25% of the total lot area.
There shall be no maximum surface area requirement in the industrial zoning district.
All applications for solar energy systems shall include the information required for a plot plan
approval pursuant to Article XVIII of this chapter relating to permits. In addition, the applicant
shall submit:
A completed glare study ensuring that reflective glare is not directed towards nor upon
any adjacent properties or adjacent street rights-of-way. The glare study shall include:
The angle of the solar collector system panels, arrays, cells, etc., at the location;
A diagram showing the maximum and minimum angles of reflective glare from the
solar collector system panels, arrays, cells, etc., at the location and the relationship
of that glare to adjacent properties, structures and rights-of-way; and
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 486/520
[3]
(b)
(c)
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
B.
A mitigation plan that limits or eliminates reflective glare on adjacent properties,
structures, and rights-of-way.
Certification from a professional engineer licensed and registered to practice in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that the proposed installation of the solar energy system
will not exceed the structural capacity of the building or other structure, considering wind
and other loads associated with any solar energy system, and applicable requirements of
most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended; and
Confirmation that the public utility company has been informed of the customer's intent to
install an interconnected customer-owned generator and also approves of such
connection. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
Prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of a solar energy system, the applicant
shall provide the Zoning Officer with written confirmation that the public utility company has
been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator
and also approves of such connection. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
Accessory wind energy systems.
The design and installation of wind energy systems shall conform to the most-recent version
of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as amended, and with all other applicable Township
electrical, fire, life safety, and other similar standards.
The design and installation of all wind energy systems shall conform to applicable industry
standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Underwriters'
Laboratories, Det Norske Veritas, Germanischer Lloyd Wind Energies, the American Society
for Testing and Materials (ASTM), or other similar certifying organizations, or as approved
under an emerging technology program such as the California Energy Commission,
International Electrotechnical Commission, or any other wind certification program recognized
by the American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the United States Department of
Energy. The manufacturer's specifications shall be submitted as part of the application.
All on-site utility and transmission lines as part of the wind energy shall system shall, to the
extent feasible, be placed underground.
All wind turbines shall have a flat finish and nonobtrusive colors, such as white, off-white, or
gray, as applied by the manufacturer in order to reduce the visual impact to the extent
feasible.
All wind turbine towers shall be painted silver or have a galvanized finish retained in order to
reduce the visual impact to the extent feasible. Towers may be painted green or brown up the
height of nearby trees.
All wind energy systems shall be equipped with manual—electronic or mechanical—and
automatic over-speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design limits of
the wind energy system.
Wind energy systems shall not be installed in any location where they would interfere with
existing fixed broadcast, retransmission, or reception antennas. This includes interference
with residential radio, television, or wireless phone or other personal communication system
reception. No wind energy system shall be installed in any location along the major axis of an
existing microwave communication link where its operation is likely to produce
electromagnetic interference in the link's operation.
All wind energy systems shall, to the extent feasible, be sited to prevent shadow flicker on any
adjacent properties as well as any adjacent street rights-of-way.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 487/520
(9)
(10)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
[1]
(a)
(18)
In addition to any yard and setback requirements set forth in this section, all wind energy
systems shall comply with the yard requirements for accessory structures in the applicable
zoning district.
Wind turbines shall be set back a distance equal to the total height of the wind turbine from all
lot lines, streets and other rights-of-way, and overhead utility lines.
The maximum height of wind energy systems shall comply with the following:
For all roof-mounted wind turbines, the height of the wind turbine shall not exceed the
height of the building by more than 15 feet.
For lots less than 1/2 acre in area, wind turbines shall be roof-mounted. The maximum
rotor diameter for wind turbines shall be six feet.
For lots between 1/2 acre and less than one acre, the wind turbines may be sited on wind
turbine towers, and the turbine height shall be limited to 75 feet, or 20 feet above the tree
line, whichever is lower.
For lots greater than or equal to one acre, wind turbines may be sited on wind turbine
towers, and the turbine height shall be limited to 120 feet, or 40 feet above the tree line,
whichever is lower.
The maximum height of any wind turbine in the industrial zoning districts, regardless of
lot area, shall be 140 feet.
For all wind energy systems not otherwise mounted on a roof, unauthorized access to the
turbine and tower shall be prevented by design, with a minimum of 12 feet from the ground to
the bottom of the ladder. All doors to the turbine and tower shall be locked.
The minimum height of the lowest position of the wind turbine shall be 15 feet above the
ground. If the wind turbine proposed is a vertical axis wind turbine (also referred to as a "helix
type" turbine or VAT), the height between the lowest point of the turbine and the ground may
be reduced to eight feet.
Wind energy systems shall not be lighted, except to comply with applicable Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) regulations.
No portion of any wind energy system shall extend over parking compounds, access drives,
driveways, or sidewalks.
Wind energy systems shall not display advertising, except for reasonable identification of the
wind energy system's manufacturer. Such sign shall have an area of less than four square
feet.
When an accessory building or structure is necessary for storage cells or related mechanical
equipment, the accessory building shall comply with the accessory building and structure
requirements specified within the applicable zoning district.
All applications for wind energy systems shall include the information required for a plot plan
approval pursuant to Article XVIII of this chapter relating to permits. In addition, the applicant
shall submit:
A plot plan showing:
Lot lines and physical dimensions of all areas of the subject property that are within
a distance equal to two times the total height of the wind energy system.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 488/520
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
(b)
(c)
(19)
A.
B.
A.
B.
The location, dimensions, and types of existing principal and accessory structures on
the property.
The location of the proposed wind energy system tower, foundations, guy anchors,
and associated equipment.
The rights-of-way of any public street abutting the property.
Any overhead utility lines.
Wind energy systems system specifications, including manufacturer and model, rotor
diameter, tower height, and tower type — freestanding or guyed.
Certification from a professional engineer licensed and registered to practice in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that the tower has been designed and will be
constructed in accordance with the current industry standards and applicable
requirements of the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Building Code, as
amended. A copy of the foundation analysis shall also be provided.
Prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of a wind energy system, the applicant
shall provide the Zoning Officer with written confirmation that the public utility company has
been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator
and also approves of such connection. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
§ 280-1602. Access to buildings.
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot which is adjacent to a public street, or on a
lot which has access to a public street by an improved private street which has a cartway width of at
least 24 feet, or said building shall be located within 100 feet of a public street. All buildings shall be
located so as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required parking.
§ 280-1603. Communications antennas.
A site with a communications antenna that is attached to an existing communications tower,
smokestack, water tower, farm silo, or other tall structure is permitted in all zoning districts, provided
that:
The height of the antenna shall not exceed the height of the existing structure by more than 10
feet.
All other uses associated with the communications antenna, such as a business office,
maintenance depot, or vehicle storage, shall not be located on the site unless the use is otherwise
permitted in the zoning district in which the site is located.
§ 280-1604. Communications towers.
The applicant shall demonstrate through technological evidence and data that the proposed
location is necessary in order to satisfy its function in the company's grid system.
The applicant shall demonstrate that the tower is the minimum height required to function
satisfactorily. If the applicant proposes to erect a new tower, the applicant shall demonstrate that
the owners of other tall structures within a one-half-mile radius of the proposed site have been
contacted, and the applicant has requested permission to install the antenna on those structures.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 489/520
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
The applicant shall demonstrate that it is not feasible to erect the antenna on these existing
structures. The applicant shall make a good-faith effort to install the antenna on an existing
structure, including but not limited to smokestacks, water towers, tall buildings, antenna support
structures of other communications companies and similar structures.
The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna is the minimum height required to function
satisfactorily. No antenna that is taller than this minimum height shall be approved. This
requirement shall not be applicable to antennas located upon an existing structure where the total
height of the structure and the antenna does not exceed 150 feet.
The setback between the base of the support structure and the lot line shall be 30% of the height
of the tower in addition to the normal minimum yard and setback requirements of the Industrial
District (I).
The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed tower support structure is safe and that the
surrounding area will not be negatively affected by support structure failure, falling ice or other
debris, electromagnetic fields, or radio or satellite frequency interference.
A fence shall be required around the communications tower and other equipment. The fence shall
be eight feet in height. Any wire on top of the fence shall not be included in the measurement of
the height of the fence.
In addition to the required landscaping and screening around the support structure, fence
surrounding the support structures, and any other related ground-level improvements as specified
in Article XIV of this chapter relating to landscaping and screening regulations, shall be provided,
except that the minimum height at maturity shall be 20 feet.
All other uses associated with the communications tower, such as a business office, maintenance
depot, or vehicle storage, shall not be located on the site unless the use is otherwise permitted in
the Industrial District (I).
In order to reduce the number of towers needed in the Township in the future, any proposed
support structure shall be designed to accommodate other users, including but not limited to
police, fire and emergency services.
If the use of the communications tower or communications antenna requires licensing by any state
or federal agency, including but not limited to the Federal Communications Commission, the
applicant shall present evidence that it has obtained such license.
Towers shall be painted with silver or have a galvanized finish retained in order to reduce visual
impact. Support structures may be painted green up to the height of nearby trees to lessen visual
impact. All support structures shall meet all applicable Federal Aviation Administration regulations.
No antenna support structure may be artificially lighted except when required by the Federal
Aviation Administration or by state regulations.
The applicant shall submit a plan for the removal of the facility when it becomes functionally
obsolete or is no longer in use. The applicant shall be responsible for the removal of the facility
within three months from the date the applicant ceases use of the facility or the facility becomes
obsolete.
All towers or antennas in excess of 35 feet in height shall be located at least 1/2 mile from any
other tower or antenna in excess of 35 feet in height.
A full site plan prepared by either a licensed professional surveyor registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or a licensed professional engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with elevations prepared by a professional engineer, shall be
required for all sites showing a communications tower, communications antenna, buildings,
fences, buffering, access, and any accessory structure. Any communications tower that is not fully
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 490/520
O.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
(1)
D.
automated and requires employee staffing and a primary building will require a land development
plan.
Access to the communications tower shall be by a sixteen-foot-wide, mud-free, and permanently
passable lane, within a twenty-foot-wide right-of-way.
§ 280-1605. Conversion of existing building to multifamily
dwellings.
In any residential zoning district, the conversion of a building which existed prior to July 17, 1972, into
a multifamily dwelling is permitted, subject to the following conditions and approval by the Zoning
Hearing Board:
There shall be no extension of the building other than as may be required for access or for safety.
The lot area required for each existing and proposed dwelling unit shall be as follows:
In the Residential District R-1, 8,000 square feet per dwelling unit shall be provided.
In the Residential District R-2, 4,000 square feet per dwelling unit shall be provided.
In the Residential District R-3, 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit shall be provided.
§ 280-1606. Driveway and access drive regulations.
Definition. For the purpose of this section, the word "driveway" shall mean any entrance or exit
used by vehicular traffic to or from properties containing a single-family dwelling abutting a public
street.
Number of driveways per lot. Single-family dwellings shall not have more than one driveway
entering or exiting on the same street. However, if, in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors, lot
area and configuration would permit, loop driveways having two access points to a public street
may be permitted.
Location.
On corner lots, no driveway access may be located within 50 feet of the point of tangency of
the existing or proposed curb radius of the site. However, if this provision is shown by the
applicant to be a hardship, the Township may allow a reduction of this requirement. Access
shall be to the street of lesser classification when two street classifications are involved.
Driveways serving residential lots shall be located at least five feet from a side lot line. Where
a proposed driveway is to serve two or more adjacent lots, the Township may permit a
driveway to be located on or within five feet of the side lot line between the lots, measured
from the outside edge of the driveway.
When two or more driveways are located on a site, a separation of 50 feet, measured along
the public street right-of-way from driveway center line to driveway center line, is required.
Design.
In general, driveways used for two-way operation shall intersect public streets at 90° as site
conditions permit; however, in no case shall driveways intersect public streets at less than
70°. Driveways used for one-way operation, right turn only, shall not intersect public streets at
any angle less than 45°. Said angle shall be measured from the center line of the street to the
center line of the driveway.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 491/520
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
F.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
Driveway dimensions and construction shall be designed to adequately accommodate the
type and volume of vehicles expected to use the site on a daily basis.
Vertical alignment of driveways serving residential lots shall not exceed a maximum of 8% for
the first 10 feet, measured from the right-of-way line.
Residential driveways on the turnaround of a cul-de-sac street may be exempted from the
above requirements at the discretion of the Zoning Officer.
Access and traffic control. Access to and from the site shall be designed in a manner conducive to
safe ingress and egress. The developer shall be responsible for the construction of any necessary
traffic control devices or additional lanes required by PennDOT or the Township. All entrances and
exits shall conform to the applicable driveway regulations of this chapter.
Permit required. Notwithstanding any other provisions set forth in § 280-1606 of this chapter, no
person, individual, firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, alter or enlarge an existing or
proposed driveway onto any public street without first having obtained a zoning permit as required
by Article XVIII of this chapter relating to administration and enforcement. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit a person, firm or corporation, however, from combining his or its application for a
driveway zoning permit with an application for a building permit, provided that all of the information
required by this section is contained on the application.
Plan submittal and permit application.
For all proposed driveways, the developer shall submit to the Zoning Office a permit
application, which is obtainable at the Township office. The Zoning Officer may also require
that a plan of the proposed driveway be submitted.
When a plan is required, the Zoning Officer shall review the plan for conformance with the
requirements of this chapter and shall:
Approve the application and plan as submitted; or
Return the application and plan for additional information and clarification; or
Disapprove the application, indicating in writing the reason for disapproval.
Fees. Permit application fees shall be as adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors from
time to time.
§ 280-1607. Fences.
Fences along side or rear lot lines are not subject to yard or setback requirements. All fences shall
be located completely within lot boundaries, and no fence may coincide with any lot line. However
a small setback is recommended to provide an area within which future maintenance may be
performed. Otherwise, fences along street right-of-way lines shall be set back two feet from the
street right-of-way lines.
No fence shall be erected in a street right-of-way or other rights-of-way or easements, including
public or private drainage, utility or access easements, unless otherwise required by this chapter,
or the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land Development and
Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended, or any other Township ordinance.
All fences shall comply with the vision obstruction requirements set forth in § 280-1617 of this
chapter and Article VI of the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Subdivision, Land
Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 492/520
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
B.
C.
Except as otherwise required within this chapter, fences within residential zoning districts:
May be located in the front yard, subject to the following standards:
Shall be an open type of fence (such as picket, metal post, wrought iron or split rail) with
a minimum of 50% open area to 50% structural area;
Shall not exceed four feet in height.
Otherwise, fences within the residential zoning districts shall not exceed eight feet in height.
Except as otherwise required within this chapter, fences within the commercial, industrial, and
other zoning districts shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
Any fence exceeding six feet in height shall comply with the most-recent version of the Lancaster
Township Building Code, as amended.
Unless required for security purposes, no fence shall be constructed of barbed wire, razor, or other
sharp components capable of causing injury, and only then if the portion of the fence containing
barbed wire, razor, or other sharp components capable of causing injury is not lower than six feet
above the average surrounding ground level.
§ 280-1608. Flag lots.
Flag lots may be permitted in residential zoning districts as a special exception, when in compliance
with the following requirements.
A flag lot shall be described as containing two parts:
The "flag" shall include that portion of the lot that is the location of the principal and accessory
uses.
The "pole" shall be considered that portion of the lot that is used for vehicular access between
the "flag" portion of the lot and its adjoining public street right-of-way or an approved private
street right-of-way. The "pole" shall be a fee-simple part of the flag lot and shall not be a
separate parcel or easement.
Requirements for the "flag."
The minimum lot area, minimum lot width, and maximum lot coverage requirements, and all
other applicable standards of the applicable zoning district and design requirements shall be
complied with and measured exclusively upon the "flag" portion of the lot. The minimum yards
of the applicable zoning district shall be increased by 25% on the "flag" portion of the lot.
For purposes of determining yards, the following shall apply:
Front yard: the area between the principal structure and that lot line of the "flag" which is
most parallel to the street right-of-way providing vehicular access to the site. Additionally,
all areas of the "pole" shall be considered to be within the front yard.
Rear yard: the area between the principal structure and that lot line of the "flag" that is
directly opposite the front yard, as described in § 280-1608B(2)(a) above.
Side yards: the area between the principal structure and that one outermost lot line which
forms the "flag" and "pole," plus the area on the opposite side of the principal structure.
The flag lot shall contain adequate driveway dimensions for vehicular backup so that ingress to
and egress from the lot is in the forward direction.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 493/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Requirements for the "pole" portion of the lot.
The "pole" shall have a minimum width of 24 feet at the street right-of-way line and
continuously maintain said minimum width between the street right-of-way line and the "flag"
portion of the lot.
The "pole" shall not exceed 500 feet in length, unless additional length is needed to avoid the
disturbance of productive farmlands, prime agricultural soils, or some other significant natural
or cultural feature.
No part of the "pole" shall be used for any portion of an on-lot sewage disposal system, nor
any other improvement, except a driveway and other permitted improvements, including
landscaping, fencing, utility connections to off-site facilities, mailboxes, and signs.
The driveway contained on the "pole" shall be located at least six feet from any adjoining lot
line and 20 feet from any existing structures on the site or any adjoining lot.
No "pole" shall be located within 500 feet of another on the same side of the street right-ofway,
unless an adjoining "pole" utilizes a joint-use or shared driveway, regulated herein in this
§ 280-1608F below. No more than two adjoining "poles" shall be permitted.
No more than one "tier" of flag lot shall be permitted. A "tier" shall be defined as a single row of
lots behind "conventional" lots that have the required frontage at the street right-of-way and lot
width at the minimum front building setback line.
Joint-use or shared driveways.
When one or more flag lots are proposed, such lots may rely upon a joint-use or shared
driveway for vehicular access in accordance with § 280-1606 of this chapter.
A joint-use or shared driveway must serve at least one flag lot but may also serve
conventional lots, up to a maximum of four total dwelling units.
Flag lots shall conform with the standards set forth in the most-recent version of the Lancaster
Township Subdivision, Land Development and Stormwater Management Ordinance, as amended.
§ 280-1609. Garage and yard sales.
Garage, yard, and similar types of residential sales shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to
the following conditions:
The period of the sale shall not exceed a total of four days during two consecutive weeks.
The sale shall not begin earlier than 8:00 a.m. and shall end by 6:00 p.m., prevailing time, on each
day of the sale.
Only goods and property of the person or persons holding the sale shall be sold, and such goods
and property shall not have been purchased or otherwise obtained for the purpose of resale.
No person or persons shall hold more than two sales per calendar year.
Signs erected on the property of the sale shall be displayed no more than 48 hours prior to the
sale and removed before the end of the day of the sale. Signs shall comply with Article XII of this
chapter relating to sign regulations. No off-premises signs are permitted.
§ 280-1610. Height limit exceptions.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 494/520
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
All buildings and structures shall be required to conform to the maximum height regulations specified
within the pertinent zoning district, except roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks,
ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, skylights, towers,
flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, antennas, utility poles, farm silos, spires on places of worship, or
similar structures. However, no penthouse, roof structure or any space above the height limit shall be
allowed for the purpose of providing additional floor space for any use.
§ 280-1611. Lot area reductions.
No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in area
so that yards, lot area per dwelling unit, lot width or other requirements of this chapter are not
maintained. This shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose.
Any two adjacent undersized lots under common ownership as of the effective date of this chapter
shall be considered as one lot for the purposes of establishing compliance with the requirements
of this chapter.
§ 280-1612. Operations management plans.
The following requirements for the submission and approval of an operations management plan apply
to all nonresidential uses. In addition to the information required to be submitted as part of the zoning
permit application as set forth in Article XVIII of this chapter relating to administration and enforcement,
applications for nonresidential uses shall include an operations management plan submitted to and
approved by the Township. Operations management plans shall include the following information:
The address of the premises of the proposed business/operation, including its tax parcel number.
The name and type of the proposed business/operation.
The name of the owner, on-site manager, and/or other authorized agent of the proposed
business/operation and the lot.
The gross floor area of the building devoted to the proposed business/operation and the gross
area of the lot devoted to the proposed business/operation.
A detailed description of the proposed business/operation and adverting associated with the
proposed business/operation.
A general description of the land uses adjacent to the property and on the same block.
The intended market/service area of the proposed business/operation.
The maximum permitted occupancy.
The estimated number of employees/occupants and the number of employees/occupants on each
shift.
The hours and days the business/operation will be open, including any expected special events.
Vehicles and traffic associated with the proposed business/operation (e.g., employees and
customers/occupants, deliveries, loading, etc.).
Collection, treatment, and disposal methods of materials generated by the proposed
business/operation.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 495/520
M.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
[1]
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
A discussion of any possible impacts and/or problems the proposed business/operation may
cause and specific measures employed to mitigate or eliminate any negative impacts/problems.
The applicant shall furnish evidence that the impacts/problems generated by the proposed
business/operation will be within acceptable levels, as regulated by applicable laws and
ordinances, including but not limited to those listed in this chapter.
§ 280-1613. Outdoor displays of merchandise.
Outdoor display of merchandise for sale, rent, or lease shall comply with the following:
Outdoor display of merchandise shall only be allowed in conjunction with a permitted commercial
building.
The maximum area to be used for outdoor display shall not exceed 15% of the building area of the
associated commercial structure or structures on the lot.
The display of merchandise shall not be located upon any sidewalk, walkway, driveway, access
drive, or within any street right-of-way. The display of merchandise shall not reduce the amount of
parking below that which is required for the associated commercial uses; and prior to the
establishment of the display, a plot plan indicating the display area, sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, access drives, and required parking compounds shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer for review to determine compliance with this subsection. The area to be used for outdoor
display shall not be located in front of any building.
Outdoor display areas shall be completely enclosed by a six-foot-high opaque fence.
Automotive sales and gasoline and service stations shall be exempt from these requirements.
Commercial establishments may hold sidewalk sales once a year for a period not to exceed 72
hours.
§ 280-1614. Preservation of greenways.
The following requirements for the preservation of greenways apply to all areas of the Township where
the conditions are applicable and to all zoning districts:
Purpose. The preservation of greenways in Lancaster Township is essential to link the urban,
suburban, and rural areas of the Greater Lancaster Area and to preserve the Township's most
valuable natural, scenic, and recreational resources. The preservation of such resources is a
municipal zoning power authorized by Section 604 of the MPC.[1] The purpose of this section is to
preserve greenways to the greatest extent possible in order to facilitate the development of a
network of intermunicipal trails and preservation areas.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10604.
Designated greenways. The most-recent version of the LIMC Comprehensive Plan identified
greenway corridors in Lancaster Township. To implement the recommendations of the plan, the
Township hereby designates greenways along the following bodies of water:
Little Conestoga Creek;
Conestoga River;
Unnamed tributary to the Conestoga River southwest of Millersville Road and adjacent to
Millersville Borough; and
Unnamed tributary to the Conestoga River on the northeast side of Millersville Road.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 496/520
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
Location of greenways. Greenways shall extend inland 100 feet from the top of the bank of the
body of water. When the top of the bank is not clearly defined, the greenway shall extend inland
125 feet from the center of the body of water.
Uses and structures permitted in greenways. To the extent permitted by the pertinent zoning
district, the following uses and structures shall be permitted in greenways:
Wildlife sanctuaries.
Nature preserves.
Reforestation.
Fishing areas.
Passive recreational areas.
Public recreational trails for bicycles and pedestrians.
Active recreation areas, such as ballfields, golf courses, and playgrounds.
Stream bank stabilization.
Greenway crossings for farm vehicles and livestock.
Bridges for public roads.
Public sewer lines, submersible pump stations protruding no more than one foot above the
original grade, and accessory features, including transformers, control panels, generators,
and dusk-to-dawn lights, that are necessary for the operation and maintenance of pump
stations and protrude to a height of no greater than four feet above the ground and occupy a
surface area no more than 50 square feet.
Public water lines and associated facilities at or below grade.
Fences for containing livestock, provided that such fences are designed to allow the
reservation of adequate land for a potential linear trail as required in § 280-1614C of this
chapter.
Public utility transmission lines.
Uses and structures prohibited in greenways. The following uses and structures shall be
prohibited in greenways:
Buildings and structures not listed in § 280-1614D of this chapter.
Impervious surfaces, including parking compounds, driveways, and access drives, not
associated with the uses listed in § 280-1614D of this chapter.
Storage of hazardous or noxious materials.
Provisions for future trails. Any building or structure permitted in a greenway shall be located and
designed to incorporate the reservation of adequate and appropriate area for a linear path that
traverses the property. Such areas shall be designated on all subdivision and land development
plans as a potential greenway trail and shall comply with the following:
The minimum width of the area reserved for the trail shall be 25 feet.
The area reserved for the trail shall not contain wetlands.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 497/520
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
A.
B.
The grading and slope of the area reserved for the future trail shall be adequate to
accommodate pedestrians and bicycles.
The alignment of the trail shall traverse the property approximately parallel to the body of
water adjacent to the greenway.
The alignment of the area designated for the potential trail shall be the optimum alignment
with designated or potential trails on adjacent properties.
§ 280-1615. Public utility corporations and municipal uses.
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building, or extension thereof, used or to
be used by a public utility corporation if, upon petition of the corporation, the PA PUC shall, after a
public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the building in question is
reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public.
Any structure or other improvement for the purpose of servicing a public utility or municipality,
except common or contract carriers, may be erected within any zoning district. If requested by the
Township, public utilities shall file a plan with the Township indicating the location of all proposed
structures and rights-of-way within the Township.
§ 280-1616. Slope control regulations.
The following controls shall apply to all areas of the Township where the conditions are applicable and
to all zoning districts. It is the purpose of these regulations to limit the amount of the removal of natural
resources, to protect the watershed areas, and to minimize erosion of the soil. Upon the receipt of an
application for a building permit, the Zoning Officer may require that the applicant submit a topographic
survey, prepared by a licensed professional surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or licensed professional engineer registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
which shall show the degree of slope. If the proposed building site is located in those areas of the
Township where the natural slope of the land exceeds 25%, the following regulations shall apply:
All uses as permitted in the zoning district in which the slope is located are permitted.
If more than 50% of the minimum required lot area is on slopes which exceed 25%, a minimum lot
area of 40,000 square feet is required for each principal building to be constructed.
§ 280-1617. Vision obstructions.
No building, structure, planting or other obstruction shall be permitted on any corner lot that would
obscure sight visibility within the clear sight triangle established by measuring 100 feet along the center
lines of the intersecting streets at a height of 3 1/2 feet above the street surface.
Article XVII. Conformity and Nonconformity Regulations
§ 280-1700. Applicability.
The requirements and provisions of this Article XVII shall apply to nonconforming uses, structures, and
lots in all zoning districts unless application to specific zoning districts is expressly stated.
§ 280-1701. Conformity of proposed land uses.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 498/520
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, no provision of this chapter shall be
construed to enable or permit the expansion of a building, structure, sign or use of land, which
existed as a nonconforming building, structure, sign or use of land pursuant to the provisions of
any prior zoning regulation or ordinance, in excess of the limits of expansion for a nonconforming
building, structure, sign or use of land authorized by said prior zoning regulation or ordinance.
It is the express intent and purpose of this chapter that if a building, structure, sign or use of land
was expanded to the limits of expansion for a nonconforming building, structure, sign or use of
land as authorized by a prior zoning regulation or ordinance, no further expansion of said building,
structure, sign or land shall be authorized; and in the event a nonconforming building, structure,
sign or use of land was expanded to a portion of the limits of expansion authorized by a prior
zoning regulation or ordinance, additional expansion, if permitted by this chapter, shall only be
authorized to the amount of expansion not previously utilized pursuant to said prior zoning
regulation or ordinance.
§ 280-1702. Continuance of nonconforming uses and structures.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any use and structure lawfully existing at the time of
the enactment of this chapter (February 8, 1999) but not in conformity with the use provisions for the
zoning district in which it is located may be continued, subject to the following limitations:
Expansion of nonconforming uses. No expansion of a nonconforming structure or use shall
hereafter be made unless an application has been filed with the Zoning Hearing Board and such
expansion has been approved by such Board as a special exception; provided, however, that the
expansion of the nonconforming use shall be limited to a distance of 250 feet in any direction from
the existing nonconforming structure or use or to an area equal to 25% of the existing total usable
area of the use or building; and provided, further, that any expansion of a nonconforming building
or use shall be limited to the lot limits which existed at the property in question at the time of
adoption of this chapter (February 8, 1999). The applicant shall provide evidence to the Zoning
Hearing Board as to the prior extent of any nonconforming use at the property. No new
nonconformities shall be created by any proposed expansion unless a variance is sought and
obtained from the Zoning Hearing Board.
Continuity of nonconforming use. Except as otherwise provided in § 280-1702E of this chapter, no
nonconforming use may be reestablished after it has been discontinued for 12 consecutive
months. Vacating of premises or buildings or nonoperative status of such premises or building
shall be presumptive evidence of discontinued use, refutable upon presentation of additional
competent evidence.
Substitution of nonconforming use. No nonconforming use may be changed to any other
nonconforming use unless the Zoning Hearing Board shall, in granting a special exception, find
that the proposed nonconforming use is not more detrimental to the zoning district than the
existing nonconforming use of the property. The Zoning Hearing Board may specify such
appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be required in connection with such change and
the granting of such special exception.
Damage to nonconforming buildings. Except as otherwise specifically provided, a nonconforming
building, structure or use which is partially damaged by fire, storm, accident or other unintended
casualty may be rebuilt and occupied for the same use as before the damage, provided that the
reconstructed building, structure or use shall not be larger than the damaged one and that the
reconstruction shall start within one year from the time of such damage. However, a
nonconforming building which has been damaged or destroyed to an extent of 60% or more of its
replacement cost shall not be continued, repaired or reconstructed.
Discontinued nonconforming use of open land. All nonconforming signs, billboards, junk areas,
storage areas, and other nonconforming uses of open land, when discontinued for a period of 90
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 499/520
F.
G.
H.
A.
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
B.
days or damaged or deteriorated to an extent of 60% or more of replacement costs, shall not be
continued, repaired or reconstructed.
Substitution of a nonconforming use with a conforming use. If a nonconforming use is proposed to
be eliminated and a conforming use substituted but certain dimensional land regulations cannot be
met (such as area, yard, etc.), the Zoning Hearing Board, with such appropriate conditions and
safeguards as the Board may see fit, may grant a special exception to permit such conforming
use.
Status of a conforming use which was previously nonconforming. If a nonconforming use becomes
a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter revert back to a nonconforming use.
Side and rear yard regulations for accessory buildings on lots containing a nonconforming use.
The side and rear yard regulations are as required in those zoning districts where the use is a
permitted use or the use is allowed by a special exception.
§ 280-1703. Nonconforming lots.
Lots which are nonconforming because of lot area, lot width, or lot depth may be used for any use
permitted in the pertinent zoning district. Such uses shall comply with all other requirements of the
zoning district, with the following exceptions:
Lot area exceptions. Lots that are nonconforming because of lot area may be used for any use
permitted in the pertinent zoning district, provided that such uses shall comply with all other
requirements of the zoning district.
Side yard exceptions. Lots that are nonconforming because of lot width shall be exempt from the
minimum side yard requirements, provided that such side yards shall comply with the following:
Residential zoning districts.
In order to provide for additions to existing single-family detached and single-family
semidetached dwelling units in those cases where a lot, on which there was an existing
dwelling unit, existed at the time of enactment of this chapter (February 8, 1999), which
has less than the required minimum lot width in the zoning district in which it is located,
the side yard requirement may be reduced by six inches for each one foot of lot width
deficiency to a minimum side yard of the following:
Residential District R-1: eight feet.
Residential District R-2: eight feet.
Residential District R-3: six feet.
The intent of this provision is to permit additional living space in existing dwelling units
and is not to be applicable when the expansion is for the purposes of adding or creating
additional dwelling units or a change in use classifications.
Side yard exceptions for accessory buildings in the residential zoning districts. In order to
provide for construction of an accessory building on those lots which existed at the time of
enactment of this chapter (February 8, 1999) which have less than the required minimum lot
width in the zoning district in which they are located, the side yard requirement may be
reduced by six inches for each one foot of lot width deficiency to a minimum side yard of the
following:
Residential District R-1: six feet.
Residential District R-2: four feet.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 500/520
(c)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
C.
Residential District R-3: four feet.
All other uses and zoning districts shall comply with the following side yard exceptions:
Side yards shall not be less than the average of the two adjacent side yards on the two
adjacent properties which front on the same street, on the same side of the street, and in
the same zoning district as the nonconforming lot.
Under no circumstances shall any side yard be less than five feet.
Rear yard exceptions. Lots that are nonconforming because of lot depth shall be exempt from the
minimum rear yard requirements, provided that such rear yards shall comply with the following:
Residential zoning districts.
In order to provide for additions to existing single-family detached and single-family
semidetached dwelling units in those cases where a lot, on which there was an existing
dwelling unit, existed at the time of enactment of this chapter (February 8, 1999) which
has less than the required minimum lot depth in the zoning district in which it is located,
the rear yard requirement may be reduced by six inches for each one foot of lot depth
deficiency, to a minimum rear yard depth of 25 feet, in all residential zoning districts.
The intent of this provision is to permit additional living space in existing dwelling units
and is not to be applicable when the expansion is for the purposes of adding or creating
additional dwelling units or changes in use classification.
All other uses and zoning districts shall comply with the following rear yard exceptions:
Rear yards shall not be less than the average of the two adjacent rear yards on the two
adjacent properties which front on the same street, on the same side of the street, and in
the same zoning district as the nonconforming lot.
Under no circumstances shall any rear yard be less than 15 feet.
§ 280-1704. Zoning district changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a zoning district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one
zoning district to another zoning district of a different classification, the foregoing provisions shall also
apply to any nonconforming uses or structures existing therein or created thereby.
Article XVIII. Administration and Enforcement
§ 280-1800. Applicability.
The requirements and provisions of this Article XVIII shall apply to the administration and enforcement
of this chapter.
§ 280-1801. Zoning Officer.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a Zoning Officer, who shall be
appointed by, and be responsible to, the Board of Supervisors. The Zoning Officer may be provided
with the assistance of such persons as the Board of Supervisors may direct. The compensation of all
employees shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 501/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
A.
§ 280-1802. Duties and responsibilities of Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer shall have all the duties and powers conferred by this chapter and by all of the
applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Zoning Officer shall not issue a permit or
certificate of use and occupancy in connection with any contemplated erection, construction, alteration,
extension, replacement, demolition, relocation, conversion or use of any building, structure, sign or
land unless it first conforms with the requirements of this chapter, all other ordinances of the Township
of Lancaster, and with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Application and permits. The Zoning Officer shall receive applications and issue zoning permits
and/or certificates of use and occupancy for the erection, construction, alteration, extension,
replacement, demolition, relocation, conversion and/or use and occupancy of any building,
structure, sign, or land in the Township.
Inspections. Before the issuance of any permit by the Zoning Officer, all buildings, structures,
signs or land and portions thereof for which an application has been filed for the erection,
construction, alteration, extension, replacement, demolition, relocation, conversion and/or use may
be examined or caused to be examined. Thereafter, such inspections as are required by the
Township during the construction of the work for which a permit has been issued may be made by
the Township or its agent. Upon completion of such work and before issuing a certificate of use
and occupancy, a final inspection shall be made; and all violations of approved plans or the zoning
permit shall be noted; and the holder of the permit shall be notified of the discrepancies, which
violations or discrepancies shall be rectified before a certificate of use and occupancy shall be
issued.
Complaints regarding violations. The Zoning Officer shall investigate alleged violations of this
chapter when in receipt of a signed written complaint stating fully the cause and basis thereof. If a
signed written complaint is received, said investigation shall be completed within 30 days of said
complaint. A written report of all investigations of this chapter shall be prepared and filed by the
Zoning Officer and a copy sent to the Board of Supervisors.
Official records. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to maintain and be responsible for all
pertinent records on zoning matters in the Township. These records shall include, but not be
limited to, all applications received, copies of all permits and certificates issued, copies of orders
and findings of the Zoning Hearing Board, written complaints of alleged violations, records of all
inspections made, a Zoning Map, and all other pertinent information. The records of the Zoning
Officer shall be available for the use of the Township government and for inspection by any
interested party during normal office hours. The Zoning Officer shall, at least annually, submit to
the Board of Supervisors a written statement of all zoning permits and certificates of use and
occupancy issued and violations and stop-work orders recommended or promulgated.
§ 280-1803. Permits.
Requirements.
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the erection, construction, alteration,
extension, relocation, conversion or use and occupancy of any building, structure, sign, fence,
wall, parking compound, driveway, access drive, or land, including an accessory building or
sign, or to commence the moving, demolition or alteration of any building, structure, sign,
fence, wall, parking compound, driveway, access drive, or land, including an accessory
building or sign, until the Zoning Officer has issued a zoning permit for such work; provided,
however, that no zoning permit shall be required for any such construction or alteration, the
fair market value of which is less than $500 and which would not change the use
classification, provided that a zoning permit shall always be required for any excavation or
construction work on, through or within a Township road or right-of-way.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 502/520
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Any excavation for or construction or erection of any building, structure, sign, fence, wall,
parking compound, driveway, access drive, or land, including an accessory building or sign, or
the commencement of any moving or alteration of any building, structure, sign, fence, wall,
parking compound, driveway, access drive, or land, including any accessory building or sign,
shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter and any other local, state or federal
regulations, ordinances, and laws.
No zoning permit shall be required for repairs to, and maintenance of, any building, structure,
sign or land, provided that such repairs do not change the use, alter the exterior dimensions
of the building, structure or sign, or otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter or other
ordinances of the Township.
No zoning permit for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, relocation, conversion or
use and any occupancy of any building, structure or land shall be issued until the developer or
landowner has submitted a certification, executed by a professional licensed to perform such
duties in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, that all stormwater management facilities and
related improvements have been completed in accordance with Township specifications and
in accordance with the plan or plans approved by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the
applicable ordinances of the Township of Lancaster.
Form of application. The application for a zoning permit shall be submitted in such form as the
Zoning Officer may prescribe and shall be accompanied by the required fee as prescribed.
Application for a zoning permit shall be made by the landowner or developer. The full names,
addresses and phone numbers of the landowner or developer, and of the responsible officers, if
the landowner or developer is a corporate body, shall be stated in the application.
Description of work. The application shall contain a general description of proposed work and use
and occupancy of all parts of the building, structure or sign and such additional information as may
be required by the Zoning Officer. The application for the zoning permit shall be accompanied by a
plot plan of the proposed building, structure, or sign, drawn to scale, with sufficient clarity to show
the nature and character of the work to be performed, including parking and loading facilities, if
required, location of new and existing construction, and the distances of the same from the
existing lot lines and street right-of-way lines.
Time limit for application. An application for a zoning permit for any proposed work shall be
deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing, unless during that six-month
period, a zoning permit shall have been issued, provided that reasonable extensions of time for
additional periods not exceeding 90 days each may be granted at the discretion of the Zoning
Officer.
Issuance of permit. Upon receiving the application, the Zoning Officer shall examine the same
within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or plans do not conform to the provisions of
all pertinent laws, he shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. The
Zoning Officer shall inform the applicant of the right of appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board in the
event such application is rejected. If satisfied that the proposed work or use conforms to the
provisions of this chapter and all other pertinent laws and ordinances and that the certificate of use
and occupancy as required herein has been properly applied for, the Zoning Officer shall issue a
zoning permit therefor, generally within 30 days but in any case within 90 days.
Expiration of permit. The zoning permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance; provided,
that the zoning permit may be extended by the Zoning Officer upon reasonable cause shown and
at his discretion for one or two six-month periods not to exceed an additional one year.
Revocation of permit. The Zoning Officer may revoke a zoning permit or approval issued under the
provisions of this chapter in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the
application or on the plans on which the zoning permit or approval was based, or for any other
case set forth in this chapter.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 503/520
H.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Posting of permit. A true copy of the zoning permit shall be kept on the site of operations and open
to inspection by the Zoning Officer during the entire time of performance of the work and until the
completion of same as defined in the application.
§ 280-1804. Conditions of permit.
Payment of fees. No zoning permit shall be issued until the fees prescribed by the Board of
Supervisors pursuant to resolution shall be paid to the Township. The payment of fees under this
section shall not relieve the applicant or holder of said zoning permit from payment of other fees
that may be required by this chapter or by any other ordinances or law.
Compliance with this chapter. The zoning permit shall be a license to proceed with the work and
should not be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this
chapter or any other ordinances or law.
Compliance with permit and plot plan. All work or use shall conform to the approved application
and plans for which the zoning permit has been issued as well as the approved plot plan.
§ 280-1805. Certificate of use and occupancy.
When required.
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy any structure, building, permanent sign or land or portion
thereof until a certificate of use and occupancy has been issued by the Zoning Officer. Such
certificate shall be required whenever a zoning permit is required, as well as when there is a
change in the use of any existing land, structure, or building.
A certificate of use and occupancy shall also be obtained before using or occupying any land,
structure, or building or a portion thereof, after approval by the Zoning Hearing Board, for a
special exception or a variance, or the grant of a conditional use.
Prior to issuing such certificate, the Zoning Officer shall be satisfied that all provisions of this
chapter and all conditions of the Zoning Hearing Board's approval, as well as the
requirements of other Township ordinances have been satisfied.
Form of application. The application for a certificate of use and occupancy shall be in such form as
the Zoning Officer may prescribe and shall be made at the same time as the application for a
zoning permit is filed with the Zoning Officer.
Description of use and occupancy. The application shall contain a description of the intended use
and occupancy of any structure, building, sign or land or portion thereof for which a zoning permit
is required herein.
Action upon application. The Zoning Officer may make a discretionary inspection of any structure,
building or sign within seven days after notification that the proposed work that was listed under
the zoning permit has been completed. If the Zoning Officer is satisfied that the work is in
conformity and compliance with the work listed in the issued permit and all other pertinent laws,
the Zoning Officer shall issue a certificate of use and occupancy for the intended use listed in the
approved application.
Availability of certificate. The certificate of use and occupancy for nonconforming uses, or a true
copy thereof, shall be kept available for inspection by the Zoning Officer at all times.
Temporary certificate of use and occupancy. Upon request of the holder of a zoning permit, the
Zoning Officer may issue a temporary certificate of use and occupancy for a structure, building, or
land or portion thereof before the entire work covered by the zoning permit shall have been
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 504/520
A.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(3)
B.
completed, provided that such portion or portions may be used or occupied safely prior to full
completion of the work without endangering life or public welfare. The Zoning Officer may also
issue a temporary certificate of use and occupancy for such temporary uses as tents, trailers and
buildings on construction sites, use of land for religious or other public or semipublic purposes and
similar temporary use or occupancy. Such temporary certificates shall be for a period of time to be
determined by the Zoning Officer; however, in no case for a period exceeding six months. The
Zoning Officer may renew such temporary certificates for additional periods of time, which shall
not exceed six months each.
§ 280-1806. Enforcement, penalty and remedy.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce this chapter.
Violation. The erection, construction, alteration, repair, demolition, extension, replacement,
relocation, conversion, and/or use and/or occupancy of any building, structure, sign, fence, wall,
parking compound, driveway, access drive, or land, or the change of use, area of use, percentage
of use or displacement of the use of any building, structure, sign, fence, wall, parking compound,
driveway, access drive, or land without first obtaining a zoning permit, when such permit is
required by this chapter, or the use of any building, structure, sign, fence, wall, parking compound,
driveway, access drive, or land without receipt of a certificate of use and occupancy, or the failure
to comply with any other provisions of this chapter or any terms and conditions of any decisions by
the Zoning Hearing Board, are hereby declared to be violations of this chapter of the Township.
Enforcement notice.
If it appears to the Township that a violation of this chapter has occurred or is occurring, the
Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as
provided in this section.
The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the
violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement
notices regarding that parcel, to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record,
and to any other person against whom the Township intends to take action. The enforcement
notice shall be sent by first-class mail and certified mail/return receipt requested. Return of
the signed return receipt card, or an unclaimed certified mailing combined with nonreturn of
the enforcement sent by first-class mail, shall constitute a conclusive presumption that the
enforcement notice recipient has been lawfully served.
An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the Township
intends to take action.
The location of the property in violation.
The specific violation, with a description of the requirements which have not been met,
citing in each instance the applicable provisions of the ordinance.
The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before
which the steps must be completed.
That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within
30 days of the date of the notice in accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions
clearly described.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 505/520
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
A.
Causes of action. In case any building, structure, sign, fence, wall, parking compound, driveway,
access drive, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, altered,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the Township or, with the approval of the
Township, an officer of the Township, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows
that his property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any
act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. Any such notice of that action shall be
served upon the Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy
of the complaint on the Township. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been
given.
Enforcement remedies.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated, is violating, or has
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more
than $500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township
as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation
violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of
the determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Township.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or
entity other than the Township the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to
this section.
Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
Township from instituting appropriate action to prevent unlawful erection or construction or to
restrain, correct or abate a violation or to prevent illegal use or occupancy of any structure,
building, sign, fence, parking compound, driveway, access drive, land or premises or to stop an
illegal act, conduct business, use or occupancy of a structure, building, sign or land in and about
any premises.
Article XIX. Zoning Hearing Board
§ 280-1900. Applicability.
The requirements and provisions of this Article XIX shall apply to the Zoning Hearing Board and
related functions of this chapter.
§ 280-1901. Establishment and membership.
There shall be a Zoning Hearing Board, which shall consist of three members who shall be
appointed by the Board of Supervisors.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 506/520
B.
C.
A.
B.
Membership of the Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of residents of the Township. Their terms of
office shall be three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of no more than one
member shall expire each year. The Zoning Hearing Board shall promptly notify the Board of
Supervisors of any vacancies that occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other office in
the Township. Any member of the Zoning Hearing Board may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of
Supervisors taken after the member has received a fifteen-day advance notice of the intent to take
such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in
writing.
The Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least one but no more than three residents
of the Township to serve as alternate members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate
member shall be three years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of § 280-1902 of this
chapter, an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the Board
to the same and full extent as provided by law for Board members, including specifically the right
to cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and
duties set forth in this chapter and as otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other
office in the Township, including membership on the Planning Commission and Zoning Officer.
Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be entitled
to vote as a member of the Board nor be compensated pursuant to § 280-1903 of this chapter
unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to § 280-1902 of this chapter.
§ 280-1902. Organization.
The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and
may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall
be not less than a majority of all members of the Board, but the Board may appoint a hearing officer
from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action
by the Board as provided in § 280-1904 of this chapter. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a
member, a quorum is not reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the
alternate was initially appointed until the Board has made a final determination of the matter or case.
Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation
according to declining seniority among all alternates. The Board may make, alter, and rescind rules
and forms for its procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of the
commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business, which records shall be the
property of the Township, and shall submit a report of its activities to the Board of Supervisors upon
request.
§ 280-1903. Expenditures for services.
The Board of Supervisors may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to hearings before the
Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the Secretary and
members of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary administrative
overhead connected with the hearing. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses of the
Zoning Hearing Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or
expert witness costs.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors, the Zoning Hearing Board may
employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and
clerical services. Members of the Board may receive compensation for the performance of their
duties, as may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors. Alternate members of the Board may receive
compensation, as may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors, for the performance of their duties
when designated as alternate members pursuant to § 280-1902 of this chapter. In no case shall
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 507/520
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
F.
the compensation paid to members of the Board or any alternate members exceed the rate of
compensation authorized to be paid to the members by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 280-1904. Hearings.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the
requirements of the MPC,[1] as well as the following requirements.
Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning Officer,
such other persons as the Board of Supervisors shall designate by ordinance and to any person
who has made timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in such
manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance, or in the absence of an ordinance provision, by rules
of the Zoning Hearing Board. In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of said
hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the
hearing.
All persons who wish to be considered parties to a hearing shall enter their appearance on forms
provided by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Every person who requests a hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board shall submit a fully
completed application to the Zoning Officer or the Zoning Hearing Board on the form prescribed by
the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Officer shall reject all incomplete applications. The date of
an applicant's request shall be the date when a fully completed application accompanied by the
appropriate fee is submitted to and received by the Zoning Officer.
All requests for a continuance of a scheduled hearing shall be submitted in writing with the
reasons therefor and shall contain a statement that the applicant agrees to an extension of time
period, within which the Zoning Hearing Board is required to hold a hearing or to render a written
decision. No more than two continuances shall be permitted, unless the party requesting the
continuance pays the fee prescribed by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to resolution.
The Zoning Hearing Board or the hearing officer shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and
the Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the transcript is ordered
by the Board or hearing officer, or shall be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the
Zoning Hearing Board if such appeal is made; and in either event the cost of additional copies
shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting
the original transcript shall bear the costs.
Effect of Zoning Hearing Board's decision. The following time requirements and conditions shall
apply to approvals granted by the Zoning Hearing Board:
Permit period.
The applicant or appellant shall secure all necessary zoning and building permits within
12 months after the approval date of the variance, special exception, or other action of
approval by the Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board may grant an extension of the twelve-month permit period,
provided that the applicant or appellant has demonstrated good cause in a written
application to the Zoning Hearing Board.
Should the applicant or appellant fail to obtain all necessary zoning permits within the
time limitations of this section, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or
applicant has waived, withdrawn, or abandoned the appeal or application; and all
provisions, variances, special exceptions and zoning permits granted shall be deemed
automatically rescinded by the Zoning Hearing Board.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 508/520
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
(c)
(2)
[1]
(1)
(2)
[1]
(3)
A.
[1]
[2]
(a)
(1)
B.
Construction period.
The applicant or appellant shall complete the building, alteration, or use within two years
after a zoning permit has been issued.
The Zoning Hearing Board may grant an extension of the two-year construction period,
provided that the applicant or appellant has demonstrated good cause in a written
application to the Zoning Hearing Board.
Should the applicant or appellant fail to complete such construction, alteration, or use
within the time limitations of this section, the Zoning Hearing Board may rescind or
revoke the granted variance, special exception, or zoning permit. The Zoning Officer shall
provide the applicant or appellant with a written notice at least 10 days prior to such
decision of the Zoning Hearing Board. The decision to rescind or revoke such approvals
shall be based on one or more of the following findings of the Zoning Hearing Board:
That there is no good cause for the failure to complete such construction, alteration,
or use within the required time.
That conditions have so changed since the approval of the zoning permit that
revocation of the action is justified.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 280-1905. Jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board.
Appeals from the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide the following
appeals:
Appeals in which it is alleged by the appellant that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow
prescribed procedures or has misinterpreted or misapplied any provision of a valid ordinance
or map or any valid rule or regulation governing the action of the Zoning Officer.
Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not limited to, the granting
or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of any ceaseand-
desist order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or
lot.
Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination of a preliminary opinion pursuant to Article
IX, Section 916.2, of the MPC.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
Substantive challenges to the validity of this chapter.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear substantive challenges to the validity of this chapter,
except those brought before the Board of Supervisors.
If a challenge heard by the Zoning Hearing Board is found to have merit, the decision of
the Zoning Hearing Board shall include recommended amendments to this challenged
chapter which will cure the defects found. In reaching its decision, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
applicant and shall also consider:
The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools and
other public service facilities.
If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional
housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of a
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 509/520
[3]
[4]
[5]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(2)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
C.
(a)
(b)
(1)
D.
type actually available to, and affordable by, classes of persons otherwise unlawfully
excluded by the challenged provisions of this chapter or map.
The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural
features.
The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands,
floodplains, natural resources and natural features, the degree to which these are
protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and any
adverse environmental impacts.
The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land uses
which are essential to public health and welfare.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall render its decision within 45 days after the conclusion of
the last hearing. If the Zoning Board fails to act on the applicant's request within this time
limit, a denial of the request is deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close
of the last hearing.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall commence its hearings within 60 days after the request
is filed, unless the applicant requests or consents to an extension of time.
Public notice of the hearing shall be provided as specified in § 280-1904A of this chapter.
Challenges to the validity of this chapter, raising procedural questions or alleged defects in
the process of enactment or adoption, shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after
the effective date of this chapter.
Variances.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the
provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Zoning Hearing
Board may grant a variance upon a finding that the applicable provisions of the MPC
regarding the granting of variances have been met by the applicant. In granting any variance,
the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary
to implement the purposes of the MPC and this chapter.
All applicants for a variance shall submit the following:
A statement describing the proposed use.
A location map showing the entire tract and its relation to the surrounding area, drawn at
a scale of 1,000 feet to the inch.
Special exceptions.
In those instances in which this chapter has stated special exceptions to be granted or denied
by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to express standards and criteria, the Board shall
herein decide all such requests for special exceptions in accordance with the standards and
criteria of this chapter, including the following:
The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter and the
applicable zoning district;
The proposed use shall not detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent or nearby
properties;
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 510/520
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(2)
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
(c)
(3)
The proposed use will not substantially change the character of the subject property's
neighborhood;
Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed use (e.g., schools, fire,
police and ambulance protection, sewer, water and other utilities, vehicular access, etc.);
The proposed use complies with this chapter, including Article X relating to Floodplain
District (FP) regulations;
The proposed use shall comply with those criteria specifically listed in the applicable
zoning district, Article XV relating to performance standards, and Article XVI relating to
supplemental regulations, of this chapter. In addition, the proposed use must comply with
all other applicable regulations contained in this chapter; and
The proposed use will not substantially impair the integrity of the most-recent version of
the Lancaster Township Comprehensive Plan.
In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the MPC and this chapter. The Board shall hear and decide all
requests for special exceptions in accordance with the standards and criteria of this chapter
as well as in accordance with the procedure outlined by this section.
All applicants for a special exception shall submit the following:
A statement describing the proposed use.
A location map showing the entire tract and its relation to the surrounding area, drawn at
a scale of 1,000 feet to the inch.
All applicants for a special exception, except for home occupations, boardinghouses and
conversions, shall submit seven sets of sketch plans for the proposed use to the Zoning
Hearing Board, including the following requirements:
The location of all existing floodplains, wetlands, watercourses, railroads, areas of
subsidence, wooded areas (marking all wooded areas to be cleared), bridges,
culverts and other significant natural features on the tract and within 200 feet of the
tract.
The location of all streets, adjoining tracts, and buildings within 200 feet of the tract.
If applicable, the location of all proposed land uses, including residential uses by
types.
The location and arrangement of all open spaces and yards, landscaping, fences,
and buffer yards, including the methods and materials to be employed for screening.
The location, size (numbers shown), arrangement and capacity of all areas to be
used for motor vehicle access, parking, loading, and provisions to be made for
lighting such areas.
The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other common areas.
If applicable, a description of any proposed industrial or commercial operations in
sufficient detail to indicate effects of those operations in producing noise, glare, air
pollution, water pollution, fire hazards, traffic congestion, or other safety hazards.
If applicable, provisions to be made for the treatment and disposal of sewage and
industrial wastes and for water supply.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 511/520
[9]
[10]
E.
F.
G.
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
The name and address of the developer (if applicable) and landowner.
The name of the individual and/or the firm that prepared the plan.
Appeals regarding the Floodplain District (FP). The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide
appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the Zoning Officer with reference to the
administration of any provisions contained within the Floodplain District (FP).
Appeals regarding development rights and density. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and
decide appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with the administration of
any transfers of development rights or performance density provisions of this chapter.
Appeals regarding sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall hear and decide appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or
Township Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance with reference to
sedimentation and erosion control and/or stormwater management for applications not involving a
subdivision/land development, nor a planned residential development as regulated in Articles V
and VII of the MPC.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide appeals from a notice of violation issued under
§ 280-1806 of this chapter.
§ 280-1906. Parties appellant before the Zoning Hearing Board.
Appeals and proceedings to challenge any provision under this chapter may be filed with the
Zoning Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, by any officer or agency of the
Township, or by any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance and for a special exception under
this chapter may be filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by any landowner. An appeal or request
shall state:
The name and address of the applicant.
The name and address of the owner of the real estate to be affected by the proposed special
exception or variance.
A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by such proposed change.
A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in question, the
improvements thereon, and the present use thereon.
A statement of the section of this chapter under which the variance or special exception is
requested, or may be allowed, and reasons why it should be granted.
§ 280-1907. Time limitations.
No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning Hearing Board later than 30 days
after any application for development, preliminary or final, has been approved by the Board of
Supervisors, if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner,
unless such person alleges and proves that he had no notice or knowledge or reason to believe that
such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he
shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest.
§ 280-1908. Stay of proceedings.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 512/520
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
Upon the filing of any proceeding referred to in this Article XIX and during its pendency before the
Zoning Hearing Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval
of the Zoning Officer, or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall be stayed,
unless the Zoning Hearing Board determines there are facts indicating that such stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property; in which case the development or official action shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or by the
court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition after notice to the Zoning Officer or other
appropriate agency or body. When an application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly
approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Zoning Hearing
Board by persons other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of
zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing the proceedings before
the Zoning Hearing Board. The question of whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court.
Article XX. Conditional Uses and Amendments
§ 280-2000. Applicability.
The requirements and provisions of this Article XX shall apply to conditional uses and amendments to
this chapter.
§ 280-2001. Conditional uses.
Conditional use hearings. The Board of Supervisors shall conduct hearings and make decisions
on conditional uses in accordance with the requirements of the MPC, as well as the following
requirements.
Before voting on the approval of a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors shall hold a
public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. The Board of Supervisors shall submit each
such application to the Township Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing
held upon an application, to provide the Township Planning Commission an opportunity to
review and submit recommendations on the application. A report of said review, together with
any recommendations, shall be given to the Board of Supervisors in writing 30 days from the
date of said referral. If the Township Planning Commission shall fail to file such a report prior
to the hearing in the manner specified, it shall be conclusively presumed that the Township
Planning Commission has approved the application. If, after any public hearing held upon an
application, the proposed application is revised, the Board shall hold another public hearing,
pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the application.
Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning
Officer, such other persons as the Board of Supervisors shall designate by ordinance, and to
any person who has made timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such
time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance, or in the absence of ordinance
provisions, by rules of the Board of Supervisors. In addition to the written notice provided
herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of
land at least one week prior to the hearing.
All persons who wish to be considered parties to a hearing shall enter their appearance on
forms provided by the Board of Supervisors.
Every person who requests a hearing before the Board of Supervisors shall submit a fully
completed application to the Zoning Officer or the Board of Supervisors on the form
prescribed by the Board of Supervisors. The Zoning Officer shall reject all incomplete
applications. The date of an applicant's request shall be the date when a fully completed
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 513/520
(5)
(6)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[a]
[3]
(b)
(7)
application accompanied by the appropriate fee is submitted to and received by the Zoning
Officer.
All requests for a continuance of a scheduled hearing shall be submitted in writing with the
reasons therefor and shall contain a statement that the applicant agrees to an extension of
time period, within which the Board of Supervisors is required to hold a hearing or to render a
written decision. No more than two continuances shall be permitted, unless the party
requesting the continuance pays the fee prescribed by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to
resolution.
The Board of Supervisors or the hearing officer may keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant
and the Board of Supervisors. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board of
Supervisors if the transcript is ordered by the Board of Supervisors or hearing officer, or shall
be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the Board of Supervisors if such appeal
is made; and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person
requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting the original transcript
shall bear the costs.
Effect of Board of Supervisor's decision. The following time requirements and conditions shall
apply to approvals granted by the Board of Supervisors:
Permit period.
The applicant or appellant shall secure all necessary zoning and building permits
within 12 months after the approval date of the conditional use approval by the
Board of Supervisors.
The Board of Supervisors may grant an extension of the twelve-month permit period,
provided that the applicant or appellant has demonstrated good cause in a written
application to the Board of Supervisors.
Should the applicant or appellant fail to obtain all necessary zoning permits within
the time limitations of this section, it shall be conclusively presumed that the
appellant or applicant has waived, withdrawn, or abandoned the application; and all
provisions, conditional uses, and zoning permits granted shall be deemed
automatically rescinded by the Board of Supervisors.
Construction period.
The applicant or appellant shall complete the building, alteration, or use within two
years after a zoning permit has been issued.
The Board of Supervisors may grant an extension of the two-year construction
period, provided that the applicant or appellant has demonstrated good cause in a
written application to the Board of Supervisors.
Should the applicant or appellant fail to complete such construction, alteration, or
use within the time limitations of this section, the Board of Supervisors may rescind
or revoke the granted conditional use or zoning permit. The Zoning Officer shall
provide the applicant or appellant with a written notice at least 10 days prior to such
decision of the Board of Supervisors. The decision to rescind or revoke such
approvals shall be based on one or more of the following findings of Board of
Supervisors:
That there is no good cause for the failure to complete such construction,
alteration, or use within the required time.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 514/520
[b]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(3)
B.
That conditions have so changed since the approval of the zoning permit that
revocation of the action is justified.
Conditional uses.
In those instances in which this chapter has stated conditional uses to be granted or denied
by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to express standards and criteria, the Board of
Supervisors shall herein decide all such requests for conditional uses in accordance with the
standards and criteria of this chapter, including the following:
The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter and the
applicable zoning district;
The proposed use shall not detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent or nearby
properties;
The proposed use will not substantially change the character of the subject property's
neighborhood;
Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed use (e.g., schools, fire,
police and ambulance protection, sewer, water and other utilities, vehicular access, etc.);
The proposed use complies with this chapter, including Article X relating to Floodplain
District (FP) regulations;
The proposed use shall comply with those criteria specifically listed in the applicable
zoning district, Article XV relating to performance standards, and Article XVI relating to
supplemental regulations, of this chapter. In addition, the proposed use must comply with
all other applicable regulations contained in this chapter; and
The proposed use will not substantially impair the integrity of the most-recent version of
the Lancaster Township Comprehensive Plan.
In granting a conditional use, the Board of Supervisors may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed in this chapter as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the MPC and this chapter. The Board of Supervisors
shall hear and decide all requests for conditional uses in accordance with the standards and
criteria of this chapter as well as in accordance with the procedure outlined by this section.
All applicants for a special exception shall submit the following:
A statement describing the proposed use.
A location map showing the entire tract and its relation to the surrounding area, drawn at
a scale of 1,000 feet to the inch.
All applicants for a conditional use shall submit seven sets of sketch plans for the
proposed use to the Board of Supervisors, including the following requirements:
The location of all existing floodplains, wetlands, watercourses, railroads, areas of
subsidence, wooded areas (marking all wooded areas to be cleared), bridges,
culverts and other significant natural features on the tract and within 200 feet of the
tract.
The location of all streets, adjoining tracts, and buildings within 200 feet of the tract.
If applicable, the location of all proposed land uses, including residential uses by
types.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 515/520
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
The location and arrangement of all open spaces and yards, landscaping, fences,
and buffer yards, including the methods and materials to be employed for screening.
The location, size (numbers shown), arrangement and capacity of all areas to be
used for motor vehicle access, parking, loading, and provisions to be made for
lighting such areas.
The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other common areas.
If applicable, a description of any proposed industrial or commercial operations in
sufficient detail to indicate effects of those operations in producing noise, glare, air
pollution, water pollution, fire hazards, traffic congestion, or other safety hazards.
If applicable, provisions to be made for the treatment and disposal of sewage and
industrial wastes and for water supply.
The name and address of the developer (if applicable) and landowner.
The name of the individual and/or the firm that prepared the plan.
§ 280-2002. Amendments.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, after public notice and hearing as hereinafter
prescribed, amend, supplement, change, or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning Map. Any
amendment, supplement, change or repeal may be initiated by the Township Planning Commission,
the Board of Supervisors or by a petition to the Board of Supervisors. Unless initiated by the Township
Planning Commission, such amendment, supplement, change or repeal shall be submitted to the
Township Planning Commission for its recommendations; and if the same, after public hearing, shall be
specifically found by the Board of Supervisors to be in accordance with the spirit and intent of the
formally adopted portions of the most-recent version of the Lancaster Township Comprehensive Plan,
as amended, final action shall be taken by the Board of Supervisors on such amendment.
§ 280-2003. Amendments initiated by the Township Planning
Commission.
When an amendment, supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Township Planning
Commission, the proposal shall be presented to the Board of Supervisors, which shall then proceed in
the same manner as with a petition to the Board of Supervisors which has already been reviewed by
the Township Planning Commission.
§ 280-2004. Amendments initiated by the Board of Supervisors.
When an amendment, supplement, change or repeal is initiated by the Board of Supervisors, it shall
submit the proposal to the Township Planning Commission for review and recommendations.
§ 280-2005. Procedure for petition.
The petition for amendment, supplement, change or repeal shall contain as fully as possible all the
information requested by the Zoning Officer and shall be signed by at least one record owner of the
property in question, whose signature shall be notarized attesting to the truth and correctness of all the
facts and information presented in the petition. In addition to the petition, the applicant shall
concurrently submit a proposed amending ordinance that reflects the changes proposed by the
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 516/520
A.
B.
petition. A fee to be established by the Board of Supervisors shall be paid upon the filing of such
petition for change and for the purpose of defraying the costs of the proceedings prescribed herein.
§ 280-2006. Referral to Township Planning Commission.
Except for those amendments initiated by the Township Planning Commission, after receipt of the
proposed petition and amendment by the Board of Supervisors, said petition and amendment shall
be presented to the Township Planning Commission for review and recommendations at least 30
days prior to the public hearing. A report of said review, together with any recommendations, shall
be given to the Board of Supervisors in writing within 30 days from the date of said referral. If the
Township Planning Commission shall fail to file such a report within the time and manner
specified, it shall be conclusively presumed that the Township Planning Commission has approved
the proposed amendment, supplement, change or repeal.
The Board of Supervisors shall submit the proposed amending ordinance to the LCPC for review
and comment at least 45 days prior to the Board of Supervisors' hearing on the proposed
amending ordinance.
§ 280-2007. Public hearing.
Before taking any action on the adoption or rejection of a proposed amendment to this chapter, the
Board of Supervisors shall fix a time and place for a public hearing at which parties of interest and
citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be
published in one newspaper of general circulation in the Township once each week for two successive
weeks, not more than 30 days and not less than 14 days prior to the date of said hearing.
§ 280-2008. Action by the Board of Supervisors.
At the time and place specified, the Board of Supervisors shall conduct a hearing on said petition to
amend, supplement, change or repeal this chapter or the Zoning Map of the Township and shall
thereafter, within a period of 30 days, either reject the proposed change or adopt an ordinance
implementing the proposed change. The Board of Supervisors may adjourn said hearing at its
discretion to a time and place certain.
§ 280-2009. Authentication of Official Zoning Map.
Whenever there has been a change in the boundary of a zoning district or a reclassification of the
zoning district adopted in accordance with the above, the change on the Official Map shall be made
and shall be duly certified by the Township Secretary and shall thereafter be filed as part of the
permanent records of the Township.
Appendix
Chapter A284. Cable Television Franchise
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lancaster 11-11-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-11. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ A284-1. Grant of franchise.
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 517/520
A.
B.
C.
[1]
There is hereby granted by the township to Suburban the nonexclusive right and privilege to
construct, erect, operate, maintain in, on, upon, along, across, above, over, and under the public
ways in the township, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, pedestals,
amplifiers, and other conductors and fixtures necessary for the construction, maintenance and
operation within the township of a cable system for the purpose of distributing or relaying
television, radio, digital, and other lawful electronic signals.
The right to use and occupy the public ways for the purposes herein set forth shall not be
exclusive. If the township grants a cable franchise to anyone other than Suburban, to the extent
that Suburban's franchise in whole or in part is inconsistent with such other cable franchise, then,
at Suburban's option, Suburban's franchise shall be automatically amended or conformed in whole
or in part, as the case may be, so that Suburban's franchise is no less favorable to it then the most
favorable cable franchise granted to any other person or entity.
The rights and privileges of the franchise shall continue for a period of 15 years from the date this
franchise is approved and adopted by the township.
§ A284-2. Annual franchise fee.
Suburban shall pay to the township on an annual basis through the term of this franchise a sum
totaling (annually) 5% of annual revenues received by Suburban from its operation of the cable system
within the township. Such amount shall be paid by Suburban to the township within 60 days after the
close of each calendar year beginning the calendar year in which this franchise becomes effective and
ending with the year in which this franchise expires, together with a report of annual revenues for each
calendar year certified by an officer of Suburban and, upon the township's request, and at its expense,
certified by a certified public accountant.
§ A284-3. Incorporation of agreement by reference; effective
date.
The franchise agreement between the Township of Lancaster and Suburban Cable TV Co., Inc., is
attached hereto marked Exhibit A and incorporated by reference herein.[1] The effective date of the
franchise agreement shall be July 1, 1996.
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the township offices.
Disposition List
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Township of Lancaster adopted since the
publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling
legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
(NCM).] Information regarding legislation which is not included in the Code nor on this list is available
from the office of the Township Secretary. The last legislation reviewed for the original publication of
the Code was Ord. No. 2001-4, adopted 8-13-2001.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2001-5 12-10-2001 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-04
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 518/520
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2001-6 12-10-2001 County participation in LASA
Regional 537 Planning Project
Ch. 20, Art. III
2002-1 2-11-2002 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2002-2 4-8-2002 Connection to public sewers
amendment
Ch. 209, Art. II
2002-3 4-8-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
2002-4 7-15-2002 Subdivision and land development
amendment
Superseded by Ord. No.
2015-07
2002-5 6-17-2002 Pennsylvania Intergovernmental
Risk Management Association
Ch. 20, Art. IV
2002-6 11-11-2002 LIMC Area Intergovernmental
Cooperation Planning Agreement
Ch. 20, Art. V
2002-7 12-9-2002 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
2003-1 1-6-2003 Joint administration of portions of
Building Code
Ch. 20, Art. VI
2003-2 3-10-2003 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-04
2003-3 4-14-2003 Recycling Ch. 222, Art. III
2004-1 6-14-2004 Uniform construction codes Ch. 126
2004-2 6-14-2004 Sewers: illicit connections and
illegal discharges
Ch. 209, Art. V
2005-1 4-11-2005 Attorney's fees amendment Ch. 247, Art. III
2005-2 5-9-2005 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-04
2005-3 8-8-2005 Sewers amendment Ch. 209, Art. II
2006-01 2-13-2006 Subdivision and land development
amendment (Act 167 Plan)
Superseded by Ord. No.
2015-07
2006-2 Not adopted
2006-3 5-8-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
2006-4 6-12-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment;
unattended vehicles amendment
Chs. 263; 270
2006-5 6-12-2006 Fees and penalties amendment Superseded by Ord. No.
2007-3
2006-6 11-13-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
2006-7 12-11-2006 Pensions amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2010-01
2007-1 2-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
2007-2 5-14-2007 Demolition review; zoning
amendment
Chs. 131; 280
2007-3 5-14-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 59; Ch. 209, Art. I
2007-4 6-11-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
2007-5 9-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
2008-01 6-9-2008 Intergovernmental cooperation:
Growing Together
Ch. 20, Art. VII
2008-02 8-11-2008 Fees amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2009-01
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 519/520
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2008-03 12-8-2008 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-04
2009-01 4-13-2009 Fees amendment repealer NCM
2009-02 12-14-2009 Intergovernmental cooperation:
police services
Ch. 20, Art. VIII
2010-01 3-8-2010 Pensions Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-07
2010-02 3-8-2010 Tattoo parlors and body art
establishments
Ch. 246
2010-03 3-8-2010 Street vacation NCM
2010-04 7-12-2010 Alarm systems Ch. 86
2010-05 12-13-2010 Connection to public sewers
amendment
Ch. 209, Art. II
2010-06 12-13-2010 Solicitation and canvassing Ch. 221
2010-07 12-13-2010 Building construction Ch. 110
2010-08 12-13-2010 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 126
2011-01 1-24-2011 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-04
2011-02 5-9-2011 Connections to public sewers
amendment
Ch. 209, Art. II
2011-03 5-9-2011 Zoning amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-04
2011-04 7-11-2011 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-04
2011-05 Not adopted
2011-06 12-12-2011 Salaries and compensation: Board
of Supervisors
Ch. 72, Art. I
2012-01 4-9-2012 Zoning Map amendment Repealed by Ord. No.
2012-04
2012-02 4-9-2012 Building construction amendment;
property maintenance
Chs. 110; 204
2012-03 6-11-2012 Swimming pools repealer Ch. 241, reference only
2012-04 8-20-2012 Zoning Ch. 280
2012-05 8-20-2012 Road maintenance agreement NCM
2012-06 11-12-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2013-01 4-8-2013 Police services agreement
amendment
NCM
2014-01 4-14-2014 Streets and sidewalks: clear sight
triangles and construction and
maintenance amendments
Ch. 231, Arts. II and IV
2014-02 4-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 263
2014-03 4-14-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 280
2014-04 4-14-2014 Stormwater management Ch. 229
2014-05 7-14-2014 Reduction of maximum daily limit
of permitted discharge of mercury
NCM; see Ch. 209
8/14/2020 Township of Lancaster, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/LA1280?guid=LA1280&children=true 520/520
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2014-06 9-15-2014 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 229
2014-07 12-8-2014 Pensions Ch. 42
2015-01 1-5-2015 Intergovernmental cooperation:
Pennsylvania Townships Health
Insurance Cooperative Trust
Ch. 20, Art. IX
2015-02 1-5-2015 Intergovernmental cooperation:
PSATS Unemployment
Compensation Group Trust
Ch. 20, Art. X
2015-03 6-8-2015 Intergovernmental cooperation:
Intergovernmental Insurance
Cooperative
Ch. 20, XI
2015-04 7-13-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
management of rights-of-way
Ch. 231, Art. III
2015-05 Zoning Map amendment Number not used
2015-06 Zoning Map amendment Withdrawn
2015-07 11-9-2015 Subdivision and land development Ch. 236
2015-08 12-14-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
2016-01 3-29-2016 Floodplain management Ch. 160
2016-02 4-11-2016 Floodplain management
amendment; stormwater
management amendment;
subdivision and land development
amendment; zoning amendment
Ch. 160, footnote only; Ch.
229; Ch. 236; Ch. 280