The Code
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
1:1

Part 1
TOWNSHIP MANAGER
§ 101. Creation of the Office. [Ord. 104, 1/7/1963]
The office of the Township Manager is hereby created by the Township of
Logan.
§ 102. Appointment and Removal. [Ord. 104, 1/7/1963; as amended
by Ord. 3-09-06]
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of all
Supervisors. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Supervisors
and he may be removed at any time by a majority vote of all its members.
In the event the Supervisors deem it possible, at least 30 days before such
removal is to become effective, the Supervisors shall furnish the Manager
with a written statement setting forth its intention to remove the Manager.
The Township Manager shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in
contracts with the Township.
§ 103. Qualifications. [Ord. 104, 1/7/1963; as amended by Ord.
1-7-63B; by Ord. 3-09-06; and by Ord. 10-23-14]
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of the Manager's
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of the
Manager's office as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of
the Township of Logan or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of the
Manager's appointment, but it shall be mandatory that within one year from
the beginning of the Manager's tenure in office that the Manager comply
with the residency requirements of the Township of Logan, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, and remain so compliant during said tenure, unless
otherwise permitted by the Supervisors in writing.
§ 104. Bond. [Ord. 104, 1/7/1963; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88; and
by Ord. 3-09-06]
Before entering upon the duties set forth herein, the Manager shall give a
bond to the Township of Logan with a bonding company as surety, to be
approved by the Supervisors in the sum to be established by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
Manager's duties, the premium for said bond to be paid by the Township
of Logan. The bond of the Township Manager may be included in and the
Township Manager may be bonded under, any blanket bond now in effect
for other Township employees, or as Secretary/Treasurer, if applicable.
§ 105. Manager's Compensation. [Ord. 104, 1/7/1963; as amended
by Ord. 3-09-06]
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed from time to time by the
Supervisors.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 106
1:3
§ 106. Powers and Duties. [Ord. 104, 1/7/1963; as amended by Ord.
3-09-06]
The powers and duties of the Township Manager shall include the following:
1. Chief Administrative Officer. The Township Manager shall be the Chief
Administrative Officer of the Township of Logan and shall be
responsible to the Board of Supervisors, as a whole, for the proper and
efficient administration of affairs of the Township of Logan. The powers
and duties of administration of all Township business shall be vested in
the Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by statute upon
other Logan Township Officers. All department heads, including, but
not limited to, police, sewer, zoning and road departments shall report
directly to and take direction from, the Township Manager and not any
one member of the Board of Supervisors or another department head
unless otherwise directed by the Township Manager and/or a majority
of the Board of Supervisors. All employees of the Township shall report
directly to and take direction from such employee's immediate superior.
2. Supervision of Township Services.
A. The Township Manager shall supervise and be responsible for the
activities of all municipal departments.
B. The Township Manager may employ, with the approval of the Board
of Supervisors, experts and consultants to perform work and
provide advice in connection with any of the functions of the
Township.
C. The Township Manager shall hold such other municipal offices and
head such other municipal departments as the Supervisors may
from time to time direct and shall be responsible for the proper
staffing of Township Departments and, shall arrange for employee
selection and shall make recommendations on hiring to the Board
of Supervisors.
D. The Township Manager shall have the power to terminate any
Township employee subject to confirmation by the Board of
Supervisors of Logan Township and as further subject to any
applicable law or Township ordinance.
E. The Township Manager shall issue administrative and personnel
rules and regulations not in conflict with existing statutes or
ordinances to properly carry out the duties contained in this Part.
F. All complaints regarding services or personnel of Township
Departments shall be referred to the Township Manager who shall
investigate these complaints and report to the Board of
Supervisors.
3. Budget Administration and Financial Management.
§ 106 LOGAN CODE § 106
1:4
A. The Township Manager shall be responsible for the preparation of
the annual budget and organizational objectives with attendant
work plans setting forth a summary of projected revenues and
proposed expenditures. In preparing the proposed budget, the
Manager shall consult with the head of each department, agency or
board, or any qualified office thereof regarding estimates of
revenues and expenditures.
B. The Township Manager shall be responsible for the administration
of the budget after its adoption by the Board of Supervisors.
C. The Township Manager shall, in conjunction with the preparation
of the yearly budget, develop long-range fiscal plans for the
Township, such plans to be presented annually to the Board of
Supervisors for review and action.
D. The Township manager shall be the purchasing officer of the
Township and shall purchase in accordance with the provisions of
the Township Code, all supplies and equipment for agencies,
boards, departments, and other offices of the Township provided
that all capital expenditures shall be subject to prior approval of
the Board of Supervisors. The Township Manager shall keep an
account of all purchases and shall, from time to time or when
directed by the Board of Supervisors, make a full written report
thereof. The Township Manager shall also issue rules and
regulations, subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors,
governing the procurement of all Township supplies and
equipment.
4. Contract Supervision.
A. The Township Manager shall attend to the letting of contracts in
due form of law and shall supervise the performance and faithful
execution of the same except insofar as such duties are expressly
imposed by statute upon some other Township Officer.
B. The Township Manager shall see that the provisions of all
franchises, leases, permits, and privileges granted by the Township
are observed.
5. Reports and Recommendations.
A. The Township Manager shall inform the Board of Supervisors
regarding the conduct of Township affairs through submission of
periodic reports on the condition of the Township finances, the
accomplishment of organizational objectives and other reports
requested by the Board of Supervisors, and shall make such
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors as the Township
Manager deems necessary and advisable for the welfare of the
Township.
§ 106 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 106
1:5
§ 107. Disability or Absence of the Manager. [Ord. 104, 1/7/1963; as
amended by Ord. 3-09-06]
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Township, the
Manager shall notify the Supervisors who may designate an assistant or
some member of the Manager's staff to perform the duties of the Manager
during the Manager's absence or disability. The person so designated shall
not perform these duties for a period longer than two weeks without the
approval of the Supervisors.
B. The Township Manager shall research and investigate the
administrative and governmental functions of various Townships
and make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors on
appropriate Ordinances affecting the health, safety, welfare and
administration of the Township.
C. The Township Manager shall establish and maintain appropriate
filing systems and efficient administrative procedures for the
conduct of Township business.
D. The Township Manager shall submit to the Board of Supervisors as
soon as possible after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report
on the financial and administrative activities of the Township for
the preceding year.
6. Protection of Township Interest.
A. The Township Manager shall cooperate with the Board of
Supervisors at all times and in all matters such that the best
interests of the Township and of the general public may be
maintained.
B. The Township Manager shall see that all money owed to the
Township is promptly paid and that proper proceedings are taken
for the security and collection of all Township claims.
C. The Township Manager shall execute and enforce the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and such ordinances and
resolutions of the Township as the Board of Supervisors may
prescribe.
7. Meetings.
A. The Township Manager shall attend all meetings of the Board of
Supervisors and has the right to attend said Board's commissions,
boards and committees with the right to take part in discussions
and shall receive notice of all regular and special meetings of the
Board of Supervisors and its commissions, boards and committees.
B. The Township Manager shall prepare the agenda for each meeting
of the Board of Supervisors and supply pertinent facts.
§ 106 LOGAN CODE § 108
1:6
§ 108. Chain of Authority. [Ord. 3-09-06]
Except for the purposes of inquiry, the Board of Supervisors, its members,
the Board of Supervisor's commissions, committees and/or boards or their
members shall address any Township related issue involving said person's
area of responsibility either with one another and/or through the Township
Manager, other than those members of commissions and/or committees
and/or boards who work with a designated employee of the Township,
such as members of the Zoning Hearing Board and Planning Commission,
who may address such issues which arise as part of their duties with
such designated employee, such as the Director of Zoning and Planning.
However, the Board of Supervisors and/or any individual member of the
Board of Supervisors, any of the Board of Supervisor's commissions,
committees and/or boards or any of their members shall not give orders
publicly or privately to any subordinate of the Manager.
§ 109. Penalties. [Ord. 3-09-06]
1. Any department head that violates § 106 (1) hereof may be subject to
discipline including, but not limited to, suspension and/or termination.
2. Any person, other than a department head who violates § 108 hereof
may be subject to private and/or public censure by the Board of
Supervisors and in the case of an appointed official, may be barred from
consideration for reappointment to any commission, committee and/or
board.
§ 108 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 109
1:7

Part 2
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
§ 201. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Association. [Ord. 10-27-88]
§ 202. Certification to Auditor General. [Ord. 10-27-88]
The Board of Supervisors shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the
Commonwealth, the name(s) of the active associations and the percentage
of service they contribute to the protection of the Township of Logan. Such
certification shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 203. Annual Appropriation. [Ord. 10-27-88]
There is annually appropriated from the Township Treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Township Treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of 1984 Act of
December 18, No. 205, §§ /01 et seq. as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania. Such
monies received by the Township Treasurer from the State Treasurer shall
be distributed to the duly recognized association(s) within 60 days of
receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the percentage of
service established in the certification to the Auditor General and with other
provisions of the Act.
1. The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged in
providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the Township of
Logan.
Logan Township Relief Association.
The above named association has been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
2. The above named Association of the Township of Logan is designated
the proper association to receive such funds as are due and payable to
the Township Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania
from the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 203
1:9

Part 3
SCHEDULE OF FEES
§ 301. Fees. [Res. 12-15-1988; as amended by Res. 2-2-89B; by Res.
6-29-89; by Res. 11/29/90A; by Res. 10-31-91; by Res. 9-3-92B; by
Res. 3/18/93B; by Res. 4-21-95B; by Res. 5-16-96; by Res. 8-8-96; by
Res. 9-19-96D; by Res. 12-5-96C; by Res. 8-7-97; by Res. 09-17-98;
by Res. 09-16-99; by Res. 01-27-00A; by Res. 06-14-01A; by Res.
1-06-03A; by Res. 12-09-04C; by Res. 01-26-06B; by Res. 07-18-06;
by Res. 11-09-06; by Res. 01-02-07; by Res. 03-08-07B; by Res.
08-23-07; by Res. 08-12-10G; by Res. 08-27-15; by Res. 08-25-16; by
Res. 02-09-17D; by Res. No. 01-24-19F; and by Res. No. 05-09-19]
It is hereby resolved by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Logan
that all fees are hereby fixed as follows:
Subject Fee
ALARM DEVICE
Permit fee (Ch. 13, § 102)
1-time connection fee $50
BUILDING PERMIT FEES
In accordance with the Logan Township Fee
Schedule provided by MDIA (Middle
Department Inspection Agency), as amended
Demolition permit (Not requiring a UCC
permit)
$5
Certificate of occupancy (business name
change only)
$50
Permit fee (hazardous materials) $1,000
Plan review deposit $156
Blair Region Uniform Construction Code
Board of Appeals – appeal application fee +
reimbursement of expenses over $500
$500
Building permit renewal $30
COPYING FEES
Photocopying charge $0.25 per page per
side
8.5 x 11 color plot $2
11 x 17 color plot $3
Zoning Map $5
Full size plan sheet Actual cost of outside
source
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:11
Subject Fee
ELECTRICAL FENCE
Permit fee (Ch. 13, § 504) $10
EMPLOYEE AND EQUIPMENT REIMBURSEMENT
Township employee wage reimbursement Hourly wage of
employee plus
benefits
Township equipment use reimbursement Hourly rate as
maintained by
Highway Foreman
FIRE COST REIMBURSEMENT
Structural fires apparatus $150 for each piece
for the first 4 hours
plus $75 for each
portion of an hour
after 4 hours
Brush fires apparatus $150 for each piece
for the first 4 hours
plus $75 for each
portion of an hour
after 4 hours
Motor vehicle incidents apparatus $150 for each piece
for the first 4 hours
plus $75 for each
portion of an hour
after 4 hours
Absorbents $35 per bag/
container
Other disposal products $40 per box
Fire reports $50 per report
Disposal of absorbents actual cost
FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS
Issuance of certificates and related functions $500 + 100% of all
costs incurred by the
Township
FIREWORKS
Fireworks permit application fee $100
FLOODPLAINS
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:12
Subject Fee
Floodplain area permit fee (Ch. 8, § 204) $35, plus 50% of any
required building
permit fee, but not
exceeding $100
Occupancy permit application fee $25
LIQUOR LICENSE
Intermunicipal liquor license transfer $1,000
Application for noise exemption from LCB $1,000
JUNKYARDS
Permit fee (Ch. 13, § 205)
0 to 15,000 square feet $125
15,000 to 40,000 square feet $250
40,000 to 100,000 square feet $350
In excess of 100,000 square feet $500
MECHANICAL/COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT
DEVICES
Annual license fee/device $75
MERCANTILE LICENSE FEE
Annual license fee for each establishment $10
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Accident report copy $20
Complaint summary copy $20
Impound storage fees - The following storage
fees shall be assessed against the vehicle
owner/custodian for the storage of towed/
impounded vehicles at the Logan Township
storage facility:
For the first 24-hour period after the vehicle
arrived
No charge
Each calendar day or portion thereof after
the first 24 hours
$20
Each calendar day or portion thereof after
the 10th day
$40
After hours (1600-0800) or weekend release $30
Winching fee $30
PUBLIC GATHERING
Public gathering application fee $100
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:13
Subject Fee
RETURNED CHECKS (NONSUFFICIENT FUNDS) $25 per check
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
Permit fee (initial permit application) $500
Permit fee (annual renewal permit) $350
SEWER AND STREET CONSTRUCTION/RESTORATION - INSPECTION
AND STORMWATER
The developer/subdivider shall be obligated to pay any fees incurred
by the Township, including services of the Township Solicitor and
Township Engineer or authorized inspector regarding the dedication
of the public improvements, for inspection and approving final
construction pursuant to all applicable Logan Township ordinances
and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
Logan Township Inspector
$20 sewer service suspension fee
$250 flat fee for inspection of new building sewer and building
drain
$500 flat fee for inspection of septic tank (I & A District only)
$65 inspection fee for sanitary sewer repairs
$2,500 - escrow deposit for maintenance agreement for small flow
sewage treatment facilities
$30 - alternative sewage system administrative fee
A sewer lateral cleaning fee, which will be charged at the
discretion of the Township. Fee to include reimbursement of staff
time and equipment usage
Curb/sidewalk district - $5 per linear foot of public roadway
frontage - $500 minimum payable upon issuance of zoning/building
permit when road has curbing, sidewalk or both and has been
taken over by the Township; deposit must be provided for frontage
of homes not yet completed when Township takes over road;
deposit will be returned within 30 days of request after inspection
by the Township
Township roadway pavement patching and restoration - the fee will
be the current cost of materials and labor as determined by the
Highway Foreman at the time of permit application
A fee of $2,000 per stormwater facility shall be paid into the
stormwater maintenance fund prior to final approval of any
stormwater facility for subdivisions or land developments
A fee of $1,000 per stormwater facility shall be paid into the
stormwater maintenance fund prior to final approval of any
stormwater facility on any individual lot
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:14
Subject Fee
Township roadway pipe installation - the fee will be the current
cost of pipe, steel grates and stone as determined by the Highway
Foreman at the time of application
$100 fee for the Township to sign off on a stormwater HOP
application to PennDOT
A fee of $1,000, or 15% of the costs of the improvement, whichever
is greater, for each stormwater improvement which is being
connected to PennDOT facilities and requires an HOP; fee shall be
applied to future inspection and maintenance by the Township
$100 plus review fees incurred by Township for planning module
review (when not accompanied by a land development or
subdivision plan)
SIGNS
Permanent signs $75 + $1 per square
feet over 10 square
feet
Annual renewal fee per sign or per tenant on
multiple tenant sign
$15
Sign modification request application $100
Public service organizations (temporary signs) Exempt
Sign renewal permit $20
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION
License for each motor vehicle (Ch. 20, § 107) $100
Transfer fee to vehicle of another or same
model (Ch. 20, § 110)
$1
STREET AND SIDEWALKS
Permit to open or cut a public street and/or sidewalk or install drainage
facilities: as established by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania from
time to time (with the exception of the exemptions, which shall not
apply)
Road vacation request: $100 application fee, plus $500 deposit for
legal and other associated fees
STUDENT RENTAL REGISTRATION
Student housing unit annual rental registration
fee
$50
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:15
Subject Fee
(Includes triannual inspection of unit; the
inspector will look for the presence of
working smoke detectors in all sleeping
rooms, outside of sleeping areas, and on all
floors of the unit, outlets and switches are
intact and are not cracked or broken, lights
and bulbs are intact, windows are not
broken, walls and ceilings do not have holes)
Student housing unit reinspection fee $50
Student housing unit application denial appeal
filing fee
$500
Student housing unit rental suspension appeal
filing fee
$500
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
The filing fee for consideration of a subdivision or a land development
plan shall be broken into categories based upon the type of subdivision
or land development presented. The accompanying fees under each
category shall include the sketch plan, preliminary plan and final plan.
The categories, together with the accompanying fees, are as follows:
Category I, Residential Subdivisions or Land Developments:
Number of Lots
or Dwelling
Units General Fee
Fee for Each
Lot or Dwelling
Unit
Deposit for
Consultant*
and Legal
Review Fees
0-2 $50 $50 $150
3-5 $150 $45 $500
6-+ $250 $40 $800
Category II, Nonresidential Subdivision:
Number of Lots General Fee
Fee for Each
Lot
Deposit for
Consultant*
and Legal
Review Fees
0-5 $300 $50 $600
6-+ $300 $50 $800
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:16
Category III, Nonresidential Land Developments:
Number of
Acres General Fee
Fee for Each
Acre
Deposit for
Consultant*
and Legal
Review Fees
0-5 $300 $50 $800
6-+ $400 $50 $1,000
Category IV, Residential Stormwater:
Each Lot General Fee
Fee for Each
Lot
Deposit for
Consultant*
and Legal
Review Fees
1 $25 — $170
Planned Residential Developments:
Master plan application fee $1,000
Master plan deposit for plan review $1,000
Final PRD application fee $300
Final PRD plan deposit for plan review $500
Wind Energy Facilities:
Wind energy facility application fee $1,000
Wind energy facility deposit for plan review $1,000
Yearly per-megawatt payment $1,500
* Any unused portions of the deposit for consultant's review fees shall be
returned to the applicant within three months following signature or
disapproval of the final plan. In the event that the actual amount for
engineering and legal review fees exceeds the amount of the deposit,
the applicant shall reimburse the Township an amount equal to the
increased fee upon receipt of the invoice.
1. The developer or subdivider shall pay the ordinary and customary
hourly rate charged to the Township for review and comment on the
plan(s) by any consultant the Township deems necessary to review said
plan(s). Said charge shall be for time devoted by said consultant on the
requested review. The rate charged shall not exceed the rate charged
by the consultant to the Township for other work performed at the
Township's request for which there is no outside reimbursement. Such
costs shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Reviewing the plan for conformance to the provisions of the codes
and ordinances of the Township.
b. Site inspection for conformance to topographic survey.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:17
c. Reviewing cost estimates of required improvements.
d. Such other fees which shall be sufficient to cover the cost of all
necessary reviews by the Township's consultants.
The definition of "consultant" shall include the services of the Township
Solicitor, Engineer or other professional or specialist whose services
the Township deems necessary to the review of any land development
or subdivision plan.
2. In the case where the developer/subdivider desires the Township to
sign a final plan, all fees shall be paid prior to the release of signed
plan by the Township to developer/subdivider. This shall be applicable
to preliminary and final plan stages.
3. The developer/subdivider shall be obligated to pay any fees incurred
by the Township, including services of the Township Solicitor, Township
Engineer or authorized inspector, regarding the dedication of public
improvements, for inspecting and approving final construction
pursuant to the Logan Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. A
deposit of $500 shall be submitted to the Township to be applied to
the cost of inspection fees. The deposit shall be submitted at such time
that the signed final plan is released to the developer. If inspection fees
are anticipated to significantly exceed the $500 deposit, the developer/
subdivider shall establish an escrow account. The amount of the escrow
account shall be as estimated by the Township Engineer. Any remaining
deposit monies for engineering and legal review fees may be used
towards the inspection fee deposit. Any unused portion of the deposit
for inspection fees shall be returned to the applicant at such time
that construction of improvements is completed and/or accepted for
dedication by the Township. In the event that the actual amount of
inspection fees exceeds the amount of the escrow, the applicant shall
reimburse the Township an amount equal to the increased fee.
TRANSIENT RETAIL LICENSE
Monthly fee (Ch. 13, § 304) $25
Annual fee $300
TRANSIENT RETAIL LICENSE, DOOR-TO-DOOR
First month $52
Each month thereafter $25
Yearly fee $327
UNREGISTERED OR UNINSPECTED MOTOR
VEHICLES
Permit fee (Ch. 4, § 5)
First year - no more than 2 vehicles permitted $50
Each year thereafter - increase per motor vehicle $20
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:18
ZONING
Deposit for cost of publication of proposed change in
Zoning Ordinance and the hearing date set to decide
the same
$500
Zoning hearing application fee plus reimbursement
of expenses over $750
$750
Temporary storage facility $100 per facility
per year
Rezoning application fee plus reimbursement of
expenses over $500
$500
Zoning permits
New home or change of business use $100
New business $200
Addition or garage $75
Shed or other outbuilding over 500 square feet $75
Swimming pool, deck, patio, carport $50
Shed or other outbuilding under 500 square feet $50
Renovations requiring a building permit $50
Home occupation $25
Zoning permit renewal $20
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:19

Part 4
COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS OF THE BOARD
§ 401. Title and Authorization. [Ord. 01/07/91]
This Part shall be known as the "Compensation to Members of the Board
of Supervisors of Logan Township Ordinance." The establishment of the
amount of compensation to members of the said board is authorized by 53
P.S. § 65515.
§ 402. Compensation. [Ord. 01/07/91]
The compensation of each member of the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Logan shall be $2,600 per year to be paid on a monthly basis.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:21

Part 5
LOGAN TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 501. Creation of Planning Commission. [Ord. 01-24-08]
1. Creation, Number, Term and Vacancy.
A. A Township Planning Commission to be composed of seven
members, appointed by the Board of Supervisors of Logan
Township, is hereby created in and for the Township of Logan.
B. The term of each of the members of the Commission shall be for
four years, or until said member's successor is appointed and
qualified, except that the terms of the members first appointed
shall be such that one member shall have a term of four years, one
member a term of three years, one member a term of two years,
and two members shall have a term of one year each.
C. Any vacancy occurring shall be filled for the unexpired term.
2. Function. The Township Planning Commission shall advise the Board of
Supervisors upon all plans related to development in the Township. The
Planning Commission shall function as the planning agency for the
Township in all matters prescribed by the law.
3. Duties. The duties of the Planning Commission shall be to:
A. Promote public interest in and understanding of the
Comprehensive Plan, community development and planning, and to
hold public meetings to this end.
B. Review and make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors
concerning the Comprehensive Plan, the Official Map, the Zoning
Ordinance, Re-zoning matters, and subdivision and land
development plans.
4. Conduct of Business. The Planning Commission shall meet at least one
time per month. The Planning Commission shall elect its own Chair and
vice chair and create and fill such other offices as it may determine.
Officers shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. The
Planning Commission may make and alter by laws and rules and
regulations to govern its procedures consistent with the ordinances of
the Township and the laws of the Commonwealth. The Planning
Commission shall keep a full record of its business and shall annually
make a written report by March 1 of each year of its activities to the
governing body.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 501
1:23
Chapter 2
ANIMALS
§ 501 LOGAN CODE § 501
1:24
Part 1
PROHIBITING THE RUNNING AT LARGE OF DOGS
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 1062; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
As used in this Part, the following terms have the meaning indicated, unless
a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in any dog or having
custody of any dog, or any person who harbors or permits a dog to remain
on or around his or her property.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park,
or any other public land, or upon property of another person other than the
owner, and not being accompanied by or under the control of the owner or
any other person having custody of said dog.
§ 102. Unlawful to Allow Dogs to Run at Large. [Ord. 1062; as
amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or dogs to allow or permit such
dog or dogs to run at large in the Township of Logan.
§ 103. Seizing of Dogs. [Ord. 1062; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
Any police officer or dog warden may seize any dog found at large in
Township of Logan. Such dogs are to be impounded in a licensed kennel.
§ 104. Licensed Dogs. [Ord. 1062; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
Owners of licensed dogs are to be notified by registered or certified mail,
with return receipt, that the dog is impounded and will be disposed of in five
days if not claimed. Five days after the return receipt has been received,
and the dog has not been claimed, the dog may be sold or destroyed in
accordance with the 1982 Dog Law.
§ 105. Unlicensed Dogs. [Ord. 1062; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
Unlicensed dogs that are seized are to be held in such kennel for 48 hours
and if not claimed may be destroyed in accordance with the 1982 Dog Law.
§ 106. Threatening Dogs. [Ord. 1062; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
Dogs that, in the opinion of any police officer or dog warden, constitutes
a threat to public health and welfare may be killed, by the police or dog
warden.
§ 107. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 1062; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; by Ord. 9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 107
1:25
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 plus costs, if
any, (including but not limited to, any costs incurred for prosecution
and costs incurred for keeping the dog in a kennel), to the Township for
the first two times a dog is seized. For the third and all succeeding
times a dog is seized, any person allowing an animal to run at large a
third or succeeding time in violation of this Part, shall upon conviction
thereof be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 and not more
than $1,000, plus said costs and/or be sentenced to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 90 days. Every day that a violation of this Part
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense which shall be
subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 107 LOGAN CODE § 107
1:26
Part 2
CONTROL OF DEFECATION
§ 201. Animal Defecation on Public and Private Property Restricted.
[Ord. 9-14-89]
No person, having possession, custody or control of any horse, dog or other
animal, as defined in 3 Pa. Stat. Ann. § 331, shall knowingly or negligently
permit any animal to commit any nuisance, i.e. defecation or urination,
upon any gutter, street, driveway, alley, curb or sidewalk in the Township of
Logan, or upon the floor or stairways of any building or place frequented
by the public or used in common by the tenants, or upon the outside walls,
walkways, driveways, alleys, curbs or stairways of any building abutting on
a public street or park or upon the grounds of any public park or public
area, or upon any private property other than the property of the owner of
such animal.
§ 202. Disposal of Animal Feces. [Ord. 9-14-89]
Any person having possession, custody or control of any animal which
commits a nuisance, i.e., defecation or urination, in any area other than the
private property of the owner of such dog or other animal, as prohibited in
§ 201 shall be required to immediately remove any feces from such surface
and either:
§ 203. Dogs Accompanying Blind or Handicapped Persons
Exempted. [Ord. 9-14-89]
The provisions of §§ 201 and 202 hereof shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying any blind persons, or to a dog used to assist any other
physically handicapped person.
§ 204. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 9-14-89; as amended by Ord.
9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
1. Carry same away for disposal in a toilet.
2. Place same in a nonleaking container for deposit in a trash or litter
receptacle.
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 204
1:27
Chapter 4
BUILDINGS
§ 204 LOGAN CODE § 204
1:28
Part 1
VACANT, BLIGHTED AND DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
§ 101. Title. [Ord. 2-22-79]
This Part 1 shall be known as the "Logan Township Red-Tag Ordinance."
§ 102. Definitions. [Ord. 2-22-79; as amended by Ord. 08-23-07A]
For the purpose of interpreting the provisions of this chapter, the following
words shall have the meaning or meanings ascribed:
BLIGHTED STRUCTURE — All buildings or structures which have been
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to have any or all of the
following defects:
DANGEROUS OR RED-TAGGED PROPERTY — All buildings or structures
which have been determined by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter to have any or all of the following defects:
Is in physical deterioration, may or may not be habitable as a dwelling
or useful for the purpose for which it was originally intended;
1.
Is partially completed and is not presently being constructed under an
existing valid building permit;
2.
May or may not be structurally sound, weather-tight, waterproof or
verminproof;
3.
Is in the process of demolition or partial demolition and is not carried
out within 60 days.
4.
Is a Vacant Structure possessing one or more of the above listed
defects.
A blighted structure is a danger to the occupant of the structure and/
or the general public.
5.
Those buildings or structures which have been damaged by fire, wind,
or other causes so as to have become dangerous to the life, safety,
morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people
of the Township of Logan;
1.
Those buildings or structures which have become or are so dilapidated,
decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, vermin-infested, rat-infested, a fire hazard,
or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent
living that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely to cause
accidents, sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health,
morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein as well as other
citizens of the Township of Logan;
2.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 102
1:29
FIRE HAZARD — A structure that has defects such that said structure and/
or the defects existing on and/or therein which may be likely to cause the
structure and/or any nearby structures to catch fire as determined by the
local Fire Chief.
PERSON — Any natural person or persons, corporation, partnership,
association or any lawful entity. The use of the singular include the plural,
and the use of any gender shall include all genders.
VACANT STRUCTURE — Any structure or building that is unoccupied, not
legally in use, or occupied by unauthorized persons, and is unsecured and/
or boarded.
§ 103. Public Nuisances. [Ord. 2-22-79, as amended by Ord.
08-23-07A]
All "dangerous or red-tagged buildings or structures" and all Blighted
Structures within the terms of § 102 of this Part 1 are hereby declared to be
public nuisances and shall be vacated, removed, repaired or demolished as
hereinbefore and herein after provided.
§ 104. Investigation Procedures. [Ord. 2-22-79, as amended by Ord.
08-23-07A]
Those buildings or structures which have parts thereof which are so
attached that they might fall and injure members of the public or
adjoining property;
3.
Those buildings or structures which, because of their general condition
are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or
general welfare of the people of the Township of Logan.
4.
1. Whenever it shall be reported or come to the attention of any Township
Official or police officer that any building or structure, completed or in
the process of construction, or any portion thereof, is in a dangerous or
red-tagged condition, and/or would be considered a blighted structure,
such person having knowledge thereof shall report same to the
Township Manager, and the Township Manager shall immediately cause
an investigation and examination to be made of such building or
structure. Such investigation and examination shall be made by the
Township Manager, or his/her designated representative, the Township
Code Enforcement Officer, and/or the Chief of the Police, or his or her
designated representative. If said investigation and examination
indicates that the said building or structure is dangerous and/or is a
blighted structure in accordance with the provisions of this Part 1, a
written report of such investigation and examination shall be submitted
to the Board of Supervisors, specifying the condition of such building or
structure, and setting forth whether or in what respect the building or
structure is dangerous and/or a blighted structure and whether it is
capable of being repaired or whether it should be demolished.
§ 102 LOGAN CODE § 104
1:30
§ 105. Hearing Procedures. [Ord. 2-22-79; as amended by Ord.
08-23-07A]
Upon receipt of a report in accordance with § 104 of this Part 1, the Board
of Supervisors of Logan Township shall:
§ 106. Standards for Repair, Vacation or Demolition. [Ord. 2-22-79;
as amended by Ord. 08-23-07A]
The following standards shall be the basic guidelines to be followed by the
Board of Supervisors in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of any
building or structure pursuant to the provisions of this Part 1:
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entrance to or to impede
any Township official or any other authorized individual in the
investigation of any such building or structure under this Part 1. The
owner, occupant or operator of every building or structure within the
Township, or the person in charge thereof, shall give such official or
authorized individual free access thereto and to all parts thereof, and to
the premises on which it is located, at all reasonable times for the
purpose of such investigation upon display by such individual of proper
identification.
1. Give written notice to the owner of said building or structure, and to all
other persons having an interest in said building or structure as shown
by the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of Blair County, to appear
before the Board of Supervisors on the date specified in the Notice to
show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous or
red-tagged building and/or blighted structure should not be repaired,
vacated, removed or demolished in accordance with the enforcement
provisions set forth in this Part 1;
2. Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the owner, or any other
person having an interest in said building or structure, shall offer
relative to the condition of said building or structure;
3. Make written findings of fact from the testimony presented at said
hearing as to whether the building in question is a dangerous or redtagged
building and/or blighted structure within the terms of § 102 of
this Part 1;
4. Issue an order based upon said findings of fact demanding that the
owner or other persons having an interest in said building repair,
vacate, remove or demolish said building in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 1.
1. If the dangerous or red-tagged building or structure and/or blighted
structure can be reasonably repaired so that it will no longer be in
violation of the provisions of -this Part 1, the Board of Supervisors shall
order that said building or structure be repaired.
§ 104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 106
1:31
§ 107. Enforcement Procedures. [Ord. 2-22-79; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; and by Ord. 08-23-07A]
If any building or structure is deemed to be a dangerous or redtagged
building and/or blighted structure pursuant to the provisions of this Part
1, the Board of Supervisors of Logan Township shall immediately cause
written notice to be served upon the owner, occupants and all other persons
having an interest in said building or structure as shown by the land records
of the Recorder of Deeds of the County of Blair.
2. If the dangerous or red-tagged building or structure and/or blighted
structure cannot be reasonably repaired so that it will no longer be in
violation of the provisions of this Part 1, the Board of Supervisors shall
order that said building or structure be demolished.
3. If the dangerous or red-tagged building or structure and/or blighted
structure is in such condition so as to make it dangerous to the health,
morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants the Board of
Supervisors shall have the authority to order said building or structure
to be vacated.
1. The Notice required by this § 107 shall be served upon the owner,
occupants and all other persons interested in said building or structure
by sending said Notice by certified or registered mail to such individual
at his last known address.
2. The Notice shall identify the building or structure deemed to be
dangerous or red-tagged and/or a blighted structure, and contain a
statement of the particulars which made this building or structure
dangerous, and shall contain an order from the Board of Supervisors
requiring said building or structure to be repaired and/or vacated and/
or demolished; provided that in any case where the Notice includes an
order to repair said building or structure, the owner thereof shall have
the option to remove or demolish such building or structure in lieu of
making the repairs thereto.
3. Said Notice shall require any person notified and ordered to repair,
vacate or demolish any such building or structure to commence the
work or act required by the Notice within 10 days of receipt of such
Notice and to complete the required work or act within 60 days thereof.
The Board of Supervisors may, at their discretion, and upon
presentation to said Board of evidence of good cause, grant extensions
of time for the commencement and completion of such work or act
required by the Notice.
4. In addition to the written Notice to be served as aforesaid, the Board of
Supervisors shall cause a Notice to be placed upon any building or
structure determined to be in a dangerous red-tagged condition, and/or
determined to be a blighted structure which Notice shall read
substantially as follows:
§ 106 LOGAN CODE § 107
1:32
§ 108. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 2-22-79; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; by Ord. 9-19-96; by Ord. 2-13-97; and by Ord. 08-23-07A]
"This building has been found to be a dangerous or red-tagged building
and/or blighted structure by the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Logan. This Notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired,
vacated or demolished in accordance with the Notice which has been
given to the owner and other persons interested in this building. It
is unlawful to remove this Notice until compliance is made under the
provisions contained in the Notice given to the above-named party.
This Notice is posted upon this building in accordance with the Logan
Township Blighted, Vacant and Red-Tag Ordinance."
5. Any person who has been notified pursuant to the terms of this Part 1 to
repair or demolish any building or structure which has been determined
to be in a dangerous or red-tagged condition and/or which is
determined to be a blighted structure, shall immediately apply for and
obtain from the Township of Logan the necessary permit to repair or
demolish said building or structure. A fee as established from time to
time by the Board of Supervisors shall be charged by the Township of
Logan for such permit.
1. Enforcement. The Township Manager, Code Enforcement Officer, Chief
of Police, any police officer and/or other person authorized by the Board
of Supervisors may enforce the violation of this Part.
2. Penalties.
A. Any person who shall fail to comply with any Notice or order to
repair, vacate or demolish any dangerous or red-tagged building
and/or blighted structure issued pursuant to the provisions of this
Part 1, or any regulation or order issued thereunder, shall upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $300 and not
more than $1,000 and costs, and/or be sentenced to imprisonment
in the Blair County Jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, and each
day's continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Penalties contained in this Part are in addition to any other
remedies provided by this Part.
B. Any person removing the Notice provided for in § 107, Subsection 4
hereof, shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less
than $300 and not more than $1,000 and costs for each offense,
and/or to imprisonment in the Blair County Jail for a period not
exceeding 90 days.
C. If the owner, occupant or any other person having an interest in any
dangerous or redtagged building or structure and/or blighted
structure, as shown by the land records of the Recorder of Deeds of
the County of Blair, fails to comply with any Notice or order to
repair, vacate or demolish any such building or structure within 30
days, from the date of said Notice or order, the Township is
§ 107 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 108
1:33
§ 109. Emergency Cases. [Ord. 2-22-79; as amended by Ord.
08-23-07A]
In cases wherein it reasonably appears that there exists an immediate
danger in the life or safety of any person caused or created by a dangerous
or red-tagged building as defined herein, the Board, Township Manager, or
his/her designated representative, the Township Code Enforcement Officer,
and/or the Chief of Police may cause the immediate repair, vacation or
demolition of such dangerous building and/or blighted structure. The costs
of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous or redtagged
building and/or blighted structure shall be collected in the same
manner as provided for in § 108, Subsection 3.
§ 110. Liability. [Ord. 2-22-79; as amended by Ord. 08-23-07A]
In the event that the owner of a building or structure, which has been
determined to be a dangerous or red-tagged building and/or blighted
structure within the provisions of this Part 1, conveys said building or
structure in any manner or method whether by sale, lease or otherwise,
said owner shall still be responsible for compliance with the provisions of
this Part 1; and it is the intent of this Part 1 that the person acquiring said
building or structure, shall be jointly and severally liable with the owner for
compliance with this Part 1.
empowered to cause such building or structure to be repaired,
vacated, or demolished by the Township and to cause the costs of
such repair, vacation or demolition, together with a penalty of 10%
to be charged against the land on which the building existed as a
municipal lien, or to recover such costs in a suit at law against the
owner or such other person having an interest in the building, and,
the recovery of such cost and expense, together with the aforesaid
penalty, may be in addition to the penalty imposed in Paragraphs a
and b of this § 108.
§ 108 LOGAN CODE § 110
1:34
Part 2
REQUIREMENTS AND ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS
§ 201. Title. [Ord. 11-14D-85]
This Part 2 shall be known and may be cited as "The Logan Township
Building Permit Ordinance".
§ 202. Permit Required. [Ord. 11-14D-85; as amended by Ord.
9-3-92; and by Ord. 10-23-08]
Prior to the commencement of any work thereon, no building or structure,
or any part thereof, shall be erected, enlarged, converted, repaired or
altered, razed and/or demolished until a building permit shall have been
procured by the owner or owner's agent from the Building Permit Clerk. A
building permit, once issued, shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of issuance. If necessary, due to work contemplated by the permit
being not completed, said building permit may be renewed on a yearly basis
(upon payment of the appropriate reissuance fee for the same) for a total
period of three consecutive one-year periods only, which total period shall
include the year of first issuance.
§ 203. Application and Proof of Waste Disposal. [Ord. 11-14D-85; as
amended by Ord. 9-3-92; and by Ord. 09-25-08]
1. Application for said permit shall be made in writing in a form
prescribed by the Township by the owner or owner's agent and shall
contain the names and addresses of the owners; a description sufficient
to identify the property for which the permit is sought; the nature of the
construction, improvement, razing and/or demolition (whether
pursuant to Chapter 4, Part 1 or for any other reason), in detail; the
amount of estimated cost thereof, and, in the case of construction and
improvement, shall be accompanied by one set of dimensioned plans
showing all habitable floors, basement or cellar and foundation and
with said plans being prepared, signed and approved by all County and
Commonwealth authorities where required by law. Provided, however,
that the Building Permit Clerk may waive the requirement for filing
plans where the work involved is of a minor nature and the building
operation is adequately described in the application.
2. Any person who obtains a building permit pursuant to this Part 2, shall,
subject to § 203(3), certify to the Township that any construction waste
of any nature caused by or due to the construction, improvement,
razing and/or demolition of any building and/or structure will be
properly disposed of in a landfill approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources for the disposal of such
construction waste. In furtherance of this subsection, any person issued
a building permit pursuant to this Part 2 shall, within one year of the
date of the issuance of said building permit, file with the Building
Permit Clerk the original of all disposal payment slips or records clearly
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 203
1:35
§ 204. Building Permit Clerk. [Ord. 11-14D-85; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
The Building Permit Clerk is vested the powers, duties and obligations
herein set forth or required by law.
§ 205. Fees. [Ord. 11-14D-85; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
There shall be paid by the applicant to the Building Permit Clerk for the
issuance of said Building Permit, fees as established from time to time by
the Board of Supervisors, to which there shall be added the charge, now
or hereafter provided by law for the certification of the issuance of said
permit to any lawful authority requiring the same. All fees, so collected by
the Building Permit Clerk, shall be accounted for and paid over by him to
the Treasurer of the Township of Logan, daily.
§ 206. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 11-14D-85; as amended by
Ord. 10-27-88 by Ord. 9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
indicating the type and amount of said construction waste and cost
of disposal thereof and that said waste was disposed of in a landfill
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
for disposal of such construction waste. Said disposal payment slips
may be signed by the appropriate landfill official or a solid waste hauler
duly licensed by the Township.
3. Any person who obtains a building permit pursuant to this Part 2 for the
purpose of constructing a building and/or structure, and not for razing
and/or demolition purposes, shall be exempt from certifying that the
construction waste caused by said construction (except any roofing
material) has been disposed of in an approved landfill if said permit was
issued for a building project the cost of construction of which is less
than $1,000 and if said person states in writing the method employed
by such person to dispose of the construction waste associated with the
issuance of said building permit.
4. Any person desiring to construct any structure designed primarily for
human habitation including, but not limited, to single family and two
family dwellings and townhouses shall be required to connect to a
public water system if such public water system is within 150 feet of the
structure to be constructed and said public water system has adequate
pressure and supply.
1. Enforcement. Any police officer, the Building Permit Clerk and/or any
person authorized by the Board of Supervisors may enforce the
violation of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
§ 203 LOGAN CODE § 206
1:36
§ 207. Definitions. [Ord. 11-14D-85; as added by Ord. 9-3-92]
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
1. For the purpose of interpreting this Part, the following words shall have
the meaning or meanings ascribed:
CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Any refuse or other material including,
but not limited to, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material,
resulting from the construction, razing and/or demolition of a building
or structure. The term does not include recyclables as defined under
Chapter 20, Part 1, of the Township of Logan Code of Ordinances
known as "Solid Waste and Recyclables Storage, Collection, Disposal
and Processing Ordinance."
PERSON — Every natural person, association, firm or corporation.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
2. In this Part, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
3. Other words not defined herein shall have the meaning set forth in said
Chapter 20, Part 1, and Chapter 27 (Zoning) of the Township of Logan
Code of Ordinances. If not otherwise defined, said words shall have the
meaning ordinarily ascribed to them in everyday usage.
§ 206 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 207
1:37

Part 3
POLICE AND FIRE SAFETY KEY BOX
§ 301. Key Box. [Ord. 3-14-96]
When a structure of any type within the Township is protected by an
automatic burglar and/or fire alarm system and/or a fire sprinkler system,
a Key Box of a UL type approved by the Township Fire Chief shall be
installed on the property in a location approved by the Township Fire Chief.
Residential structures shall be exempt from this requirement. Such Key
Boxes shall contain the following:
§ 302. Penalties. [Ord. 3-14-96]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part and/or who shall
attempt to tamper with any Key Box located on any structure subject to this
Part, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $600 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days or
both, at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
1. Keys to locked points of egress whether on the interior or exterior of
such structures.
2. The keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms.
3. The keys to locked electrical rooms.
4. Keys to elevator controls.
5. Keys to other areas as directed by the Township's Fire Chief.
6. A tamper alarm which shall be connected to a Township approved
monitoring system.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:39

Part 4
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 401. Title. [Ord. 7-15-99B]
These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Regulations
of Logan Township.
§ 402. Intent. [Ord. 7-15-99B]
These regulations are enacted to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Township of Logan. Therefore, these
regulations shall be construed to secure its express intent, which is to
ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the
matters covered by these regulations.
§ 403. Definitions. [Ord. 7-15-99B]
The following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth:
CODE OFFICIAL — The official who is charged with the administration
and enforcement of these regulations including but not limited to the Code
Enforcement Officer and any duly appointed police officer.
HABITABLE STRUCTURE — Any building, dwelling or other space in which
any person may reside or which is intended for human occupancy.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the premises or, if applicable, any personal property;
or recorded in the official records of Blair County, Pennsylvania, as holding
title to the premises; or otherwise having control of the premises, including
the guardian of the estate of such person, and the executor or administrator
of the estate of such person.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
PREMISES — A lot(s), plot(s) or parcel(s) of land including any habitable
structure(s) located thereon.
§ 404. Weed and Plant Height. [Ord. 7-15-99B]
An owner of any premises shall ensure that said premises shall be
maintained free from all weeds or plant growth in excess of 12 inches within
100 feet of any habitable structure regardless of whether said habitable
structure is owned by said owner.
1. Exceptions. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided, however, this term
shall not include cultivated flowers, gardens and/or cultivated crops.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:41
§ 405. Motor Vehicles. [Ord. 7-15-99B]
Not more than two currently unregistered or uninspected motor vehicles
shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no motor vehicle shall,
at any time, be in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Any and all
such unregistered or uninspected motor vehicle(s) shall be kept or stored
only on owner's premises on which owner resides.
§ 406. Notices and Orders. [Ord. 7-15-99B]
This regulation shall not apply to any premises owned, operated or
controlled by a governmental unit used for a public purpose.
1. Permit Required. An owner having or permitting unregistered or
uninspected motor vehicles on the owner's premises shall obtain, on an
annual basis, a permit (the cost of which shall be established by the
Board of Supervisors from time to time) from the Township indicating
whether said motor vehicle is being restored or is a vehicle intended
only for use off of public streets. In all events, said motor vehicle must
be intact.
2. A motor vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including body work, provided that such work is performed and the
motor vehicle is kept at all times inside a structure or similarly enclosed
area designated and approved for such purposes.
3. This § 405 shall not apply:
A. To any motor vehicle being stored as a wrecked and/or damaged
motor vehicle in a properly zoned area in connection with a lawful
automobile repair business, where such wrecked and/or damaged
motor vehicle is stored merely to await repair thereof in the
immediate future; or
B. To any motor vehicle being kept in an enclosed building; or
C. To any motor vehicle on the premises of a business operated in a
properly zoned area and lawful manner when necessary in the
operation of such business; or
D. To any motor vehicle kept in a storage area and/or depository
owned by a governmental entity; or
E. To any motor vehicle which is not required by any governmental
entity to obtain a registration or inspection in order to be used on a
public roadway.
1. Notice to owner or to person or persons responsible. Whenever the
code official determines that there has been a violation of this Part or
has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be
given to the owner or the person or persons responsible therefore in the
following described manner:
§ 404 LOGAN CODE § 406
1:42
§ 407. Penalties. [Ord. 7-15-99B]
A. Be in writing;
B. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
C. Include a statement of the reason or reasons why the notice is
being issued; and
D. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for the
repairs and improvements required to bring the premises into
compliance with the provisions of this code.
2. Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if
a copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner personally; or (b) sent by
certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known
address with return receipt requested. If the certified or registered
letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy
thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the premises
affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner
upon the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the premises
shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.
3. Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon
whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose of to another until the provisions of the
compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or
until such owner shall first furnish the prospective grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of
violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official
a signed and notarized statement from the said prospective grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such
compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the
responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs
required by such compliance order or notice of violation.
1. Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, fail to
maintain, provide, fail to provide or let to another or occupy or permit
another person to occupy any premises, property, structure or motor
vehicle regulated by this Part, or cause same to be done, contrary to or
in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this Part, or to
fail to obey a lawful order of the code official, or to remove or deface a
placard or notice posted under the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both,
at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Notwithstanding any other provision herein to the contrary and in
§ 406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 407
1:43
addition to any penalty imposed herein, in the event any person shall
fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the period of time stated
therein, the Township may remove any and/or correct said violation
including but not limited to cutting weeds and/or plant growth.
§ 407 LOGAN CODE § 407
1:44
Chapter 5
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 407 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 407
1:45

Part 1
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 101. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code. [Ord. 12-24-87B; as
amended by Ord. 5-21-92; by Ord. 8-7-97; and by Ord. 10-02-97A]
The Township of Logan hereby adopts, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire
or explosion, the fire prevention code known as the "BOCA Basic Fire
Prevention Code, 1996, Tenth Edition," save and except such provisions as
are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which three copies have
been and now are filed in the office of Municipal Secretary and the same are
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. From
the date on which this Part shall take effect, the provision thereof shall be
controlling within the corporate limits of the Township of Logan.
§ 102. Amendments Made in Fire Prevention Code. [Ord.
12-24-87B; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88; by Ord. 5-21-92; by Ord.
8-7-97; and by Ord. 10-02-97A]
The fire prevention code hereby adopted is amended as follows:
1. Section F-101.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
F-101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Fire Prevention
Code of the Township of Logan hereinafter referred to as "this code."
2. Section F-112.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:
F-112.3 Penalty for Violations: Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 30 days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Each
day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
3. Section F-113.1 is hereby deleted in its entirety and in its place shall
appear the following:
F-113.1 Application for appeal: Any person affected by a decision
of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall
have the right to appeal to the Township Manager provided a written
application is filed in the Office of the Township Manager within 20
days after the decision, notice or order of the said official code was
served. The appeal to the Township Manager shall be an informal
proceeding in which the Township Manager shall be entitled to review
such evidence as said Manager deems necessary and appropriate. The
Township Manager shall render a written decision within 30 days of
the date of filing said appeal with a copy thereof to be furnished to
the appellant and to the code official. Any person wishing to appeal the
decision of the Township Manager shall have such right to appeal to
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 102
1:47
§ 103. State Laws and Regulations. [Ord. 12-24-87B]
In all matters that are regulated by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the
Commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations,
as the case may be, shall control where the requirements thereof are the
same as or more limiting than the provisions of this Part. The code shall
control in all cases where the State requirements are not as strict as those
contained in this Part.
§ 104. Validity. [Ord. 12-24-87B]
The invalidity of any section or part of this Part shall not affect the
remaining sections.
§ 105. Provisions to be Continuation of Existing Regulations. [Ord.
12-24-87B]
The provision of this Part, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances
and/or codes in force immediately prior to the enactment of this Part, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and codes and not as new
enactments. The provisions of this Part shall not affect any act done or
liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Logan provided a written
application is filed in the Office of the Township Manager within 20 days
after the day the decision by the Township Manager was served. All
applications for any appeal permitted herein shall be based on a claim
that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder
have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not
fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by
other means. Appeals to the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Logan shall in all cases be accompanied by a fee as determined by the
Board from time to time.
4. Section F-113.2, including Subsections 113.2.1 through 113.2.6 are
hereby deleted in their entirety and in their place shall appear the
following: (Reserved)
5. Section F-113.5 is hereby deleted in its entirety and in its place shall
appear the following:
F-113.5 Postponed hearing: When two members are not present to
hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative
shall have the right to request and receive a postponement of the
hearing. A new hearing shall be held within 10 days.
6. Section F-403.0 Open Burning and its subsections are hereby deleted in
their entirety and in their place shall appear the following:
F-403.0 (Reserved)
§ 102 LOGAN CODE § 105
1:48
be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under
authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
§ 105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 105
1:49
Chapter 6
CONDUCT
§ 105 LOGAN CODE § 105
1:50
Part 1
PROTECTION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 101. Definition and Interpretation. [Ord. 4-7-88]
As used in this Part, the term "person" shall include any individual,
corporation, partnership, association, firm, or other legal entity. The
singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the singular; and
the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 102. Possession of or Tampering with Public Property on Streets,
Alleys or Public Ground Prohibited. [Ord. 4-7-88]
No person shall possess, destroy, injure, tamper with or deface any public
property of the Township of Logan, or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental
work, building or street light on or in any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks,
or public grounds in the Township of Logan.
§ 103. Tampering With or Possession of Stakes, Posts and
Monuments Prohibited. [Ord. 4-7-88]
No person shall in any manner possess, interfere or meddle with, or pull,
drive, change, alter, or destroy any stake, post, monument, or other
marking, made, placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or set, or caused
to be done by the authorities of the Township of Logan to evidence the
location, elevation, line, grade, corner, or angle of any public street, alley,
sidewalk, curb, gutter, drain, or other public work, or thing.
§ 104. Possession of or Tampering with Warning Lamps, Signs or
Barricades Prohibited. [Ord. 4-7-88]
No person shall possess, destroy, remove, deface, obliterate or cover up any
lamp, sign or barricade erected as a warning of danger by the authorities
of the Township of Logan or by any person doing work by permission of
the authorities of the Township of Logan on any of the streets, alleys,
sidewalks, or bridges in the Township of Logan or on any public grounds of
the Township of Logan, within or without the Township of Logan.
§ 105. Possession or Removal of Material from Streets, Alleys or
Public Grounds Prohibited. [Ord. 4-7-88]
No person shall take, or have in their possession any earth, stone, or other
material from any street, alley, or public grounds in the Township of Logan.
§ 106. Deposit of Harmful Substances on Streets, Alleys, Sidewalks
or Public Grounds Prohibited. [Ord. 4-7-88]
No person shall pour, throw or deposit any harmful or destructive substance
or matter on any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds in the Township of
Logan.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 107
1:51
§ 107. Exceptions. [Ord. 4-7-88]
This Part shall not apply to normal activities in connection with
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks, and
public grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon or therein,
or to incidental results of work done thereon or therein upon permit from or
by authority of the Township of Logan.
§ 108. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 4-7-88; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; by Ord. 9-19-96; by Ord. 12-13-97; and by Ord. 02-13-03]
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
3. In the event any harmful substance is deposited on any street, alley,
sidewalk or public grounds, in the interest of the public health, safety
and welfare, the Township may remove or cause to be removed any
such harmful substance at the sole cost and expense of any and/or all
persons responsible for depositing such harmful substance through any
manner available to the Township for collecting such cost and expense.
§ 107 LOGAN CODE § 108
1:52
Part 2
PROHIBITING THE CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 7-9-87A]
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words or phrases shall
be construed according to the definitions set forth below:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 1/2% of a percent of alcohol volume which is fit for
beverage purposes.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can or other vessel in which alcoholic beverages
are contained.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any way, area or place open to the use of the public or
wherein the public has been invited, whether privately or publicly owned,
operated or leased.
§ 202. Consumption. [Ord. 7-9-87A]
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any quantity upon any
street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, stairway, thoroughfare, playground, park,
parking lot, or other public place within the Township of Logan, nor shall
any person consume any alcoholic beverage within five feet of any public
way or thoroughfare while on a private stairway, doorway, or other private
property open to public view without the express or implied permission of
the owner, his agent or other party in lawful possession thereof.
§ 203. Possession. [Ord. 7-9-87A]
No person shall possess any container of alcoholic beverage whether
wrapped or unwrapped which has been opened or on which the seal has
been broken in any manner on any public street, avenue, alley,
thoroughfare, playground, park, parking lot or other public place within the
Township of Logan, nor shall any person possess any container or alcoholic
beverage within five feet of any public way or thoroughfare while on a
private stairway, doorway, or other private property open to public view
without the express or implied permission of the owner, his agent, or other
person in lawful possession thereof.
§ 204. Exceptions. [Ord. 7-9-87A]
Provided, however, that the provisions of § 202 and § 203 above shall not
apply to interior portions of any private dwelling, habitat or building, nor
to the consumption or possession by persons in the areas herein designated
of any duly prescribed and dispensed medication having alcoholic content
as set forth in § 101 hereof; and provided further that the provisions of
said § 202 and § 203 above shall not apply to premises duly licensed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board and to persons then and there patrons of
said license. Furthermore, the provisions of § 202 and § 203 above shall not
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 204
1:53
apply to those public places whereby express permission has been granted
by the owner, his agent or other party in lawful possession of those areas,
and all other necessary lawful requirements have been met, to hold or
conduct fairs, bazaars, picnics, fund raisers or other seasonal activities;
provided that, in order to protect the public's health, safety and welfare, the
said public places are cordoned or barricaded in such a manner as to define
those specific areas within which such owner's express permission has been
given.
§ 205. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 7-9-8/A; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; by Ord. 9-19-96; by Ord. 2-13-97]
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 204 LOGAN CODE § 205
1:54
Part 3
CURFEW
§ 301. Definitions. [Ord. 12-21-95]
As used in this Part, the terms hereinafter stated shall have the following
meaning unless otherwise noted:
CURFEW HOURS —
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN —
MINOR — Any person under 18 years of age.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes,
but is not limited to, the members or partners of an association or
partnership and the officers of a corporation.
PARENT — A person who is:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, and shops and malls.
REMAIN —
11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
or Thursday; and
A.
B. 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday.
A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor; or
A.
A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
B.
A. A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or
At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have
the care and custody of a minor.
B.
A. Linger or stay; or
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:55
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY — Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Logan.
§ 302. Offenses. [Ord. 12-21-95]
§ 303. Defenses. [Ord. 12-21-95]
Fail to leave an establishment and/or public place when requested to do
so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control
of the establishment and/or public place.
B.
1. A minor commits an offense if he remains (whether in or out of any
vehicle) in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
within the Township during curfew hours.
2. A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, a minor to remain (whether in
or out of any vehicle) in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the Township during curfew hours after having
received notice from the Township Police Department of a prior
violation. A conviction before a District Justice shall not be required to
constitute notice of a prior violation for purposes of this Part.
3. The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.
1. It is a defense to prosecution under § 302 that the minor was:
A. Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
B. On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
C. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
D. Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
E. Involved in an emergency;
F. On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor permitted the
minor's presence;
G. Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the Township, Altoona Area
School District, a civic organization, or another similar entity that
takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home
from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or
other recreational activity supervised by adults, a civil
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 303
1:56
§ 304. Enforcement. [Ord. 12-21-95]
The Township Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, adopt by
resolution policies for enforcement of this Part.
§ 305. Penalties. [Ord. 12-21-95]
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
the minor.
H. Exercising rights protected by the United States and/or
Pennsylvania Constitution and not otherwise prohibited by law,
such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
I. Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with Pennsylvania law.
2. It is a defense to prosecution under § 302 that the owner, operator, or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department
that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during
curfew hours and refused to leave.
1. Any person who violates § 302, Subsection 1, of this Part shall upon
conviction before a District Justice be guilty of a summary offense
punishable by a fine of not less than $25 and not to exceed $600 and
upon failure to pay said fine and costs be subject to imprisonment up to
30 days. Each time that a violation is committed shall constitute a
separate offense.
2. Any parent or guardian who shall violate § 302, Subsection 2, of this
Part after having received notice of the prior violation from the Logan
Township Police Department shall upon conviction before a District
Justice be guilty of a summary offense punishable by a fine of not less
than $25 and no more than $600 for each violation, and upon failure to
pay said fine and costs, be subject to imprisonment up to 10 days. Each
time that a violation is committed shall constitute a separate offense.
3. Any person who violates § 302, Subsection 3, of this Part shall upon
conviction before a District Justice be guilty of a summary offense
punishable by a fine of not less than $25 and no more than $600 for
each violation, and upon failure to pay said fine and costs, be subject to
imprisonment up to 10 days. Each time that a violation is committed
shall constitute a separate offense.
4. When required by the Juvenile Act of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania the magisterial court shall refer the matter to the juvenile
court.
5. All fines imposed and collected shall be paid to the Township.
§ 303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 306
1:57
§ 306. Official Title. [Ord. 12-21-95]
This Part shall be cited as the "Logan Township Curfew Ordinance."
§ 306 LOGAN CODE § 306
1:58
Part 4
DISORDERLY GATHERINGS
§ 401. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. 04-24-08]
The Township of Logan finds and determines as follows:
§ 402. Definitions. [Ord. 04-24-08]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the following meanings
unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
DISORDERLY GATHERING — A gathering at which any public disturbance
occurs.
A. That certain private properties require a disproportionate amount of
police service with many calls requiring response to maintain order and
public peace and safety and to stop public disturbances at parties or
other social events so that there is less police personnel and resources
available for other locations, emergencies and duties within the
Township, thereby placing a disproportionate and unfair burden upon
the residents of the Township.
B. That the host of a disorderly party or other social event and those
persons attending such party or event should be held criminally
responsible for any public disturbances or other acts of disorderly
conduct thereat.
C. That owners of private properties derive a benefit from the aforesaid
police service.
D. That owners of private properties have a responsibility to manage their
properties to minimize required police responses to maintain order and
public peace and safety and to stop public disturbances, to minimize the
burden upon the residents of the Township and to promote the health,
safety and welfare of the public in general.
E. That owners of private properties can minimize required police
responses to maintain order and public peace and safety and to stop
public disturbances by diligent and strict management and regulations
of their properties.
F. That assessment of fines for successive police responses as provided in
this Part is reasonable and will have a deterrent effect and encourage
more responsible management of private properties.
G. That it is not the intent of this Part to discourage or suppress calls or
requests for police service, but rather to encourage and stimulate
diligent and strict management and regulation of private properties by
the owner thereof and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Township.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:59
FINE FOR POLICE SERVICE — The cost to the Township for police services
rendered in responding to a call at a disorderly gathering or otherwise
maintaining order and public peace and safety and stopping public
disturbances at a disorderly gathering including, but not limited to, the
salaries and other compensation of police officers, appropriate
administrative costs allocable thereto, prorated costs of equipment, the cost
of repairing damaged Township equipment and property, and the cost of any
medical treatment of injured police officers. This cost shall be recouped via
a fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense imposed on the violator of
this part, and be fixed from time to time by Township Supervisors of the
Township, based upon the average cost for a typical police response.
GATHERING — A party or event involving a group of persons who have
assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or activity on private
property.
HOST — The person who owns, leases or is otherwise in possession and
control of the private property where the gathering takes place and/or
who organized, sponsored, conducted, hosted or permitted such gathering,
invited persons to attend such gathering or was otherwise in charge of such
gathering.
OWNERS — The person, persons, corporation or other entity who holds
record title to the private property.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, firm, or
other legal entity.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land, building or other structure, including
single and multifamily dwellings and commercial and industrial buildings
not owned by a public entity.
PUBLIC DISTURBANCE(S) — Any act by a host or those persons attending
a gathering involving public drunkenness, consumption of an alcoholic
beverage in public, the serving of alcoholic beverages to minors, public
urination or defecation, the unlawful deposit of trash or litter on public or
private property, damage to or destruction of public or private property,
the obstruction of public roads, streets, highways or sidewalks, interference
with emergency or police services, unreasonable noise, use of profane or
obscene language or gestures, indecent exposure, fighting or quarreling,
or any other act defined as disruptive conduct by the Township's Code of
Ordinances and/or state and/or federal law or any other conduct which
otherwise disturbs, annoys, injures or endangers the health, safety or
welfare of the residents of the Township residing in the neighborhood or
vicinity of the gathering.
PUBLIC ENTITY — Any federal, state or local government, school district or
agency, or authority created or organized thereby.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any land, building or other structure owned by a
public entity.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Logan, Blair County, Pennsylvania.
§ 402 LOGAN CODE § 403
1:60
§ 403. Violation. [Ord. 04-24-08]
No host or person attending a gathering shall commit any act of public
disturbance. No host shall hold, conduct or have a gathering where any act
of public disturbance occurs or continue a gathering where any act of public
disturbance has occurred or is occurring.
§ 404. Arrest of Violators. [Ord. 04-24-08]
In addition to the right to file a citation against violators under and pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, police officers may also
arrest a host or person attending a gathering who violates this Part,
provided that the police officer views the public disturbance and in the case
of the host, the host is in attendance at the gathering at the time of such
public disturbance, although nothing herein shall prevent a host from being
cited for violation of this Part, whether or not any person attending the
gathering is arrested or cited for a violation.
§ 405. Violation by Owners Required to Pay Fine for Police Service.
[Ord. 04-24-08]
No owner who, after receiving the notice set forth in this Part shall permit,
cause, encourage and/or be complicit in any disorderly gathering in excess
of one such Disorderly Gathering during any ninety-day period of time
occurring on said owners private property.
§ 406. Notice to Owners of Disorderly Gathering. [Ord. 04-24-08]
Whenever the police are called to respond to a disorderly gathering for
the purpose of maintaining order and public peace and safety and stopping
public disturbances, the Chief of Police or the Chief's duly authorized
designee shall notify the owner of the private property where the disorderly
gathering took place and/or also the agent of such property by regular mail
at the last known address of such owner and operator, that the police were
called to respond to a disorderly gathering at the owner's property for the
purpose of maintaining order and public peace and safety and stopping
public disturbances and that if the police are again called to respond to
a disorderly gathering at such property within 90 days after their initial
response, such owner shall be in violation of this Part and may be required
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 for each violation of this Part.
§ 407. Penalties. [Ord. 04-24-08]
Any host or person who violates this Part shall be guilty of the offense of
disorderly gathering and upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or be imprisoned for
a period not to exceed 90 days.
§ 403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 407
1:61

Part 5
LOITERING
§ 501. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. 04-24-08A]
The Township of Logan finds and determines as follows:
A. Certain individuals, whether under or over the age of 18 years, require
a disproportionate amount of police responses with many calls
requiring response to maintain order and public peace and safety and
to stop loitering at public places and/or business property so that there
is less police personnel and resources available for other locations,
emergencies and duties within the Township, thereby placing a
disproportionate and unfair burden upon the residents of the Township.
B. In many instances, the Parents/Guardians and/or Persons standing in
Loco Parentis to individuals violating this Part are aware of and/or
indifferent to such individuals under the age of 18 years participating in
loitering at public places and/or on business properties such as
shopping malls and other commercial establishments.
C. Parents/Guardians and/or Persons standing in Loco Parentis of
individuals under age 18 years have a responsibility to oversee and
control the actions of such individuals under 18 years to minimize
required police service to maintain order and public peace and safety
and to stop such loitering and/or unreasonable noise, tumultuous
behavior, profane language and/or physically offensive condition that
causes or is likely to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm,
to minimize the burden upon the residents of the Township and to
promote the health, safety and welfare of the public in general.
D. Parents/Guardians and/or Persons standing in Loco Parentis can
minimize required police responses to maintain order and public peace
and safety and to stop such loitering and public inconvenience by
diligent and careful oversight of such individuals under the age of 18
years.
E. Individuals over the age of 18 years participating in loitering and/or
creating a physically offensive condition in public places and/or on
business properties also have the duty to minimize required police
responses by not participating in such behavior and thereby minimize
the burden upon the residents of the Township and to promote the
health, safety and welfare of the public in general.
F. Assessment of a fine for subsequent police responses as provided in this
Part is reasonable and will have a deterrent effect and encourage more
responsible behavior on the part of those committing violations of this
Part as well as Parents/Guardians and/or Persons standing in Loco
Parentis to individuals under the age of 18 years.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 501
1:63
§ 502. Definitions. [Ord. 04-24-08A]
For the purposes of this Part, the following words shall have the meaning
ascribed thereto:
LOITERING — To loaf, linger, remaining idle in essentially one location or
lingering or standing around without purpose either alone or in concert
with others.
PARENT/GUARDIAN/PERSON STANDING IN LOCO PARENTIS — Any
person who is a parent, court appointed guardian and/or a person standing
in loco parentis to any person under 18 years of age who violates any
provision of this Part.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, firm, or
other legal entity.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access including any
public street or alley, or public sidewalk, as well as in front of and the area
immediately adjacent to any parking lot, store, restaurant, school, tavern or
other places of business.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Logan, Blair County, Pennsylvania.
§ 503. Obstruction of Public Places. [Ord. 04-24-08A]
G. It is not the intent of this Part to discourage or suppress calls or
requests for police service, but rather to encourage and stimulate
diligent and strict oversight of behavior from those persons violating
this Part and by the Parents/Guardians and Persons standing in Loco
Parentis to individuals under 18 years of age violating this Part and to
promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township.
A. No person shall loiter in a public place, as defined above, in such a
manner so as to obstruct any public street, public sidewalk, public
bridge (foot or vehicle) or public building by hindering or impeding or
tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of
vehicles or pedestrians.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit peaceful picketing
or free speech, provided that such picketing does not obstruct free and
uninterrupted passage of vehicles or pedestrians. Marches and protests
are required by the Township to obtain a parade permit in advance of
the march and/or protest pursuant to Chapter 15, Part 1, of the
Township of Logan Code of Ordinances.
C. No person shall create or cause to be created any annoyance in a public
place as defined above to any person or persons.
§ 501 LOGAN CODE § 504
1:64
§ 504. Loitering on Business Property. [Ord. 04-24-08A]
No person shall at any time loiter on private property that is customarily
used by the public as an integral part of a commercial business in such a
manner so as to:
§ 505. Violation by Parents/Guardians and/or Persons Standing in
Loco Parentis. [Ord. 04-24-08A]
Parents/Guardians and/or persons standing in loco parentis to a person who
has violated this Part for a second or subsequent time during any ninetyday
period of time, shall be in violation of this Part if said Parents/Guardians
and/or Persons standing in loco parentis shall have received written notice,
as provided in § 506 of this Part and, thereafter, permits, causes and/or
provides the means for and/or is complicit with said person violating this
Part for a second and/or subsequent time within any ninety-day period.
§ 506. Notice to Persons Violating this Part and/or Parents/
Guardian and/or Persons in Loco Parentis of Fine for Subsequent
Police Responses. [Ord. 04-24-08A]
Whenever the police are called to respond for the purpose of maintaining
order and public peace and safety and stopping violations of this Part,
the Chief of Police or the Chief's duly authorized designee shall notify the
Person violating this Part and any Parent/Guardian and/or Person standing
in loco parentis for any such person involved in such violation, by regular
mail at the last known address of such person violating this Part and any
such Parent/Guardian and/or Person in loco parentis of such person, that
the police were called to and/or responded to a violation of this Part for the
purpose of maintaining order and public peace and safety and stopping such
violation and that if the police are again called to respond to any violation of
this Part involving the person violating this Part within 90 days after their
initial response, such person violating this Part and any Parent/Guardian
and/or Person in loco parentis of such person shall be required to pay a fine
of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 to the Township for each
such violation.
§ 507. Signs or Notice Required. [Ord. 04-24-08A]
No person shall be guilty of a violation of this Part unless:
A. Obstruct the free, unadulterated passage of vehicles.
B. Obstruct or interfere with any person lawfully seeking access to use of
the commercial business.
C. Make unreasonable noise, engage in tumultuous behavior, use profane
language or create a physically offensive condition that causes or is
likely to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm.
A. The private property owner, tenant or other responsible and authorized
person posts the property with "No Loitering" signs or other notices of
§ 504 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 507
1:65
§ 508. Penalty. [Ord. 04-24-08A]
Any person who violates any provision of this Part, upon conviction in
a summary proceeding, shall, in addition to any other penalty provided
herein, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000 to be paid to the Township, together with costs of prosecution, or to
be sentenced to be imprisoned for not more than 10 days or both.
§ 509. Enforcement. [Ord. 04-24-08A]
The Township of Logan Police Department shall have the authority to
enforce this Part.
like meaning at the entrance or entrances to the property and at
intervals of a maximum of 75 feet measured from the side of the
building which contains the entrance(s). Property of 75 feet or less
measured on the entrance side may contain only one sign; or
B. The person to be charged with loitering has been asked by the property
owner, tenant, police officer or other responsible and authorized person
to leave the property and has failed to leave.
§ 507 LOGAN CODE § 509
1:66
Part 6
PUBLIC GATHERINGS
§ 601. Definitions. [Ord. 10-13-16]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — The person applying for a public gathering permit either
individually and/or on behalf and as a representative of a group and/or
organization.
COMMERCIAL PUBLIC GATHERING — Any event which involves the sale
of food and/or merchandise.
PUBLIC GATHERING — A meeting of persons for a privately sponsored,
organized or planned event for any lawful purpose proposed to occur on
public property.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All streets, parks, parklets, playgrounds parking
lots and/or any other real estate owned by the Township and/or other
governmental entity within the political boundaries of the Township.
PUBLIC STREET — A street owned and maintained by the Township and/or
any other governmental entity.
RACE/RUNS — A public gathering in which participants typically raise
funds for certain charities by walking and/or running and/or by other forms
of transportation, including, but not limited to, utilizing antique cars,
motorcycles and bicycles.
TOWNSHIP — Logan Township, Blair County, Pennsylvania.
§ 602. Permit Required. [Ord. 10-13-16]
Any use of public property for a public gathering requires the issuance of
a permit by the Township. Permit applications shall be obtained from the
Township Police Chief.
§ 603. Permit Applications; Fees; Review; Exemptions; Special
Services. [Ord. 10-13-16]
1. Applications for permits required under § 602 hereof utilizing any
public property in the Township shall:
A. Be submitted not less than 60 days prior to the date of a public
gathering utilizing a public street while applications for all other
public gatherings shall be submitted not less than seven calendar
days prior to the date of the public gathering.
B. Include detailed information on the applicant, including:
(1) Names, addresses and contact information for persons
responsible for the event;
(2) Sponsor of the event;
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 603
1:67
(3) Type of public gathering (e.g., political, charitable);
(4) Number of people expected to attend and/or participate;
(5) The extent of interference with public rights-of-way, if any;
(6) The route for any race/run, with specific information regarding
the intersections and number of race/run certified marshals to
be utilized;
(7) The extent and nature of commercial activity (e.g., the sale of
food or merchandise), if any;
(8) Special services which may be required, such as electricity,
sanitary facilities or waste removal;
(9) The detailed provisions for security and traffic control:
(a) The names and qualifications of those individuals and/or
entities providing the security;
(b) The names and qualifications/certifications of those
individuals/entities providing traffic control;
(10) Copies of permits from any other governmental agency or
political subdivision, specifically including the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, in the event state-owned
roadways are to be utilized, and the Department of Agriculture
for the licensing of food vendors.
(11)Name and address of any insurance company/liability carrier
for the public gathering.
2. Upon the submission of the application and appropriate application
review fee to the Township Police Chief, the application shall be
reviewed to determine whether the application is complete, and, if so,
the Township Chief of Police shall specify the applicable amount of
deposit, if any. Said permit fee and deposit amount shall be determined
by the Township Supervisors by resolution from time to time. Upon
finding that the application is complete and that the permit fee and
deposit have been paid, the Township Chief of Police shall forward the
same to the Township Board of Supervisors for approval, and upon
approval thereof, the Township Chief of Police shall issue a permit for
the proposed public gathering. The Township Supervisors are also
authorized to impose a reasonable time, place and other restrictions or
conditions upon the public gathering to reduce unnecessary
interference with public rights-of-way and the peace and enjoyment of
the community.
3. The Township will establish a written policy for granting waivers or
reductions in fees and insurance in special circumstances. Requests for
waivers shall be submitted in writing by the organization. Waivers will
be granted solely on the express written approval of the Township Chief
§ 603 LOGAN CODE § 603
1:68
§ 604. Race/Runs and Commercial Public Gatherings; Insurance.
[Ord. 10-13-16]
For any race/runs and/or commercial public gatherings, the applicant shall
further be required to submit proof of insurance. The applicant shall furnish
to the Township an insurance certificate, together with any necessary
endorsements, in a form provided with the application, naming the
Township as an additional insured, with such insurance being on a primary
and noncontributory basis. The required amount of certificate of general
public liability insurance, including bodily injury and property damage
insurance, shall be in the amount of $1,000,000 for all damages arising out
of bodily injury, including death, at any time resulting therefrom, sustained
of Police in accordance with the policy established by the Township
Board of Supervisors.
4. A deposit fee, as determined by resolution of Township from time to
time, shall be required at the time of submission of the application for a
permit. The payment of a damage deposit is for the protection of public
property and to offset any loss to the Township caused by damage to
public property. The deposit is fully refundable, depending upon a
showing by the applicant that no damage to public property resulted
from the event. The deposit will be refunded after the public property
has been inspected by the Township.
5. Should the event require any special services, such as electricity,
sanitary facilities, waste removal, security or traffic control, the
applicant shall provide evidence, satisfactory to the Township Chief of
Police, as to how such services will be provided. The Township shall not
provide any type of security and/or traffic control through its Police
Department or otherwise for any public gathering, whether within or
without the political boundaries of the Township.
6. Any failure to pay the permit fee and/or deposit, or to provide sufficient
proof of insurance, or to provide for special services, and/or to obtain a
waiver of the payment of the fee and/or security deposit, shall result in
the application being considered incomplete and, therefore, rejected.
7. Applicants who withdraw an application may request a refund of fees
paid. The amount of the refund will be reduced in accordance with the
following schedule and based upon the time the date of the request for
refund was made and the date of the public gathering:
A. Thirty days or more: 80% of fee will be refunded.
B. Between 29 days and 15 days: 50% of fee will be refunded.
C. Fourteen days or less: no refund.
8. The permit holder or contact person at the event must have the permit
available at all times for inspection by authorized personnel of the
Township.
§ 603 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 604
1:69
by any one person in any one accident, and a limit of liability of not less
than $2,000,000 aggregate for any such damages sustained by two or more
persons in any one accident. Property damage shall be in an amount of
$1,000,000 for all property damage sustained by any one person in any one
accident. Automobile and truck public liability, bodily injury, and property
damage shall be in an amount of $1,000,000 for each. The applicant shall
provide umbrella excess liability insurance at a minimum limit of liability
of $2,000,000 per occurrence, which shall be in excess over the primary
limits of insurance required in this section. No insurance shall be cancelled
or materially altered, except after 30 days' written notice has been received
by the Township. Upon cause shown by the applicant, the Township Chief of
Police is authorized to waive or reduce the amount of insurance required.
§ 605. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 10-13-16]
Any person or persons who violate any of the provisions of this Part shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $500 and no more
than $1,000, together with the cost to repair any damages and legal fees,
for each offense and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment in the Blair County Jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 604 LOGAN CODE § 605
1:70
Chapter 7
FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE PROTECTION
§ 605 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 605
1:71

Part 1
OPEN BURNING
§ 101. Title. [Ord. 1-2-92]
This Part shall be known as the "Logan Township Open Burning Ordinance."
§ 102. Definitions. [Ord. 1-2-92]
§ 103. Open Burning Permitted. [Ord. 1-2-92; as amended by Ord.
4-22-93]
A person shall be permitted to conduct open burning as follows:
1. For the purpose of interpreting the provisions of this Part, the following
words and phrases shall have the meaning or meanings ascribed:
GARBAGE — All crockery, dishes, ashes, cinders, rubber, linoleum,
asphalt or tarry products (e.g. roofing paper and shingles), grease and
animal products, vegetable or food waste.
LEAF AND YARD WASTE — Leaves, grass clippings, garden residues,
shrubbery and tree trimmings, and other similar material.[Added by
Ord. No. 03-28-19]
PERSON — Any natural person or persons, corporation, partnership,
association or any other entity.
2. All other terms and phrases shall have the meaning or meanings
ascribed to them in the Air Pollution Control Act, 35 Pa. Stat. Ann.
§ 4000 et seq., the Solid Waste Management Act, 35 Pa. Stat. Ann.
§ 6018.101 et seq., the Municipal Waste Planning Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act, 53 Pa. Stat. Ann. § 4000.101, and all ordinances of the
Township enacted pursuant to said Acts.
A. On Tuesdays from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and Saturdays from 8:00 a.m.
to 3:00 p.m. of each week and/or at such other days and times as may be
designated by the Board of Supervisors from time to time when they
deem the same necessary for the purpose of burning only nonrecyclable
refuse and noncompostable yard waste when the fire is on the premises
of any structure occupied solely as a dwelling by two families or fewer
and only when such refuse results from the normal occupancy of said
structure. The burning of recyclable materials (as defined by Chapter
20 and related guidelines) and yard waste is strictly prohibited as noted
in § 105. [Amended by Ord. No. 03-28-19]
B. For the purpose of preventing or abating a fire hazard, when approved
by DEP and when set by or under the supervision of a public officer
designated by the Township of Logan. [Amended by Ord. No.
03-28-19]
C. For the purpose of instructing personnel and firefighting, when
approved by DEP. [Amended by Ord. No. 03-28-19]
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:73
§ 104. Regulations. [Ord. 1-2-92]
D. For the prevention and control of disease or pests, when approved by
DEP. [Amended by Ord. No. 03-28-19]
E. For recreational or ceremonial purposes, provided that the material to
be burned is nonrecyclable.
F. For cooking food, provided that the material to be burned is
nonrecyclable. For purposes of this Part, the cooking of food on a grill
fueled by charcoal or propane gas shall not be considered open burning
so long as said grills have a lid and meet Federal and State safety
standards.
G. All other open burning is prohibited.
1. Any and all open burning of any material shall be done in an approved
container such as a metal barrel or concrete enclosure for any material
burned pursuant to § 103A, E, and F, which must conform to DEP
standards and to the following: [Amended by Ord. No. 03-28-19]
A. Said container must have a screen of sufficient strength to prevent
ash or unburned material from being released from said container
during or after burning has occurred.
B. Said container shall be within reach of an operating water faucet
and/or operating garden hose and shall be placed on privately
owned property, but in no event shall said container be placed
closer than 10 feet from the property line of the person so burning.
C. Said container shall be at least 15 feet from any dwelling or
structure, whether inhabited by humans or not.
D. Said container shall not be placed on or near any combustible
material nor on the surface on any public street.
2. Any and all open burning shall be done under the consent and direct
supervision of an adult individual of 18 years of age or older and shall
not be done when a strong breeze or wind is active.
3. All containers used for open burning must be emptied on a monthly
basis with the refuse therefrom to be taken to a landfill or composted
and in no event shall such burned refuse be permitted to accumulate
and/or cause unsightliness, odors and/or attract vermin.
4. All open burning must be carried out in a manner to prevent the
emission of noxious or offensive smoke and/or odors.
5. No open burning shall cause emissions which interfere with the
reasonable enjoyment of life or property.
§ 103 LOGAN CODE § 105
1:74
§ 105. Burning of Certain Materials Prohibited. [Ord. 1-2-92]
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn those materials which are
prohibited under any and all local, State and Federal laws including, but not
limited to, the following materials:
§ 106. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 1-2-92; as amended by Ord.
9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
§ 107. Amendments to Local, State or Federal Law. [Ord. 1-2-92]
In the event that any local, State or Federal law relating to open burning is
amended or supplemented or any of the regulations promulgated under said
A. Leaves, leave waste and grass clippings (dried or otherwise).
B. Recyclable materials as defined by Chapter 20 and related guidelines.
[Amended by Ord. No. 03-28-19]
C. Garbage.
D. Hazardous waste.
E. Any substance which interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of life or
property or is deleterious to human or animal health.
1. Removal by Township. The Township of Logan, through its authorized
agents or employees, may give written or verbal notice to the person,
whether owner or occupant, to abate or eliminate or correct any
violations of this Part and upon failure of the person, whether owner or
occupant, to do so within the time specified by said notice, the
Township of Logan may abate or eliminate or correct the violation and
collect the cost and expenses thereof together with a penalty of not less
than $25 or more than $1,000 from the owner or occupant by court
proceedings or in the manner provided for the collection of municipal
claims or by an action of assumpsit without the filing of a claim.
2. Equitable Proceedings. The Township of Logan may institute
proceedings in the Civil division of the Court of Common Pleas of Blair
County for equitable relief in enforcing the provisions of this Part.
3. Criminal Offense. Any police officer and/or any person authorized by
the Board of Supervisors may enforce the violation of this Part. Any
person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 and not more
than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day that a
violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
4. Election. The Township of Logan may, in its discretion, use any one or
more of the above provisions and the use of any one provision shall not
constitute an election or bar to the use of any other provision.
§ 105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 107
1:75
laws are amended or supplemented, then in such event, said laws and/or
regulations shall be incorporated into this Part and this Part, as amended,
shall be enforceable.
§ 107 LOGAN CODE § 107
1:76
Part 2
PUBLIC DISPLAY OF DISPLAY FIREWORKS
§ 201. General. [Ord. 6-20-85; amended by Ord. No. 04-26-18; and
by Ord. No. 05-23-19]
§ 202. Definition. [Ord. 6-20-85; amended by Ord. No. 04-26-18]
For the purposes of this Part 2, all terms and phrases not specifically defined
herein, shall be as defined in Act 13 of 2017, amending the Tax Reform Code
of 1971 (72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.) which repealed 35 P.S. § 1271:
ACT — Shall mean Act 13 of 2017.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Shall be as set forth in the Act which includes:
1. No person, amusement park, municipality, fair association, corporation,
partnership, or other organization or group of individuals shall conduct
or attempt to conduct any public display of display fireworks within the
boundaries of the Township of Logan or within such distance of a
boundary of the Township of Logan such that such display may affect
the health, safety, welfare, or property of person or entities in the
Township of Logan, unless the person, amusement park, municipality,
fair association, corporation, partnership, or other organization or
group of individuals first applies, pays the application fee as may be
established by the Township from time to time and secures approval
from the Township of Logan for a permit authorizing such display.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or discharge consumer
fireworks on the streets of the Township, the sidewalks of the Township
or any property owned by the Township, including, without limitation,
all of the Township's parks and public buildings. It shall be unlawful to
ignite or discharge consumer fireworks at any location within the
Township in violation of the Act, in any manner which causes any
combustible materials to be deposited on the land of another or during
the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or
combination of substances which is intended to produce visible or
audible effects by combustion, is suitable for use by the public, complies
with the construction, performance, composition and labeling
requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety
Commission in 16 CFR (relating to commercial practices) or any
successor regulation and complies with the provision for "consumer
fireworks" as defined in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the sale,
possession and use of which shall be permitted at all times throughout
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
1.
The term does not include devices as ground and hand-held sparkling
devices, novelties or toy caps in APA 87-1 or any successor standard,
the sale, possession and use of which shall be permitted at all times
throughout the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
2.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:77
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Shall be defined as large fireworks to be used
solely by professional pyrotechnicians and designed primarily to produce
visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation. The
term includes, but is not limited to:
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure, other than a
permanent facility with fixed utility connections, which is in use or in
place for a period of 20 consecutive calendar days or less and is dedicated
to the storage and sale of consumer fireworks and related items. The
term includes temporary retail sales stands, tents, canopies and membrane
structures meeting the specifications of NFPA 1124. The term shall not
include a facility that is not licensed to sell consumer fireworks by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Logan.
§ 203. Application. [Ord. 6-20-85]
Applications for permitting approval for such a display must be made in
writing at the Township offices at least 30 days in advance of the display
date and shall indicate the name, address, and telephone number of the
person or entity applying for the permit along with the other information as
set forth below.
The Act allows any person at least 18 years of age to purchase, possess
and use consumer fireworks but such person may not intentionally
ignite or discharge:
Consumer fireworks on public or private property without the
express permission of the owner.
A.
Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices within, or throw
consumer fireworks or sparkling devices from a motor vehicle or
building.
B.
Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices into or at a motor vehicle
or building or at another person.
C.
Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices while the person is under
the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance or another drug.
D.
E. Consumer fireworks within 150 feet of an occupied structure.
3.
Salutes that contain more than two grains or 130 milligrams of
explosive materials;
1.
Aerial shells containing more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic
compositions; and
2.
Other display pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials for
classification as consumer fireworks and are classified as fireworks
UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 under 49 CFR 172.101 (relating to
purpose and use of hazardous materials table).
3.
§ 202 LOGAN CODE § 204
1:78
§ 204. Authority of the Board of Supervisors. [Ord. 6-20-85]
The Board of Supervisors determine, in its discretion and in accordance
with the provisions of these regulations, whether the permit shall be
granted.
§ 205. Approval of Applicant. [Ord. 6-20-85]
For the application to be approved and a permit issued, the applicant must
furnish satisfactory documentation that the display shall be handled by a
competent operator.
§ 206. Determination of a Competent Operator. [Ord. 6-20-85;
amended by Ord. No. 04-26-18]
Any person who shall handle any public display of display fireworks, in
addition to any other requirement set forth herein, shall be at least twentyone
(21) years of age and have experiences deemed satisfactory by the Chief
of Police of the Township in handling such displays which have complied
with all regulations required at the location in which such displays have
been held. To facilitate the decision of the Board as to whether the operator
is competent, the applicant shall submit the following in its application:
1. The name, address, age and telephone number of said proposed
operator.
2. The experience of said operator in the public display of fireworks
including the date, number and location of displays conducted by said
proposed operator, educational degrees, courses, or other training with
respect to the handling and display of fireworks and/or explosives, and
any license held by the operator.
3. Whether the operator has been licensed by any governmental or private
unit in the past with respect to the public display of display fireworks.
4. The names and addresses of at least two references for which the
proposed operator has conducted a public display of display fireworks.
5. A statement as to whether at any previous public display of display
fireworks conducted and/or supervised by said operator, there occurred
any injury to persons and/or property as a result of the public display of
display fireworks and the date and location of such injuries.
6. The application shall also set forth the proposed date, time and length
of the display, and the proposed location for said display.
7. The application shall be signed by both the applicant and the proposed
operator (if said operator is not the applicant) and shall state that all
information contained in the application is true to the best of the
signer's knowledge, information and belief under penalty of perjury.
§ 204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 207
1:79
§ 207. Display Location. [Ord. 6-20-85; amended by Ord. No.
04-26-18]
§ 208. Authorize Applicant to Conduct a Public Display of
Fireworks. [Ord. 6-20-85; amended by Ord. No. 04-26-18]
Said permit, if issued, shall only authorize the applicant to conduct a public
display of display fireworks with the proposed operator present to operate
said display at the date, time and location as set forth in the approved
application.
§ 209. Permit Regulations. [Ord. 6-20-85; amended by Ord. No.
04-26-18]
Pursuant to the Act, if by reason of unfavorable weather the display for
which a permit has been granted does not take place at the time so
authorized, the person or other entity to whom such permit was issued may
within 24 hours apply to the Board of Supervisors having granted the same,
setting forth under oath that such display was not made, giving the reason
therefor, and requesting a continuance of such permit for a day designated
therein, not later than one week after the day fixed originally in said permit.
Upon receiving such application for a continuance, the Board of Supervisors
may extend the provision of said permit to the day fixed in said application,
not later than one week after the original day designated in the permit, and
such extension of time, if the Chief of Police of the Township believes that
the facts stated within the request are true, shall be granted without the
payment of any additional fee and without requiring any bond other than
the one given for the original permit, the provisions of which shall extend to
and cover all damages which may be caused by reason of said display taking
place at such extended date in the same manner and to the same extent as
if such display had taken place at the date originally fixed in the permit.
1. Before approval of any application for a permit, the Board of
Supervisors shall inquire of the Chief of Police of the Township and the
Fire Chief of the volunteer fire company servicing the proposed location
for said display as to whether the location of the display will be
hazardous to property, or endanger any person or persons. Thereafter,
and in the event that the Board is of the opinion that the proposed
operator is competent, and the Board is otherwise satisfied that the
issuance of said permit will not endanger the health, safety, welfare of
any person or property, then the Board in its discretion may authorize
the issuance of said permit. Pursuant to the Act, in no event shall
display fireworks be ignited within 300 feet of:
A. Any stand-alone permanent location licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture to sell consumer fireworks; and
B. Any temporary structure licensed by the Department of Agriculture
licensed to sell consumer fireworks.
§ 207 LOGAN CODE § 210
1:80
§ 210. Issuance of a Bond to the Township from the Applicant. [Ord.
6-20-85; amended by Ord. No. 04-26-18]
Pursuant to the Act, the Township, before a permit is issued, shall require
a bond from the applicant in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 for
the payment of any and all liability, claims, causes of action, damages,
costs, demands whatsoever, in law or equity to any person or persons or
to property by reason of the licensed display, or arising from or in any
way connected with said display or any acts of the licensee, his agents,
employees or subcontractors. The applicant's liability for any damages
arising by reason of the licensed display shall not be limited to the amount
of the bond.
§ 211. Permit Permissible Purposes and Requirements. [Ord.
6-20-85; amended by Ord. No. 04-26-18]
§ 212. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 10-27-88; as amended Ord.
9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
1. Permissible Purposes. Pursuant to the Act, display fireworks may be
possessed and used by a person holding a permit from the Township at
the display covered by the permit or when used as authorized by a
permit for any of the following:
A. For agricultural purposes in connection with the raising of crops
and the protection of crops from bird and animal damage.
B. By railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or
illumination.
C. In quarrying or for blasting or other industrial use.
D. In the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater.
E. For signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports.
F. By military organizations or organizations composed of veterans of
the Armed Forces of the United States.
2. Permit Requirements. A permit issued pursuant to these regulations
shall set forth the name of the applicant, the name of the proposed
operator, the date, time and location of said display, and a clause
whereby in consideration of the granting of the permit, the applicant
agrees to defend and indemnify and save harmless the Township of
Logan from any and all liability, claims, causes of action, damages,
costs, demands whatsoever, in law or equity, against the Township as a
result or in any way connected with the public fireworks display.
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50
§ 210 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 212
1:81
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 212 LOGAN CODE § 212
1:82
Part 3
FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS REQUIREMENTS
§ 301. Enforcement Responsibilities. [Ord. 8-7-97A]
The Township of Logan Manager or such official's designee is hereby
appointed as the designated officer authorized to carry out all
responsibilities and duties set forth herein.
§ 302. Issuance of Certificate. [Ord. 8-7-97A]
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "Insuring
Agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
the Township of Logan (hereinafter the "Municipality") where the amount
recoverable for a fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500,
unless the named insured or Insuring Agent is furnished by the municipal
treasurer with a municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(b) of Act
98 of 1992 as it may be amended from time to time and unless there is
compliance with Section 508(c) and (d) of Act 98 of 1992 as it may be
amended from time to time and the provisions of this Part.
§ 303. Payment of Insurance Proceeds. [Ord. 8-7-97A]
Where, pursuant to Section 508(B)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992 as amended,
the municipal treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real
property, the Insuring Agent shall pay the claim of the named insured,
provided however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured and
the Insuring Agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability
on all fire policies covering the building or other structure, the following
procedures must be followed:
1. The Insuring Agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated officer of the Municipality in the aggregate of $2,000 for
each $15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim,
this section to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the
amount transferred to the Municipality shall be $2,000; or
2. If at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named insured
and the Insuring Agent, the named insured has submitted a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, the Insuring Agent shall transfer to the
Municipality from the insurance proceeds the amount specified in the
estimate.
3. The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all companies,
associations or exchanges insuring the building or other structure.
4. After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 303
1:83
other structure, and the designated officer shall return the amount of
the funds transferred to the Municipality in excess of the estimate to
the named insured, if the Municipality has not commenced to remove,
repair and secure the building or other structure.
5. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the Municipality shall do
the following:
(a) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing, or securing the building or structure which are incurred
by the Municipality. Such costs shall include, without limitation,
any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the
Municipality in connection with such removal, repair or securing of
the building or any proceedings related thereto; and
(b) It is the obligation of the Insuring Agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the Municipality with the name and address of
the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the
name and address of the named insured, the designated officer
shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have
been received by the Municipality and notify the named insured
that the procedures under this subsection shall be followed; and
(c) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the Municipality and the required proof
of such completion received by the designated officer, and if the
Municipality has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If the
Municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund and if excess funds remain, the Municipality shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured; and
(d) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
Municipality pursuant to this section, and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the Municipality. To
the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named
insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
6. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the Municipality and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured if some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 303 LOGAN CODE § 304
1:84
§ 304. Fees. [Ord. 8-7-97A]
The Board of Supervisors may by resolution adopt procedures and
regulations to implement Act 98 of 1992 and this Part and may by resolution
fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or services
provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992 and this part, including but not limited
to issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening
separate fund accounts.
§ 305. Penalty. [Ord. 8-7-97A]
Any owner of property, any named insured or any Insuring Agency who
violates this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty of
not less than $500 and not more than $1,000 per violation. Each day that
a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 304 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 305
1:85

Part 4
ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES FOR
LOGAN TOWNSHIP VOLUNTEER FIRE COMPANIES
§ 401. Title. [Ord. 10-2-97]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Establishment of
Standard Operating Procedures for Logan Township Volunteer Fire
Companies."
§ 402. Purpose. [Ord. 10-2-97]
The purpose of this Part is to authorize the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Logan to establish standard operating procedures for all the
volunteer fire companies in Logan Township.
§ 403. Establishment of Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 10-2-97]
The Township is authorized to adopt and amend from time to time, by
Resolution, regulations including, but not limited to, standard operating
procedures to govern the authorized activities of all volunteer Fire
Companies as well as govern such other matters deemed appropriate by
the Township as authorized pursuant to Section 1803 of the Second Class
Township Code, 53 Pa. Stat. Ann. § 66803.
§ 404. Penalties. [Ord. 10-2-97]
Any Volunteer Fire Company located within the Township of Logan that
violates this Part, the Resolution or regulations promulgated thereunder
shall, at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, have Township funding
withheld and/or have the right to participate in fire fighting operations
within the Township revoked.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:87

Part 5
RECOVERY OF COST FOR FIRE SERVICES
§ 501. Reimbursement of Fire Companies Authorized. [Ord.
9-17-98]
The Township of Logan (hereinafter "Township") hereby authorizes its
Volunteer Fire Companies to collect from persons who use their services a
sum sufficient to reimburse the said fire company in full for the time and
effort spent by the said volunteer fire company.
§ 502. Reimbursement of Township Authorized. [Ord. 9-17-98]
The Township shall have the right to ask for reimbursement where services
are rendered by the Township under similar circumstances.
§ 503. Establishment of Charges. [Ord. 9-17-98]
For purposes of this Part, the charges for use of Township and/or Township
Volunteer Fire Companies emergency services equipment, materials and
personnel shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Logan from time to time.
§ 504. Civil Remedies. [Ord. 9-17-98]
The Township and/or any affected Township Volunteer Fire Company shall
have the right, in the event that the said payment is not made, to pursue
these remedies in the Court of Common Pleas of Blair County.
§ 505. Penalties. [Ord. 9-17-98]
In addition to any other remedy herein authorized, any person violating any
provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, by proceeding brought
by the Township before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 and/or to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 90 days. Every day that a violation of this Part continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 505
1:89

Part 6
ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE DISTRICTS
§ 601. Title. [Ord. 10-15-98]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Establishment of Fire
Districts and Recognition of Fire Companies."
§ 602. Purposes. [Ord. 10-15-98]
The purposes of this Part are to establish fire districts in the Township and
to recognize the fire companies authorized to fight fires in the established
districts as well as adopt standard operating procedures for the fire
companies recognized. This Part shall also establish authorized activities for
workmen's compensation purposes.
§ 603. Fire Districts Established. [Ord. 10-15-98]
There are hereby established five Fire Districts in the Township of Logan
the boundaries of which are identified and described as set forth in Exhibit
"A" attached hereto and incorporated herein.1
§ 604. Recognition of Fire Companies. [Ord. 10-15-98]
There are hereby officially recognized by Logan Township the following fire
companies with the recognition to be effective upon receipt by the Township
of written certification of existence by said fire companies:
§ 605. Assignment to Fire Districts. [Ord. 10-15-98]
The Fire Companies recognized in Section 4 hereof shall provide such
services as hereinafter set forth in those Fire Districts indicated in Exhibit
"A" attached hereto. Said Fire Companies are responsible to provide
Authorized Activities in the Fire Districts set forth in Exhibit "A", however,
the Township may establish regulations from time to time allowing the
Fire Companies to provide Authorized Activities in all Fire Districts of the
Township.
§ 606. Authorized Activities of Fire Companies. [Ord. 10-15-98]
A. United Fire (formerly Grandview and Juniata Gap).
B. Kittanning Trail.
C. Greenwood.
D. Lakemont.
E. Newburg (formerly Newburg and Mill Run).
1. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township Municipal Building.
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 606
1:91
§ 607. Authorized Activities of Members of the Fire Companies.
§ 608. Fire Company Mergers. [Ord. 10-15-98; as amended by Ord.
12-10-09A]
In the event a merger occurs between any of the Fire Companies recognized
in § 604 hereof, the appropriation of the Fire Companies undergoing such
merger shall be equivalent to the amount which would have been received
by each such Fire Company had no merger occurred. By way of example
only, if two Fire Companies, each of which receive $6,000 per year
appropriation from the Township merge, the newly created Fire Company
shall receive a $12,000 appropriation per year. Such "combined"
A. The Fire Companies recognized by the Township are hereby authorized
to provide such services to the Township as may be necessary for the
protection of property and persons situate therein which include, by
way of example and not of limitation, the extinguishment and
prevention of loss of life and property from fire, automobile accidents,
medical emergencies, hazardous materials incidents, and other
dangerous situations.
B. The Fire Companies may also provide non-emergency and public
service functions, such as, again by way of example and not of
limitation, removing water from property after storms, and assisting in
the removal, abatement and prevention of damage or injury to persons
or property, whether through natural causes or man-made situations.
C. The Fire Companies may also conduct and participate in such training
activities and drills either within or outside the Township, as may be
deemed necessary by the Township to maintain proficiency in providing
service.
D. The Fire Companies may also respond to calls and provide services to
Fire Districts and municipalities outside of the Fire Districts assigned to
such Fire Companies as permitted by the Township.
A. In addition to actually participating in the activities of the Fire
Companies as authorized above, or in going to or returning from any
activity, the members of the Fire Companies recognized by the
Township are also authorized to do the following things:
(1) Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice test or
parade when duly called for or authorized by the Township.
(2) Engage in fund-raising activities for the fire company, when
authorized by the fire company.
(3) Engage in the performance of any other duty or activity authorized
by the Township.
B. All such activities, unless otherwise provided, shall be funded by the
recognized Fire Companies.
§ 606 LOGAN CODE § 608
1:92
appropriation shall continue for a period of 10 years from the date of
the merger, as said date is determined by the Township at which time
the Township may adjust said appropriation; provided, however, that in
the event the newly created Fire Company shall retain and keep in full
operation, the physical plant of the fire station so merged such that said
merged fire company station shall be able to be the first responder to fight
fires in the Fire District where the fire station is located, then in that event,
the "combined" appropriation shall not cease after said ten-year period,
but shall continue until adjusted by the Township. The new created Fire
Company shall be responsible to provide Authorized Activities within the
Fire Districts previously assigned to the Fire Companies (as set forth in
§ 605 hereof) which were parties to the merger in question prior to the date
of the merger.
§ 609. Penalties. [Ord. 10-15-98]
Any Volunteer Fire Company and/or other entity and/or person that violates
this Part, any resolution or regulations promulgated thereunder shall, at
the discretion of the Board of Supervisors, have Township funding withheld
and/or have the right to participate in fire fighting operations within the
Township revoked, and/or if found to be in violation hereof by any District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300 and not more
than $1,000, and in default of payment thereof, to undergo a term of
imprisonment of up to 90 days.
§ 608 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 609
1:93

Part 7
SPECIAL FIRE POLICE
§ 701. Nomination, Annual Membership Status Review and Removal
From Membership. [Ord. 01-26-12C]
A. Special Fire Police Nomination. The volunteer fire companies
recognized in Chapter 7, Part 6, of the Code of Ordinances shall, from
time to time as they deem necessary, nominate for the position of Fire
Police individual fire fighters from among their membership who have
all of the qualifications set forth in § 702 of this Part 7. Said nominations
shall be in written form supplied to the Chief of Police of the Township
and, if approved by the Chief of Police, the same shall be forwarded to
the Board of Supervisors for consideration. In the event the Board of
Supervisors approves any such individual so nominated, such individual
shall be confirmed and sworn by the Chair of the Board of Supervisors
prior to entering upon their duties and shall thereupon be, subject to
this Part, a member of the "Township of Logan Special Fire Police".
Once having been confirmed as set forth herein, a member of the
Township of Logan Special Fire Police shall be subject to the control
and oversight by the Chief of Police of the Township as required by law.
B. Annual Membership Status Review. On an annual basis beginning
February 1, 2012 and every first day of February thereafter, each of the
volunteer fire companies recognized in Chapter 7, Part 6, hereof, shall
submit to the Chief of Police of the Township, a written roster of names
of the individual fire fighters that said fire company desires to continue
to have as special fire police members for the upcoming year. Said
roster shall indicate the name of such individual and certify that such
individual continues to have the qualifications set forth in § 702 of this
Part. The Chief of Police shall then submit such rosters to the Board of
Supervisors with such recommendations as the Chief may desire to
include. Upon consideration of the said rosters, the Board of
Supervisors may approve the same as submitted or may delete names
from the roster as said Board deems appropriate. Once such rosters, as
may be amended, are approved by the Board of Supervisors, those
individuals listed thereon shall continue to remain members of the
Special Fire Police subject to the provisions applicable law and of this
Part 6. The Chief of Police shall forward the rosters, as approved, to the
respective fire companies.
C. Removal From Membership. Every member of the Special Fire Police
shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors, and said Board
shall have the authority to remove any member of the Township of
Logan Special Fire Police at any time for any or no reason including, but
not limited to, conduct unbecoming a special fire police member; failure
to maintain any of the qualifications set forth in § 702 of this Part; and/
or upon recommendation from the Chief of Police and/or the fire
company of which the special fire police individual is a member. The
Board may remove such individual from membership as deemed
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 701
1:95
§ 702. Qualifications. [Ord. 01-26-12C; as amended by Ord.
06-08-17]
§ 703. Organization of Special Fire Police. [Ord. 01-26-12C]
All members of the special fire police shall meet, as often as they deem
appropriate and/or at the direction of the Chief of Police. Each fire company
having members who are also members of the fire police, as approved by
the Township, shall appoint one such approved member of the fire police as
captain who shall interact with the Chief of Police with regard to such fire
company's special fire police. In order to prevent unnecessary confusion in
carrying out their duties as assigned by the Chief of Police and for various
other reasons, the members of the Township of Logan Special Fire Police,
shall not be permitted to be members of any other organization relating
to special fire police (e.g., a county wide organization or otherwise) unless
authorized by the Chief of Police of the Township.
§ 704. Powers. [Ord. 01-26-12C]
When confirmed and sworn and displaying a badge of authority, special
fire police shall have full power to regulate traffic and keep crowds under
control at or in the vicinity of any emergency scene on which their
companies are in attendance and to exercise other limited police powers
necessary to facilitate and prevent interference with the work of firemen in
extinguishing fires. They shall also have limited police powers necessary to
appropriate at any time including by failing to include such individual's
name as part of the roster approved annually by the said Board.
1. No person shall be nominated for or appointed to the Township of
Logan special fire police who has not attained the age of 18 years. All
special fire police shall, at all times, be members in good standing of
one of the fire companies recognized by the Township as set forth in
Part 6 of this Chapter 7 and must maintain a valid driver's license. In
addition, essential functions of all special fire police include: standing
for extended periods of time in all seasons; the ability to hear and see
with or without normal corrective aids; and walking/standing without
assistance.
2. All persons, prior to appointment as special fire police, shall undergo all
necessary governmental criminal background checks (at the expense of
the Township) and shall be certified in basic fire police training and
within two years of such appointment as special fire police shall receive
certification in advanced fire police training, highway safety training,
emergency management training and any other such training required
by the Township from time to time.
3. Training/certifications shall be renewed at least every three years
during which the individual is a member of the special fire police. There
shall be at least 16 hours of related training to special fire police duties
required within every three-year period.
§ 701 LOGAN CODE § 704
1:96
perform their duties when functioning as special fire police at any function,
event or parade conducted by and under the auspices of a volunteer fire
company, or another event, function or parade conducted by and
organization other than a volunteer fire company, provided that the request
to perform these duties is made by the governing body of the city, borough,
town, Township or home rule municipality in which the event will be
conducted, or when accidents, floods or any other emergencies require
performance of traffic-control and crowd control duties. All members of the
special fire police shall be subject to the command and control of the officer
in command at the scene where a member is carrying out special fire police
duties regardless as to whether said officer in command is a police officer or
the fire commander on the scene. In the event there is both a police officer
and a fire officer in command of such scene, the member of the special fire
police shall be subject to the command and control of the ranking police
officer as required by law. Nothing herein contained shall authorize any
member of the Township of Logan Special Fire Police to take any form of
compensation for performing special fire police duties, unless authorized by
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Logan.
§ 705. Violations and penalties. [Ord. 01-26-12C]
Any person who shall interfere with or fail to comply with any lawful order
of any member of the special fire police while on duty and displaying his or
her lawful badge of authority shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not less than $20 nor more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution and,
in default of payment thereof, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 704 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 705
1:97
Chapter 8
FLOODPLAINS
§ 705 LOGAN CODE § 705
1:98
Part 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 101. Intent. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
§ 102. Permit from Administrator Required. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development
anywhere within the Township of Logan unless a permit has been obtained
from the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 103. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 104. Severability. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 105. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
1. The intent of this chapter is to:
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents by preventing excessive
development in areas subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
1. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 105
1:99
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
2. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Logan or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 105 LOGAN CODE § 105
1:100
Part 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 201. Designation of Floodplain Administrator. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
§ 202. Permits Required. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Township of Logan.
§ 203. Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
[Ord. No. 11-08-18]
1. The Director of Planning and Zoning is hereby appointed to administer
and enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain
Administrator." The Floodplain Administrator may: A) fulfill the duties
and responsibilities set forth in these regulations, B) delegate duties
and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or C)
enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency
or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another
entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to
the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR
59.22.
2. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
1. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit required pursuant to
this chapter, only after it has been determined that the proposed work
to be undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
2. Prior to the issuance of any permit pursuant to the chapter, the
Floodplain Administrator shall review the application for the permit to
determine if all other necessary government permits required by state
and federal laws have been obtained, such as those required by the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);2 the
Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended);3 the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as
amended);4 and the United States Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33
U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination has
been made.
2. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
3. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 203
1:101
§ 204. Application Procedures and Requirements. [Ord. No.
11-08-18]
3. During the construction period in the identified floodplain area, the
Floodplain Administrator or other authorized official shall inspect the
premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with
the information provided on the permit application and with all
applicable municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall make as many
inspections during and upon completion of the work as are necessary.
4. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
5. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Logan Township Board of
Supervisors for whatever action it considers necessary.
6. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity, or for the life
of the structure, all records associated with the requirements of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, permitting, inspection, finished
construction elevation, and enforcement.
7. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and the 2009
International Residential Code (IRC) or latest revisions thereof.
8. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program as requested.
9. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the Floodplain Administrator/
Manager.
1. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Township of Logan.
Such application shall contain the following:
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
C. Name and address of contractor.
§ 203 LOGAN CODE § 204
1:102
D. Site location, including address.
E. Listing of other permits required.
F. Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related costs and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
G. A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
H. Any other requirements of other laws, including but not limited to,
the UCC.
2. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances; and
B. All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards; and
D. Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement; and
E. Building materials are flood-resistant; and
F. Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
G. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
3. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
A. A completed permit application form.
B. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale, and date;
(2) Topographic contour lines, if available;
§ 204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 204
1:103
(3) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
C. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(1) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(2) The elevation of the base flood;
(3) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
D. The following data and documentation:
(1) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood; and
(2) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations; and
(3) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the effect of any proposed
development within a floodway area (See § 302, Subsection 1A)
will not increase the base flood elevation at any point.
(4) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE area/district (as identified on the
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) without floodway (See
§ 302, Subsection 1B) when combined with all other existing
and anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point; and
(5) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that any proposed development within a
floodway area will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point; and
(6) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
§ 204 LOGAN CODE § 204
1:104
§ 205. Review of Application by Others. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood; and
(a) Such statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development;
(7) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 402, Subsection 1F, Storage, and § 403, Development Which
May Endanger Human Life, including:
(a) The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 402, Subsection 1F, and 403
which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
(b) A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 403
during a base flood.
(8) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development"; and
(9) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(10) Elevation certificate. All permit applications involving
construction or modification to a structure, as defined in § 702,
shall include an elevation certificate, prepared by a licensed
professional engineer or registered surveyor, which designates
the regulatory flood elevation that the lowest floor of the
proposed structure must meet.
4. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality. The fee for a floodplain area permit shall be established
from time to time by the Board of Supervisors. Such fee shall be payable
at the office of the Township of Logan before the issuance of any
floodplain area permit, and no permit shall be issued until such fee is
paid. At the time of application for such permit, the fee provided above
shall be based on an estimate of construction cost approved by the
Floodplain Administrator.
§ 204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 205
1:105
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 206. Changes. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 207. Placards. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard,
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance and shall be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 208. Start of Construction. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
§ 209. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
1. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of a permit and shall be completed
within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit, or the permit
shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the
Floodplain Administrator. The "actual start of construction" means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of
construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
2. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit,
which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain
Administrator to approve such a request and the original permit is
compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the
extension is granted.
§ 205 LOGAN CODE § 209
1:106
§ 210. Appeals. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
1. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
A. Be in writing; and
B. Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; and
C. Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires; and
D. Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state; and
E. Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will affect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee, and/or agent, of
Logan Township shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall
pay a fine to Logan Township of not less than $25 nor more than $600
plus costs of prosecution. In default of such payment, such person shall
be imprisoned in county prison for a period not to exceed 90 days. Each
day during which any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute
a separate offense. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter with any judgment also being a municipal
lien on the real estate involved. The imposition of a fine or penalty for
any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse
the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Logan Township Board of Supervisors to be a public nuisance and
abatable as such.
1. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Logan Township Zoning Hearing Board. Such
§ 209 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 210
1:107
appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
2. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Logan Township Zoning Hearing
Board shall set a time and place, within not less than 10 or not more
than 30 days, for the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the
time and place at which the appeal will be considered shall be given to
all parties.
3. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Logan Township Zoning
Hearing Board may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as
provided by the laws of this State, including the Pennsylvania Flood
Plain Management Act.5
5. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 210 LOGAN CODE § 210
1:108
Part 3
IDENTIFICATION OF FLOODPLAIN AREAS
§ 301. Identification. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
§ 302. Description and Special Requirements of Identified
Floodplain Areas. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
1. The identified floodplain area shall be:
A. Any areas of the Township of Logan, classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 2,
2012, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital
data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
2. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by the Township of Logan and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
1. The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas:
A. The Floodway Area/District identified as floodway in the FIS/FIRM
which represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
by more than one foot at any point. This term shall also include
floodway areas which have been identified in other available
studies or sources of information for those special floodplain areas
where no floodway has been identified in the FIS/FIRM.
(1) Within any floodway area, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall not be permitted unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge; and
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base
flood elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:109
§ 303. Changes in Identification of Area. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Township
of Logan where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
(2) The AE Area/District without floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA and for which base flood elevations have
been provided in the FIS but no floodway has been delineated.
(a) No permit shall be granted for any construction,
development, use, or activity within any AE Area/District
without floodway unless it is demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development would not,
together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any
point.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located
within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse unless the appropriate permit
is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
1% annual chance flood elevations have been provided. For these
areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal, state,
or other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
(1) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant
to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
§ 302 LOGAN CODE § 303
1:110
becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 304. Boundary Disputes. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Logan Township Floodplain
Administrator, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination
may appeal to the Logan Township Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of
proof shall be on the applicant.
§ 305. Jurisdictional Boundary Changes. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 305
1:111

Part 4
TECHNICAL PROVISIONS
§ 401. General. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
1. Alteration or Relocation of Watercourse.
A. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
B. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
C. In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
2. When Logan Township proposes to permit the following
encroachments: 1) any development that causes a rise in the base flood
elevations within the floodway; or 2) any development occurring in
Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway which will
cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or 3)
alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR
65.12):
A. Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
B. Upon receipt of the FEMA Administrator's conditional approval of
map change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
C. Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, the applicant
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
3. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 401
1:113
4. Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements.
A. Residential Structures.
(1) In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to,
or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to,
or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with § 302, Subsection 1C, of this chapter.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most
recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential Structures.
(1) In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the
space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with § 302, Subsection 1C,
of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the WI or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some
other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect which states
§ 401 LOGAN CODE § 401
1:114
that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above-referenced standards.
(4) Any nonresidential structure that will be floodproofed must
submit the following to the Floodplain Administrator along
with the nonresidential floodproofing certificate and prior to
the issuance of the certificate of occupancy:
(a) An inspection and maintenance plan detailing the annual
maintenance of floodproofed components, ensuring that
all components will operate properly under flood
conditions. Components that must be inspected include at
a minimum:
1) Mechanical equipment such as sump pumps and
generators;
2) Flood shields and closures;
3) Walls and wall penetrations; and
4) Levees and berms (as applicable).
(b) Flood emergency operations plan detailing the procedures
to be followed during a flooding event, and must include
information pertaining to how all components will operate
properly under all conditions, including power failures.
The design professional must produce the plan. An
adequate plan must include the following:
1) An established chain of command and responsibility,
with leadership responsibilities clearly defined for all
aspects of the plan.
2) A procedure for notification of necessary parties when
flooding threatens and flood warnings are issued.
Personnel required to be at the building should have a
planned and safe means of ingress and should have no
other emergency response duties during a flood event.
Alternates should be assigned in the event that the
primary persons responsible are unable to complete
their assigned duties under the plan.
3) A list of specific duties assigned to ensure that all
responsibilities are addressed expeditiously. The
locations of materials necessary to properly install all
floodproofing components must be included in the list.
4) An evacuation plan for all personnel or occupants;
those without duties for the flood emergency as well
as those with duties for implementing the plan. All
possible ingress and egress routes must be identified.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 401
1:115
5) A periodic training and exercise program to keep
personnel and occupants aware of their duties and
responsibilities. Training drills should be held at least
once a year and should be coordinated with
community officials.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most
recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
5. Space Below Lowest Floor.
A. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
B. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
6. Historic Structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
7. Accessory Structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
§ 401 LOGAN CODE § 401
1:116
§ 402. Design and Construction Standards. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
A. The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
B. Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
C. The structure will have a low damage potential.
D. The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
E. Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
F. Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
G. Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
H. The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
I. For accessory structures that are 200 square feet or larger in area
(footprint) and that are below the base flood elevation, a variance is
required as set forth in Part 6. If a variance is granted, a signed
declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement) shall be
recorded on the property deed prior to issuance of the certificate of
occupancy. No variances shall be granted for a proposed accessory
structure that exceeds 600 square feet in size. A signed
nonconversion agreement is required as a condition of receiving
the variance.
1. The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:117
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to
and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage Facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
C. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with
all state and local regulations for such systems. If any such
system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
No. 348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages,"
and the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be
utilized.
D. Other Utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 402 LOGAN CODE § 402
1:118
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life,
and not listed in § 403, Development Which May Endanger Human
Life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of Buildings and Structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
I. Floors, Walls and Ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing
structural damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are waterresistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
J. Paints and Adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a
marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical Components.
§ 402 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:119
§ 403. Development Which May Endanger Human Life. [Ord. No.
11-08-18]
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units,
and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral movement.
(2) Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to remain water-resistant.
M. Fuel Supply Systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs. Refer to Section R322 of
the International Residential Building Code (IRC).
N. Uniform Construction Code Coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405),
as amended, and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply
to the above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to
the extent that they are more restrictive and supplement the
requirements of this chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402,
and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the
latest edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R322,
Appendix E, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
1. Development Which May Endanger Human Life.
A. General. The location of many types of activity within any
floodplain area may produce unnecessary dangers for the residents
of the Township of Logan and surrounding communities. As a
result, this chapter specifies particular types of activity that are
prohibited within identified floodplain areas. If a variance is
obtained in accordance with the criteria in Part 6, then the
following provisions apply.
§ 402 LOGAN CODE § 403
1:120
B. Prohibited Activities. Any new or substantially improved structure
which will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances or which will be used
by any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than
550 gallons or other comparable volume, or any amount of
radioactive substances) of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances on the premises, shall be prohibited in any identified
floodplain areas:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulfur and sulfur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
2. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection 1, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in Subsection 1, above, shall be elevated
to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 401 and 402.
3. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
§ 403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 403
1:121
§ 404. Special Requirements for Subdivisions. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 405. Special Requirements for Manufactured Homes. [Ord. No.
11-08-18]
Subsection 1 above shall be built in accordance with §§ 401 and 402,
including:
A. Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
B. Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
4. Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (United States
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992), or with
some other equivalent watertight standard.
1. Within any floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be prohibited. If
a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in Part 6, then the
following provisions apply:
A. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all
manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
B. Equipment Requirement:
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating units,
and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation and shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse,
and lateral improvement.
§ 403 LOGAN CODE § 405
1:122
§ 406. Special Requirements for Recreational Vehicles. [Ord. No.
11-08-18]
§ 407. Large Facilities Prohibited. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
(2) Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to remain water-resistant.
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009
International Residential Building Code or the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development's "Permanent
Foundations for Manufactured Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or
latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405
shall apply.
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the latest revision thereto as
adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units where
the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided or
were not established for the proposed unit's installation.
1. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must:
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
1. The following activities shall be prohibited within any identified
floodplain area. No variance shall be granted.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
§ 405 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 407
1:123

Part 5
EXISTING STRUCTURES IN IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREAS
§ 501. Existing Structures. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
The provisions of this Part do not require any changes or improvements to
be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is
made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 502 shall apply.
§ 502. Improvements. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
1. The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is
made to an existing structure located within any identified floodplain
area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any floodway area/district that would cause any
increase in BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within an AE Area/District without floodway that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 502
1:125

Part 6
VARIANCES
§ 601. General. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Logan Township Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief
from the strict application of the requirements.
§ 602. Variance Procedures and Conditions. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
1. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Logan Township
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures contained in
§ 210 and the following:
A. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area/district that would cause
any increase in the BFE.
B. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE than one foot at any point.
C. No variance shall be granted for development regulated by § 407,
Large Facilities Prohibited, or § 403, Development Which May
Endanger Human Life.
D. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by § 403, Development Which May Endanger Human
Life.
E. No variances shall be granted for a proposed accessory structure
that exceeds 600 square feet in size. A signed nonconversion
agreement is required as a condition of receiving the variance.
F. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
G. In granting any variance, the Logan Township Zoning Hearing
Board shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards
it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
H. Whenever a variance is granted, the Logan Township Zoning
Hearing Board shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 602
1:127
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
I. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Logan Township
Zoning Hearing Board shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) There is good and sufficient cause.
(2) Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) The granting of the variance will:
(a) Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
(b) Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
J. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Logan Township Board of Supervisors. In
addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be
included in the annual report to FEMA.
K. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting
the 1% annual chance flood.
§ 602 LOGAN CODE § 602
1:128
Part 7
DEFINITIONS
§ 701. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 702. Specific Definitions. [Ord. No. 11-08-18]
1. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood" or "1%
annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a
base flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually
expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings
or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets
and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining;
dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and
the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 702
1:129
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles,
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
§ 702 LOGAN CODE § 702
1:130
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational
vehicles and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more
than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MUNICIPALITY/TOWNSHIP — Township of Logan located in Blair
County.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this floodplain
management chapter, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures. Any construction started after September 28, 1984,
and before the effective start date of this floodplain management
chapter is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was
issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of permit
issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility, or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation that have been certified
either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(2)
D.
§ 702 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 702
1:131
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on
or after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
dated September 28, 1984, whichever is later, and, as such, would be
required to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or
before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated
September 28, 1984, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be
required to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is
shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and
subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing parks,
when such development is located in all, or a designated portion of, a
floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension
is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The "actual
start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 702 LOGAN CODE § 702
1:132
of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start
of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building
code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable
to new construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the
municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry.
Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted
the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building
Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with
the state floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references
to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the
IBC.
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed.
A.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement
of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified
by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions.
B.
§ 702 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 702
1:133
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or
(e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 702 LOGAN CODE § 702
1:134
Chapter 10
HEALTH AND SAFETY
§ 702 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 702
1:135

Part 1
PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 101. Title. [Ord. 6-69]
This Part shall be known as the "Logan Township Nuisance Ordinance."
§ 102. Definition. [Ord. 6-69]
"Public Nuisance" is the doing of or failure to do something that injuriously
affects safety, health or morals of the public, or works some substantial
annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt to the public.
§ 103. Nuisance Prohibition. [Ord. 6-69]
No person, persons, corporation, partnership, association or any entity
whatsoever, shall cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist a public
nuisance, on private or public property in Logan Township, Blair County,
Pennsylvania; including but not limited to, accumulations of garbage and
rubbish, storage of abandoned or junked automobiles, carrying on of any
offensive manufacture business, permitting a dangerous building or
structure to exist; or failing to remove or safely maintain an unused or
abandoned septic tank or well, and provided that such act or omission
constitutes a nuisance in fact.
§ 104. Remedies and Penalties. [Ord. 6-69; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; by Ord. 9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
1. Removal by Township. In the event an owner and/or occupant of any
premises violates § 103 of this Part by causing, maintaining or
permitting to exist a public nuisance on said premises, the Township
may give or cause to be given written notice to said owner and/or
occupant to remove or abate said public nuisance. The notice shall state
that unless the said public nuisance shall have been removed or abated
within such reasonable time as specified therein (but not less than 10
days) after the giving of notice, the Township may remove or abate such
public nuisance or cause it to be removed or abated at the cost and
expense of said owner and/or occupant. The Township is hereby
authorized to collect the cost of such removal or abatement, from the
owner and/or occupant in the manner provided for the collection of
municipal claims or by an action of assumpsit without the filing of a
claim and/or by whatever other legal proceeding the Township may
choose to institute. Nothing herein shall prevent the Township from
also enforcing violation of this Part in criminal summary proceedings or
provided herein.
2. Enforcement and Penalty.
A. Enforcement. Any police officer, the Building Permit Clerk and/or
any person authorized by the Board of Supervisors may enforce the
violation of this Part.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 104
1:137
B. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution,
and/or be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Every day that a violation of this Part continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense which shall be subject to
the aforesaid penalties.
3. Equitable Proceedings. The Board of Supervisors may institute
proceedings, in the name of Logan Township, in the Civil Division of the
Court of Common Pleas of Blair County for equitable relief in enforcing
the provisions of this Part.
4. Election. The Board of Supervisors may, in their discretion, utilize any
one or more of the above provisions and the use of any one provision
shall not constitute an election or bar to the use of any other provision.
§ 104 LOGAN CODE § 104
1:138
Part 2
CHEMICAL AND HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE CLEAN-UP
§ 201. Short Title. [Ord. 6-28-90]
This Part 2 shall be known as "The Township of Logan Chemical and
Hazardous Substance Clean-Up Ordinance."
§ 202. Definitions. [Ord. 6-28-90]
As used in this Part, the following words shall have the meaning so ascribed:
CHEMICAL — Any element, substance, chemical compound or mixture of
elements, substances or compounds, but shall not include an article as
defined in 35 Pa. Stat. Ann. § 7301 et seq., food, drugs or cosmetics as
defined in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. § 301 et
seq.), cosmetics, tobacco or products which are primarily intended for sale
on the retail market to the general public and are sealed in the packages to
be used therewith.
COMMON CARRIER — Any type of transportation used to carry chemicals
and/or hazardous substances through, over, or within the Township of
Logan, including, but not limited to, pipelines, railroads, airlines, trucks
and/or automobiles.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — Any chemical or mixture defined as
hazardous under Pennsylvania's Worker and Community Right-to-Know Act.
For the purposes of this Act, any hazardous mixture is a hazardous
substance. Hazardous substance shall also include any substance listed as
such under any Federal statute and/or regulation.
OWNER — The actual owner, agent or custodian of the common carrier
used to transport chemical and/or hazardous substances, and/or the actual
owner, agent or custodian of the chemical and/or hazardous substance
being transported or stored within, through or over any part of the
Township of Logan.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. The term
"person" as applied to association, shall include the responsible members or
general partners thereof, and as applied to corporation, the officers thereof.
§ 203. Liability for Transporting and Storage. [Ord. 6-28-90]
Any person, owner or lessee storing, either temporarily or permanently,
and/or transporting, by any manner including by common carrier, chemicals
and/or hazardous substances within, through or over any part of the
Township of Logan shall be liable to the Township of Logan and/or its
Police Department and/or its various volunteer fire companies to control,
extinguish and/or contain spills, leaks, fires or accidents involving said
materials.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 204
1:139
§ 204. Assessment of Costs. [Ord. 6-28-90]
The costs involved in the clean-up of spills, leaks, fires or accidents,
including assistance calls by the Township of Logan and/or its Police
Department and/or its various volunteer fire companies, shall be assessed
to the person, including but not limited to an owner, transporting and/
or storing said chemicals and/or hazardous substances. Said costs shall
include payment of special equipment and/or materials and/or labor
including, but not limited to, the following:
§ 205. Procedure for Payment. [Ord. 6-28-90; as amended by Ord.
9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
Bills for the amount of the above-described costs shall be prepared by the
Township Manager for labor cost and/or special equipment for all Township
employees and/or by Fire Chief or Chiefs of the particular volunteer fire
company and/or companies involved for all special equipment used in the
clean-up of said spills, leaks, fires and/or accidents. Bills prepared by the
Fire Chief or Chiefs shall be forwarded to the Logan Township Police
and Fire Coordinator for review, revision and written approval. Upon said
written approval by the Police and Fire Coordinator given to the respective
Fire Chief or Chiefs, the Fire Chief or Chiefs shall forward the said bill
to the above described liable person, owner or lessee. Bills prepared by
the Township Manager shall be forwarded directly to the above-described
liable person, owner or lessee. Payment must be made in full within 30
days from the date of making said bill or bills and in default thereof, the
Township Manager or, as the case may be, the Fire Chief or Chiefs shall
notify the Logan Township Police and Fire Coordinator who in turn shall
institute collection litigation through the Township Solicitor and/or criminal
prosecution.
§ 206. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 6-28-90; as amended by Ord.
9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
A. Special chemical protective clothing (i.e. disposable fully encapsulating
chemical suits, reusable butyl rubber splash and flash suits, breathing
apparatus, etc.).
B. Foam, dry chemical extinguishing agent, and/or any material used to
control and/or extinguish a fire in said material and/or incidents.
C. Absorbent material (i.e., sand, sawdust, clay, absorbent pigs, earth,
etc.).
D. Any other equipment and/or material deemed necessary by the Police
and Fire Coordinator of the Township of Logan or said Coordinator's
designated representative.
E. Wages, including fringe benefits paid by the Township of Logan to all
Township employees involved in the clean-up of spills, leaks, fires or
accidents mentioned herein.
§ 204 LOGAN CODE § 206
1:140
1. Enforcement. Any police officer, the Building Permit Clerk and/or any
person authorized by the Board of Supervisors may enforce the
violation of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 206 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 206
1:141

Part 3
NOISE NUISANCE
§ 301. Purpose and Scope. [Ord. 12-22-94B]
It is the purpose and scope of this Part 3 to provide regulations defining
the maximum sound levels that vehicles, appliances and equipment shall
be allowed to produce at specified distances from these devices, and also
to provide for the prohibition of other kinds of prohibited noises. These
regulations and prohibitions are intended to protect the physical, mental
and social well-being of the residents of the Township of Logan and to
foster mutual respect among residents with regard to living and working
environments being free of noise pollution.
§ 302. Application. [Ord. 12-22-94B]
This Part shall apply:
§ 303. Exemptions. [Ord. 12-22-94B]
The following devices are exempt from the provisions of these regulations:
1. To all types of vehicles, appliances, animals and equipment, whether
privately or publicly owned.
2. To sounds of any time duration.
3. To both the owner and operator of vehicles, appliances, equipment,
devices, animals or any other object creating noises.
4. The provisions of this Part are not intended to interfere with, abrogate
or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, including Title 18
(Crimes Code) and Title 75 (Vehicle Code), Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes. If more stringent requirements concerning noise abatement
are contained in the other rules, regulations or ordinances, the more
stringent regulation shall apply.
1. Aircraft (except model aircraft).
2. Police, fire, ambulance and other governmental emergency vehicles.
3. Back-up alarm devices on trucks and other equipment when installed
and operated in accordance with Society of Automotive Engineers
recommended practice J 994, "Criteria for Back-up Alarm Devices."
4. Governmental warning devices (i.e., civil defense and fire siren).
5. The provision, repair and maintenance of municipal services or public
utilities.
6. Bells, chimes and carillons used for religious purposes or in conjunction
with national celebrations or public holidays; existing bells, chimes and
carillons that are currently in use for any purpose.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 303
1:143
§ 304. Definitions. [Ord. 12-22-94B]
All acoustical terminology shall be that contained in ANSI S1.1, "Acoustical
Terminology." All other words not defined herein shall be used with a
meaning of standard usage. Words used in the present tense include the
future tense; the singular number includes the plural and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender
and words of feminine gender include masculine gender; the word
"includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example,
but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and
character; the words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may"
and "should" are permissive; the words "used" or "occupied" include the
words "intended, designed, maintained or arranged to be used or occupied."
ANSI — American National Standards Institute or its successors.
APPLIANCE — Any device or combination of devices used or capable of
being used as a means of accomplishing a desired end, such as a window air
conditioning unit.
DAY — The twenty-four-hour period starting at local midnight.
DAYTIME — 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. from October 1 to March 31 and 6:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. from April 1 to September 30.
DECIBEL (dB) — A unit of sound level which is a division of logarithmic
scale used to express the ratio of the sound intensity of the source of the
intensity of an arbitrarily chosen reference intensity. The ratio is expressed
on the decibel scale by multiplying its "base ten logarithm" by 10.
EQUIPMENT — Any devices or combination of devices to accomplish a
desired end, such as a chain saw, bulldozer, etc.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — Excessive noise is that sound which is:
7. Appliances, lawn and garden equipment, snow removal equipment and
household power tools in use between the hours of 7:00 a.m. (prevailing
time) and 9:00 p.m. (prevailing time) provided such are operated within
the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard noise reducing
equipment in use, unmodified, and in proper operating condition.
8. Air conditioners, fans, heating units and similar devices, provided such
are operated within the manufacturer's specifications and reasonable
measures are taken to reduce noise levels as approved by the Noise
Enforcement Officer.
9. Motor vehicles regulated by other rules, regulations or ordinances.
10. Musical, recreational and athletic events conducted by schools or local
government.
11. Activities permitted by special waiver, as provided herein, according to
the terms and conditions of said waiver; activities conducted in
accordance with a special activity permit approved by the Board of
Supervisors of Logan Township.
§ 303 LOGAN CODE § 304
1:144
FLUCTUATING NOISE — A fluctuating noise is a noise whose sound level
varies significantly with time.
IMPULSIVE NOISE — Impulsive noise is characterized by brief excursions
of sound level. The duration of a single impulse is usually less than one
second.
INTERMITTENT NOISE — An intermittent noise is a noise whose sound
level exceeds the ambient noise levels at least twice during the period of
observation, which is one minute or more. The period of time during which
the level of the noise remains at an essentially constant value different from
that of the ambient is on the order of one second or more.
NOISE — Noise is any sound emitted by a person, animal, vehicle,
appliance, equipment or other device and its environmental interaction.
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person appointed by the
Township of Logan with responsibility to enforce municipal ordinances and/
or, any sworn member of the Township of Logan Police Department.
PARTY — A social gathering.
PERSON — Either the owner or operator of vehicles, appliances, equipment
or devices whether an individual, firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, corporation or any other similar entity.
PERIOD OF OBSERVATION — The time interval during which acoustical
data are obtained. The period of observation is determined by the
characteristics of the noise being measured and the instrumentation being
used. The period of observation must be at least as long as the response
time of the instrumentation. The greater the variance in individual sound
level, the longer must be the observation time for a given expected accuracy
of measurement.
S.A.E. — Society of Automotive Engineers.
SOUND LEVEL (NOISE LEVEL) — Airborne sound levels are expressed
in dB and obtained by the use of specific frequency dependent weighing
networks, as specified in the referenced standards. The specific weighing
network used must be indicated by the proper notation. If the A-weighing is
employed, the sound level is identified as dB(A).
SOUND LEVEL METER — A sound level meter is an instrument, or
combination of instruments, which meets or exceeds the requirements for
an ANSI Type S1A or Type S2A Sound Level Meter.
STEADY NOISE — A noise whose level remains essentially constant (i.e.,
fluctuations are less than (5 dB) during the period of observation is a steady
noise.
Injurious or which unreasonably interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property. Measured noise levels in excess of limits
established in these regulations or those specified in valid permits are
declared to be excessive noises;
A.
B. Annoying to a person of ordinary sensibilities.
§ 304 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 304
1:145
VEHICLE — Any devise, or combination of devices, used for or capable
of being used for transporting persons or property. Vehicles include, but
are not limited to, the following: automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles,
motorized bicycles, snowmobiles, scooters, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts,
racers and like devices, farm machinery, industrial machinery, highway
graders, trailers, graders and semi-trailers.
§ 305. Enforcement. [Ord. 12-22-94B]
§ 306. Administration. [Ord. 12-22-94B]
The Township of Logan shall:
1. Abatement. Any emission of noise from any source in excess of the
limitation established in or pursuant to this Part herein described shall
be deemed and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be
abated, in addition to the administrative proceedings, fines and
penalties herein provided. Such abatement may be made by any
Ordinance Enforcement Officer, including Township police officers,
and/or may be made by order of the Court of Common Pleas of Blair
County on complaint or petition filed on behalf of the Township of
Logan.
2. Nothing in this Part shall be construed to impair any cause of action, or
legal remedy thereof, of any person or the public for injury or damage
arising from the emission or release into the atmosphere or ground
from any source whatever of noise in such place or manner, or at such
levels which may give rise to such cause of action.
3. The Noise Enforcement Officers of the Township of Logan shall:
A. Be qualified by training and experience to perform the necessary
measurements and procedures required to determine violations of
the provisions of this Part.
B. File complaints with the District Justice to prosecute any violation
of this Part.
C. Investigate complaints of violations of this Part and make
inspections and observations of noise conditions; and
D. May issue a warning to persons considered in violation of these
regulations, a warning which may allow an appropriate time not to
exceed 30 calendar days for correction to bring the offending
vehicle(s), appliance(s), equipment or other device(s) within the
provisions of these regulations before enforcement by prosecution.
1. Prepare and maintain records of all orders issued by the Noise
Enforcement Officers and the Appeals Board.
2. Issue all standards, permits, certificates, notices and other matters
required under the provisions of this Part and notify all persons
§ 304 LOGAN CODE § 306
1:146
§ 307. Appeals Board. [Ord. 12-22-94B]
An Appeals Board is hereby established consisting of the Board of
Supervisors to hear and decide cases regarding interpretations of this Part
and variances for undue hardship situations which may be granted in the
sole and absolute discretion of said Board.
§ 308. Noise Limitations. [Ord. 12-22-94B]
concerned of any decisions rendered and provide such persons with an
opportunity to be heard (as herein set forth).
3. Be permitted to issue a temporary waiver from strict compliance with
the noise standards specified herein to persons during emergency
circumstances, as determined by the Township Manager, to permit
reasonable time to effect repairs and/or adjustments to equipment,
appliances, instruments and other sound-emitting devices which, when
in use, exceed the noise level limits, provided that the use of such
devices shall be essential to preserve and protect health and safety or
to comply with other lawful rules, regulations and ordinances.
1. General. No person shall make, create, permit or cause to be made or
created, any excessive noise of any kind by crying, calling or shouting,
or by means of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, hammer, drum,
horn, hand organ, mechanically-operated piano, other musical
instrument, wind instrument, mechanical device, radio, phonograph,
sound amplifying or other similar electronic device unless said person
has obtained a permit from the Township as provided in Section 308(10)
herein.
2. Musical Instruments. No person shall use or perform on any hand organ
or other musical instrument or device, in any public way or public open
space of the Township unless said person has obtained a permit from
the Township as provided in § 308(10) herein.
3. Noise from Premises. No person owning, or in possession or control of
any building or premises, shall use the same, permit the use of the
same, or rent the same to be used for any business or employment or
residential use, or for any purpose of pleasure or recreation, if such use
shall, by its boisterous nature, disturb or destroy the peace of the
neighborhood as measured at or about the boundaries of the lot nearest
to the source of the alleged violation.
4. Equipment Noise. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any pile
driver, shovel, hammer, derrick, hoist, tractor, roller or other
mechanical equipment operated by fuel or electric power in building or
construction operations, including but not limited to road construction,
from 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of the following day, except as provided
herein unless such equipment has been manufactured or modified for
sound control and meets the provisions of this Part.
§ 306 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 308
1:147
5. Noise in Handling Refuse Cans. No person shall make any excessive
noise in the handling of ash, trash and garbage cans, either in loading
or unloading, whether full or empty.
6. Noise in Vicinity of Hospitals, Schools and Churches. No person shall
make any excessive noise in the vicinity of any hospital, or church
during hours of public worship, or school during school hours.
7. Unlawful to Keep Noisy Animals. No person shall keep, or permit to be
kept, harbor, or otherwise maintain any animal which shall disturb the
quiet of any public street or other public place, or of any neighborhood.
Provided, however, that a noisy animal shall be defined as one or more
animals which makes noises habitually, so as to constitute annoyance to
a person of ordinary sensibilities.
8. Noise by Peddlers. No peddler or other person who plies a trade or
calling of any nature on the streets of the Township shall use any horn,
bell, or other sound instrument to make any noise tending to disturb the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood, for the purpose of directing
attention to his wares, trade or calling.
9. Use of Horns and Other Devices on Vehicles. No person, operating any
vehicle, other than police, fire, public service or ambulance operators
shall sound any horn, bell, gong, siren, or whistle, except for the
ordinary horn installed on such vehicle by the manufacturer, or sound
any type of horn except when reasonably necessary to prevent
accidents or to otherwise comply with the law of motor vehicles.
10. The operational performance standards established by this Part shall
not apply to any public performance being conducted in accordance
with provisions of a permit obtained from the Township for the conduct
thereof.
11. Vehicles.
A. Operation on Publicly Owned Streets and/or Roads. No person shall
operate a motor vehicle, except as provided herein at any time or
under any condition of grade, load, acceleration or declaration in
such a manner as to exceed the following noise limits for the
category of motor vehicles based on a distance of 50 feet from the
center of the lane traveled or within the speed limit specified in this
section under test procedures established by § 310 of this Part.
§ 308 LOGAN CODE § 308
1:148
Type of Vehicle
Speed Limit of
35 MPH or
Less
Speed Limit of
35 MPH or
More
Any motor vehicle with a
manufacturer's gross
combination weight rating of
10,000 lbs. or more and any
combination of vehicles towed
by such motor vehicle
86 dB(A) 90 dB(A)
Any other vehicle or any
combination of vehicles towed
by such motor vehicle
76 dB(A) 82 dB(A)
Any motorcycle or motor
driven cycle
78 dB(A) 82 dB(A)
(1) This section applies to the total noise from a vehicle or
combination of vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting
or precluding the enforcement of any other provisions of this
code relating to motor vehicle mufflers for noise control.
(2) No person shall modify or change the exhaust muffler, intake
muffler or any other noise abatement device of a motor vehicle
so that the noise level is increased above that emitted by the
vehicle as originally manufactured. Procedures used to
establish compliance with this paragraph shall be those used to
establish compliance of a new motor vehicle with the
requirements of this Part.
(3) No person shall sell or lease or offer for sale or lease a new or
second-hand vehicle that produces a maximum noise
exceeding the noise limit a distance of 50 feet from the
centerline of travel as stated in § 308(11) of this Part. The
manufacturer, distributor, importer or designated agent shall if
requested certify in writing to the Township that his vehicles
sold or leased within the Township comply with the provisions
of this Part.
B. Operation of Vehicles Off Publicly Owned Streets or Roads. No
person shall operate a vehicle off a publicly owned street if such
use shall disturb or destroy peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
12. Equipment.
A. No person shall operate any powered equipment or powered hand
tool that produces a maximum noise level exceeding the following
noise limits at a distance of 50 feet, under test procedures
established by § 310 of this Part.
§ 308 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 308
1:149
§ 309. Use of Property. [Ord. 12-22-94B]
Type of Equipment Noise Limit
Construction and industrial machinery,
such as crawler-tractors, dozers, rotary
drills and augers, loaders, power
shovels, cranes, derricks, motor graders,
paving machines, off-highway trucks,
ditchers, trenchers, compactors,
scrapers, pavement breakers,
compressors and pneumatic power
equipment, but not including pile drivers
86 dB(A)
Powered commercial equipment of 2HP
or less intended for infrequent use in
residential areas, such as chain saws,
pavement breakers, log chippers,
powered hand tools, etc.
84 dB(A)
B. No person shall sell or lease or offer for sale or lease new or
second-hand equipment that produces a maximum noise exceeding
the noise limit at the distance of 50 feet as stated in § 308(12)(A)
above. The manufacturer, distributor, importer or designated agent
shall if requested certify in writing to the Township that his
equipment sold or leased within the Township complies with the
provisions of this Part.
1. Any property use established in a zoning district as defined and
designated under the provisions of the Township of Logan Zoning
Ordinance shall be such as to comply with the performance standards
governing noise set forth hereinafter for the district in which such use
shall be located.
2. Noise levels shall be measured in terms of the sound level in dBA using
a Sound Level Meter.
3. In all business and industrial zoning districts, at no point on the
boundary of any residential zoning district shall the sound level of any
individual operation or business, or the combined operations of any
person, firm or corporation exceed the dBA levels shown below for the
zoning district indicated from 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of the following
day, as measured under the test procedures established by § 310(2) of
this Part.
4. Maximum sound levels dB(A) along district boundaries as measured by
conventional sound level meters on slow response:
Residential Business/Industrial
A-scale levels 55 dB(A) 62 dB(A)
§ 308 LOGAN CODE § 309
1:150
§ 310. Test Procedures. [Ord. 12-22-94B]
§ 311. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 12-22-94B; as amended by
Ord. 2-13-97]
5. In business zoning districts, all activities involving the production,
processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair of materials, goods or
products, or any property use shall conform with the performance
standards stated above, provided that performance standards shall, in
every case, be applied at the boundaries of the lot on which any such
activities take place, except in such cases where the maximum
permitted sound levels may be exceeded at a more distant point.
6. In residential zoning districts, any property use shall conform with the
performance standards stated above for residential district boundaries
including, but not limited to, any party as defined herein, provided that
performance standards shall, in every case, be applied at the
boundaries of the lot on which such use is established, except in such
cases where the maximum permitted sound levels may be exceeded at a
more distant point.
7. The maximum sound levels established in this section to be applied to
the boundaries of a lot shall not apply to construction sites and
emergency operations. Construction site noise levels shall be regulated
by § 308(12) of this Part.
1. Test procedures to determine whether maximum noises emitted by new
motor vehicles sold or offered for sale or lease meet the noise limits
stated in § 308(12) of this Part shall be in substantial conformity with
standards and recommended practice established by the S.A.E.,
Incorporated, and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources as well as the United States Environmental Protection
Agency and such other and further standards as may be propounded by
the Township.
2. Test procedures to determine whether maximum noises emitted by
powered equipment or powered hand tools, sold or leased, or offered
for sale or lease, meet the noise limits stated in § 308(12) of this part
shall be in substantial conformity with Standards and Recommended
Practices established by the S.A.E., Incorporated and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources as well as the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and such other and further standards
as may be propounded by the Township.
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
§ 309 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 311
1:151
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 311 LOGAN CODE § 311
1:152
Part 4
9-1-1 PROPERTY ADDRESSING
§ 401. Renaming of Certain Public Streets. [Ord. 08-23-01; as
amended by Ord. 04-28-05; by Ord. 06-12-08B; and by Ord.
08-28-08]
The names of the existing public roads or streets identified below are
hereby changed to the names indicated and hereafter these streets or roads
shall be identified and officially recognized by the names hereby given:
Existing Road/Street Name New Road/Street Name
1st Avenue Windrose Avenue
2nd Avenue Heather Avenue
3rd Street Focht Street
3rd Avenue Neal Avenue
4th Avenue Amelia Avenue
4th Street Garden Street
5th Street Parrish Street
5th Avenue Schoolhouse Avenue
6th Street Forrest Street
7th Street Reid Street
8th Street Imler Street
9th Street Reimer Street
10th Street Brumbaugh Street
11th Street Clair Street
12th Street Stoney Street
17th Street (Newburg between 26th
Avenue & 25th Avenue)
Chartiers Street
17th Street (Newburg - 28th Avenue
to McConnell Lane)
Quad Street
30th Avenue Palm Springs Avenue
31st Avenue Eisenhower Avenue (Btwn Allegheny
& 32nd Aves)
31st Avenue Seaway Avenue (Btwn 3rd Street
and 4th Street)
31st Avenue (between 3rd & 4th
Streets)
Seaway Avenue
59th Street 60th Street
61st Street Beacon Street
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 401
1:153
Existing Road/Street Name New Road/Street Name
62nd Street 61st Street
Amelia Avenue (between Forrest
Street & Parrish Street)
Gage Avenue
Amelia Avenue (between Stillwood
Street & Forrest Street)
Jade Avenue
Beverly Boulevard Baker Lane
Chapel Hill Canterberry Drive
Cherry Street S. Pine Street
Clair Street (between Park Avenue
& Frankstown Road)
Stillwood Street
Clapper Drive Coral Drive
E. 1st Avenue (upper portion) E. Crawford Avenue
E. 7th Street and upper portion of E.
2nd Avenue
Ward Trucking Drive
Edison Avenue (southwest portion) Electric Avenue
Eyer Road Weaver Street
Gleichert Road Marjorie Road
Howard Avenue Meadow Lark Avenue
James Madison Road Dakota Lane
Juniata Street Priority Street
Leslie Avenue (between Spruce
Street & S. Pine Street)
Jasmine Avenue
Locust/48th Street (off 58th St) Windbrook Street
Logan Boulevard (Lakemont) South Logan Boulevard (Lakemont)
Mountain Drive Holly Ridge Drive
N. Pine Street Keystone Street
North Sprankle Avenue Legion Alley
Olde Dominion Dr (upper portion) Purdue Drive
Orchard Avenue (off Lookout
Avenue)
Eliminated
Park Avenue (0.64 miles) Osgood Drive
Park Drive Glenwood Drive
Pierce Street (off Kettle Street) City View Street
Pitt Road (Between Plateau Street &
Pottsgrove Road)
Winterberry Street
Pitt Road (off of Pottsgrove Road) Oxford Road
§ 401 LOGAN CODE § 401
1:154
Existing Road/Street Name New Road/Street Name
S. Colgate Lane Clarion Lane
Schoolhouse Avenue (between
Forrest St & Parrish Street)
Jaguar Avenue
Schoolhouse Avenue (by Lake
Avenue.)
Hawk Eye Lane
South Sprankle Avenue Bridge Street
Tulane Lane (eastern section off of
E. Pleasant Valley Boulevard)
Mercer Lane
Valley Avenue 48th Street
§ 402. Naming of Certain Private Roads/Streets. [Ord. 08-23-01; as
amended by Ord. 04-28-05; by Ord. 06-12-08B; by Ord. 08-28-08;
and by Ord. No. 11-08-18A]
The private streets/roads identified below shall be named and shall be
hereafter known by the names indicated:
Intersection w/Public/
Private Street Approx. Area
Name of Private
Street
30th Avenue above 29th
Avenue and 13th Street
15th Street 14th Street
35th Street S. 10th Avenue Concord Lane
Intersecting 49th Street Oak Avenue Pecan Avenue
58th Street Valley Avenue Vine Lane
Intersecting 59th Street Edison Avenue Copp Lane
Intersecting Avalon Road Juniata Gap Road McCloskey Lane
Intersecting Avalon Road State Route 36 Gill Lane
Beckers Lane Juniata Gap Road Blackhawk Lane
Bellmeade Drive Colgate Lane Robert Morris Lane
Intersecting Bellmeade
Drive
Driftwood Road Pine Manor Drive
Bloom Road Woomer Road Trinity Lane
Intersecting Bridge Street 6th Avenue Meyers Lane
Intersecting Bridge Street 6th Avenue Roundhouse Road
Intersecting Bridge Street 6th Avenue Yankee Lane
Intersecting Bud Circle
(private road)
Temple Lane Gene Lane
Intersecting Cashman Road Old Mill Run Road Husick Lane
Intersecting Clemson Road Colgate Lane Monte Drive
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:155
Intersection w/Public/
Private Street Approx. Area
Name of Private
Street
Cogan Lane Stephenson Street Carlow Lane
Colgate Lane Bellmeade Drive Grove City Lane
Colonel Drake Highway Miller Road Serenity Lane
Colonel Drake Highway Washington Avenue Delray Lane
Colonel Drake Highway Washington Avenue Talbot Lane
Davis Road Davis Road Aurora Lane
Davis Road Gleichert. Road Dewberry Lane
Deb Lane Roy Lane Deb Lane Ext
E. Hamilton Lane Sharon Avenue IUP Lane
E. Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Bucknell Lane Skidmore Lane
E. Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Lehigh Lane Kent State Lane
E. Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Lehigh Lane WVU Circle
Intersecting East Pleasant
Valley Boulevard
South Dartmouth
Lane
Deb Lane
E. Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
S. Dartmouth Lane Lock Haven Lane
Intersecting East Pleasant
Valley Boulevard
South Dartmouth
Lane
Roy Lane
E. Walton Avenue Pottsgrove Road Geneva Lane
Focht Street Windrose Avenue Flagstone Avenue
Fowler Lane Moyer Lane Hodge Lane
Gleichert Road Davis Road Quartz Lane
Gleichert Road Davis Road Ruby Lane
Grandview Road Davis Road Catskill Lane
Intersecting Grandview
Road
Homer's Gap Road Ferncliff Road
Grandview Road Homer's Gap Road Unity Lane
Intersecting Grandview
Road
Honey Suckle Lane Chester Lane
Grandview Road Kennedy Drive Prospect Lane
Grandview Road N. 5th Street Forbes Lane
Grandview Road N. 5th Street Lodge Lane
§ 402 LOGAN CODE § 402
1:156
Intersection w/Public/
Private Street Approx. Area
Name of Private
Street
Intersecting Granite Avenue Kettle Road Scenic Road
Intersecting Greenwood
Road
East 2nd Avenue Bennetti Road
Gwin Road (lower portion
Gwin)
Rider Farm Road Alpine Lane
Hillside Drive Electric Avenue Westlawn Lane
Homers Gap Road Falling Leaf Lane Hartwood Lane
Homers Gap Road Grandview Road Preston Lane
Intersecting Homer's Gap
Road
Nelson Road Falling Leaf Lane
Intersecting Homer's Gap
Road
Nelson Road McGough Lane
Intersecting Homer's Gap
Road
Nelson Road Moyer Farm Road
Intersecting Homer's Gap
Road
Nelson Road Moyer Lane
Homers Gap Road Nelson Road Sagemore Lane
Intersecting Homer's Gap
Road
Nelson Road Wolf Lane
Intersecting Hope Lane Avalon Road Bream Road
Intersecting Hope Lane Avalon Road Shady Road
Horseshoe Curve Road Leopold Park Boxcar Lane
Juniata Gap Road Avalon Road Antrim Lane
Intersecting Juniata Gap
Road
Cogan Lane Side Mountain Road
Intersecting Juniata Gap
Road
Cogan Lane White Fox Road
Intersecting Juniata Road South Dartmouth
Lane
Ivan Lane
Intersecting Juniata Road South Dartmouth
Lane
Will Lane
Intersecting Kettle Road Interstate 99 Dale Circle
Intersecting Mill Run Road Old Mill Run Road Karler Lane
Intersecting Mill Run Road Wingate Lane Eagle Lane
Mill Run Road Willow Drive Pebble Lane
N. 3rd Street N. 16th Avenue Windbrook Lane
§ 402 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:157
Intersection w/Public/
Private Street Approx. Area
Name of Private
Street
N. 3rd Street N. 20th Avenue Holbrook Lane
N. 5th Street Grandview Road Green Thumb Avenue
N. 8th Street Old 6th Avenue Rose Yard Road
N. 15th Avenue N. 11th Avenue Western Lane
Intersecting Oak Avenue 58th Street 49th Street
Intersecting Old Mill Run
Road
Weaver Street Eyers Lane
Old Mill Run Road Clapper Road Dream Lane
Penn Street (upper portion) Grandview Road Lawn Lane
Intersecting Philip Lane
(private road)
St. Francis Lane Andrew Lane
Intersecting Philip Lane
(private road)
St. Francis Lane Elizabeth Road
Intersecting Philip Lane
(private road)
St. Francis Lane James Drive
Intersecting Philip Lane
(private road)
St. Francis Lane Katherine Road
Intersecting Philip Lane
(private road)
St. Francis Lane Kenneth Road
Intersecting Pierce Street Reiling Lane Knob Lane
Pleasant Valley Boulevard Hawthorne Lane Equestrian Lane
Intersecting Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Temple Lane Bud Circle
Intersecting Poland Avenue Edison Avenue Shoenfelt Lane
Intersecting Poland Avenue Novak Road Fay Lane
Ponderosa Drive Denby Lane Cross Creek Drive
Intersecting Porta Road Coburn Feather Lane
Intersecting Princeton Road Cornell Lane Bucknell Extension
Intersecting Princeton Road Greenwood Road Melanie Lane
Intersecting Princeton Road Greenwood Road Rhett Lane
Intersecting Princeton Road Greenwood Road Scarlet Lane
Intersecting Princeton Road Greenwood Road Tara Lane
Princeton Road Lehigh Lane Wesley Lane
Rose Yard Road Old 6th Avenue Car Shop Road
Rose Yard Road Old 6th Avenue Coal Tower Road
§ 402 LOGAN CODE § 402
1:158
Intersection w/Public/
Private Street Approx. Area
Name of Private
Street
Intersecting Rosehill Drive
Extension
Greenwood Stanford Lane
Rutgers Lane Pottsgrove Road Gonzaga Lane
Rutgers Lane Rosehill Drive Ext. Pace Lane
Rutgers Lane (upper
portion)
Rosehill Drive Ext. Hanover Lane
Sandy Run Road Foxglove Road Heritage Lane
Intersecting Sandy Run
Road
South Dartmouth
Lane
Foxglove Street
Intersecting Sandy Run
Road
South Dartmouth
Lane
Primrose Lane
Intersecting Sandy Run
Road
South Dartmouth
Lane
Shroeder Street
Scarlet Lane S. Temple Lane UCLA Lane
S. 10th Street Porta Road Craft Lane
Intersecting South
Dartmouth Lane
East Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Orr Hill Road
Intersecting South
Dartmouth Lane
Sandy Run Road Penny Lane
S. Dartmouth Lane Clairmont Drive Madden Lane
S. Dartmouth Lane Sharrar Drive Mercyhurst Lane
Intersecting South
Dartmouth Lane
St. Francis Lane Philip Lane
S. Logan Boulevard Rosewell Street Solar Lane
Spook Hollow Road N. 11th Avenue Haymaker Lane
Intersecting State Route 36 Avalon Road Clover Lane
Intersecting State Route 36 Lecrone Road Bernard Lane
Intersecting State Route 36 Shannon Road Gazebo Lane
Intersecting State Route 36 Washington Avenue Elwood Lane
Intersecting Temple Lane East Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Moss Road
Intersecting Temple Lane East Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Shallow Lane
Intersecting Temple Lane East Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Thistle Road
Timberline Drive Longview Drive Tahoe Street
§ 402 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:159
Intersection w/Public/
Private Street Approx. Area
Name of Private
Street
Intersecting Timberline
Drive
Poland Avenue Timberline Drive
Extension
Utah Road LaSalle Lane James Madison Lane
Intersecting Weaver Street 14th Avenue Marie Lane
Weaver Street S. 11th Avenue Mobile Lane
Willow Drive Red Hill Breezy Country Lane
Willow Drive Wyngate Farms Road Orpwood Lane
Intersecting Wingate Road Koeck Drive Rita Lane
§ 402.1. Renaming of Certain Private Streets. [Ord. 04-28-05; as
amended by Ord. 06-12-08B; and by Ord. 08-28-08]
The names of the existing private roads or streets identified below are
hereby changed to the names indicated, and hereafter these streets or
roads shall be identified and officially recognized by the names hereby
given:
Existing Road/Street Name New Road/Street Name
17th Street (Newburg between
Washington Avenue and 16th Street)
Angus Lane
30th Avenue above 29th Avenue and
13th Street
14th Street
Catherine Street Extension Hen House Lane (off E. Granite
Avenue)
N. 15th Avenue (above N. 5th
Street)
Mosside Circle
Orchard Avenue (0.10 mile) Doral Avenue
Rutgers Lane (upper portion) Hanover Lane
Timberline Drive Longview Drive
Wopsononock Avenue (0.15 mile) Arbor Avenue
§ 403. Street Number Regulations. [Ord. 08-23-01]
The owners of all buildings or property within Logan Township to which
street numbers have been assigned by the Blair County 9-1-1 System and
U.S. Postal System shall have the street number prominently displayed at
all times in accordance with the following standards. For purposes of this
Part a "street number" is an address number established in accordance with
the County wide 9-1-1 system with reference to the adjacent road or street,
assigned and given to a particular building or property by the Blair County
9-1-1 Agency and U.S. Postal Service.
§ 402 LOGAN CODE § 403
1:160
§ 404. Private Road Name Signs. [Ord. 08-23-01]
The owner or owners of all private drives, roadways or easements used for
vehicle access to multiple properties where the drives and roadways are
not recognized as Township roads and which is referenced in the address of
property owners whose residence or business abuts said private drives or
roadways shall, in addition to the other requirements set forth in this Part,
maintain and replace (in the exact location established by the Township)
when needed, the sign and sign post, which shall be initially erected by
the Township, at the Township's cost, which identifies the private road or
private drive name as adopted by the Township.
§ 405. Prohibited Activity. [Ord. 08-23-01]
It shall be unlawful to cover, conceal, obstruct, destroy, remove, deface
or vandalize any street number or road/street name sign or placard and
any post containing the same, installed or displayed pursuant to and in
accordance with the requirements of this Part.
A. Each building to which a street number has been assigned shall have a
street number displayed upon the building except that for buildings
which are located a distance greater than 50 feet from the nearest
public roadway or upon which signage cannot be attached which would
be readable from the nearest public roadway by reason of natural or
manmade obstructions. The owner of said property shall be required to
provide posted signage within 20 feet of the public roadway, which post
shall have affixed thereon the street number which has been assigned
to the building, or such other posted sign as may be approved by the
Township.
B. The assigned street numbers shall be either affixed directly to the
building or post or displayed upon a sign affixed to the building or post.
The street number shall be displayed in such a manner that the
numbers will contrast in color with the background and will be
observed and readable from the nearest public or private roadway. All
numbers shall be in standard arabic numerals, not less than four inches
in height and not less than 1/2 inch in width, or such sizes as may be
approved by the Township. It is recommended that the numbers be
reflective for greater nighttime visibility.
C. If, for any reason, the street number of a particular building is not
readily identifiable by posted sign along the roadway whether due to
the proximity of multiple buildings with different street numbers or
some other reason, then the street number should be affixed to the
building as well as posted by the road. Similarly, if a single building has
multiple street numbers or apartment numbers such as a professional
building or apartments, a building directory should be posted at the
main entrance of the building.
§ 403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 406
1:161
§ 406. Enforcement. [Ord. 08-23-01]
Upon determining that a building or property owner has not complied
with the street numbering or road name sign regulations of this Part, the
Township, through the Code Enforcement Officer, or such other person as
may be designated by the Township Manager from time to time, may pursue
any of the following enforcement remedies:
A. Provide written notice to the owners, occupants and other persons in
possession of buildings or property which has not been numbered in
accordance with these regulations, of the violation, the need to comply,
and the time within which compliance must be accomplished.
B. In the event that persons persist in refusing to comply with these
regulations despite notices to do so, the Township Code Enforcement
Officer may issue a written order directing the owners, occupants or
others in possession of the buildings or property in violation of this Part
to comply with the applicable requirements of this Part. Any person who
is aggrieved by any order issued pursuant to this Part may appeal to the
Township Supervisors by filing a written notice of appeal with the office
of the Township Manager within 10 days of the date of the subject
order. The Township Supervisors shall, within 45 days of the receipt of
the written notice schedule a time, during a public meeting of the
Supervisors, to consider the said written appeal, and any other
comments offered by said person and, at said public meeting, or such
later date established by the Supervisors not later than 14 days
thereafter, either affirm, reverse and/or modify the order of the Code
Enforcement Officer. Notice of the public meeting date and time shall
be given to the person filing the appeal at least 10 days in advance of
said meeting.
C. In the event the property owners or occupants or possessors fail or
refuse to take action in accordance with the notice and an order issued
pursuant to this Part, the Township may provide the sign, as necessary,
in order to bring the property owner(s) into compliance with the
standards promulgated in this Part. The Township may recover the cost
of materials and labor for the purchase and installation of sign from the
property owners, occupants or possessors and reasonable
administrative fees, interest or other charges allowed by law. In the
event the owners, occupants or possessors of the subject property fail
to pay the cost of such installation as determined and approved, then
the Township may institute proceedings at law to collect the full costs
together with all penalties, interest, fees, and other charges which are
authorized by applicable law, or may take action to assess these costs
and charges against the premises and the owners thereof and collect
same as a municipal lien or may take other action to collect these sums
as may be permitted by law. The Township may pursue any, all or a
combination of any of the said remedies, as the Township may decide.
§ 406 LOGAN CODE § 407
1:162
§ 407. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. 08-23-01]
Any person who shall be found to have engaged in the prohibited unlawful
conduct as set forth in this Part, shall be guilty of a summary offense and
shall upon conviction be sentenced to pay a fine of no less than $100 and no
more than $600, together with court costs, and upon default in payment of
the fine, shall be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 10 days.
§ 408. Authorization of Officers. [Ord. 08-23-01]
The proper officers of the Township are hereby authorized to take necessary
and proper action to establish, implement and enforce the standardized
system of property address numbering and street/road name sign
placement as provided for in this Part and to comply with the requirements
of the Automatic Location information needs of the Blair County 9-1-1
system.
§ 409. Effective Date. [Ord. 08-23-01]
The provisions of this Part shall become effective upon the United States
Postal Service approval of street names and numbering for Logan Township.
§ 410. Severability. [Ord. 08-23-01]
Should any section, part or provision of this Part be, declared by
appropriate authority to be unlawful or unconstitutional, all other terms,
conditions, provisions and parts hereof, and of any Code of which this Part
may be or may be considered to be part, shall continue in full force and
effect as if the provision declared to be unlawful or unconstitutional had
been omitted as of the date of final enactment hereof.
§ 411. Repealer. [Ord. 08-23-01]
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 407 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 411
1:163

Part 5
REGULATION OF OUTDOOR FURNACES
§ 501. Authority. [Ord. 04-24-08B; as amended by Ord. 04-09-09]
This Part is enacted pursuant to the specific powers granted to the
municipality in the Township Code at 53 P.S. § 66527 with respect to health
and safety of Township residents. Additionally, this Part is enacted pursuant
to the specific powers granted to the municipality with respect to public
nuisances found at 53 P.S. § 66529.
§ 502. Purpose. [Ord. 04-24-08B; as amended by Ord. 04-09-09]
It is the purpose of this Part to establish and impose restrictions upon
the construction and operation of outdoor furnaces within the limits of the
Township of Logan for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the Township
and its inhabitants. It is generally recognized that the types of fuel used
and the scale and duration of the burning by such furnaces create noxious
and hazardous smoke, soot, fumes, odor, air pollution, particles and other
products of combustion that can be detrimental to citizens' health and
can deprive neighboring residents of the enjoyment of their property or
premises.
§ 503. Findings. [Ord. 04-24-08B; as amended by Ord. 04-09-09]
Smoke emitted from outdoor furnaces, chimneys, smokestacks and/or other
sources of smoke as part of building heating systems not meeting the
regulations of this Part shall constitute a nuisance and shall be a danger to
the health and general welfare of the citizens of the Township due to the
noxious fumes, reduction in breathable air, and risk to asthmatics and those
with allergies.
§ 504. Definitions. [Ord. 04-24-08B; as amended by Ord. 04-09-09]
ACCEPTABLE FUEL — All natural wood products, (dried and without
additives), coal, # 2 heating oil, agricultural seeds in their natural state and
without additives.
BUILDING HEATING SYSTEMS — Includes, but not be limited to, an
"outdoor furnace".
OUTDOOR FURNACE — Any equipment, device, apparatus or structure or
any part thereof which is installed, (excluding pre-existing flues for in-home
heating systems) affixed or situated outdoors for the purpose of combustion
of any type of fuel to produce heat or energy used as a component of a
heating system providing heat for an interior space and/or water source.
UNACCEPTABLE FUEL — The following types of materials:
Wood that is wet and/or has been painted, varnished or coated with
similar material, pressure treated lumber, wood containing
A.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 504
1:165
§ 505. Regulations. [Ord. 04-24-08B; as amended by Ord. 04-09-09]
preservatives, resins, glue as in plywood, particle board or other
composite wood, railroad ties.
Garbage, municipal waste (both as defined in Chapter 20 of the
Township of Logan Code of Ordinances) or rubbish, including but not
limited to food waste, food packaging, food wraps.
B.
Any recycling materials (as defined in Chapter 20 of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances) such as plastic materials including but not
limited to nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic
fabrics, plastic films and plastic containers.
C.
Rubber including tires or other synthetic rubber-like products,
linoleum, asphalt or tarry products (roofing paper or shingles).
D.
Newspaper, cardboard, leaves or any paper with ink or dye and any
other items not specifically allowed by the manufacturer or this
provision.
E.
1. Outdoor furnaces shall not be placed less than 100 feet from the
nearest point of intersection of any other adjacent property owner's
structure and shall have a chimney stack, smokestack and/or other
source of smoke utilized for the purposes of emitting smoke from a
building heating system of a size required pursuant to the
manufacturer's specifications. Said chimney stack shall also have a
spark arrestor installed on top.
2. Outdoor furnaces shall not be placed less than 20 feet from the nearest
point of intersection of the property line of another property owner.
3. An area of 20 feet around the outdoor furnace structure shall be free of
combustible material, including vegetation, except grass not exceeding
four inches in height.
4. The minimum required lot size for an outdoor furnace is 40,000 square
feet.
5. Outdoor furnaces shall burn only acceptable fuel and shall not burn
unacceptable fuel.
6. Outdoor furnaces and associated installation shall be subject to
inspection by the Township Code Enforcement Officer at any
reasonable time to assure compliance with the terms hereof.
7. Outdoor furnace installation is subject to the permit provisions of the
other Township ordinances including, but not limited to, building code
ordinances including furnishing the following information:
A. A drawing providing and identifying all of the information
necessary to assure compliance herewith, including property lines,
§ 504 LOGAN CODE § 505
1:166
§ 506. Enforcement. [Ord. 04-24-08B; as amended by Ord.
04-09-09]
If noncompliance with the provisions of this Part constitutes a nuisance, or
if any condition poses a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public,
the Police Department or Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a written
notice to be served by registered or certified mail upon the owner of said
premises, or, if the owner's whereabouts or identity be unknown, by posting
the notice conspicuously upon the offending premises.
Said notice shall specify the condition complained of and shall require the
owner to commence to remove or otherwise rectify the condition as set forth
therein within 30 days of mailing or posting of said notice, and thereafter, to
fully comply with the requirements of the notice within a reasonable time.
§ 507. Penalty. [Ord. 04-24-08B; as amended by Ord. 04-09-09]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, and in default of
payment, to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each
day that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 508. Status of Existing Outdoor Furnaces. [Ord. 04-24-08B; as
amended by Ord. 04-09-09]
This Part shall not be construed to be retroactive and shall not require the
removal of any outdoor furnace or component thereof in existence within
the Township at the effective date of this Part and not compliant with the
setback provisions of this Part. All outdoor furnaces in existence at the
effective date of this Part shall comply with all other regulations set forth
herein within 90 days of the date of enactment of this Part, including but
not limited to, the erection of a flue or chimney stack of a size required
pursuant to the manufacturer's specifications. If an outdoor furnace is more
location of neighboring properties and structures, height of nearby
buildings, etc.
B. Manufacturer's specifications for the outdoor furnace.
C. Compliance with all applicable State and Federal statutes including
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the
Underwriter's Laboratory (UL) listing.
8. Nothing contained herein shall authorize any installation that is a
public or private nuisance, regardless of compliance herewith.
9. This Part shall not be a defense to any civil claims.
10. Unless otherwise prohibited, burning in Outdoor furnaces shall be
permitted only from September 1 through and including May 31 of any
year.
§ 505 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 508
1:167
than 50% dismantled, damaged, deteriorated or otherwise reduced to 50%
of its original design, any rebuilding or restoration of said outdoor furnace
shall comply with the provisions of this Part.
§ 509. Variances. [Ord. 04-24-08B; as amended by Ord. 04-09-09]
The Township Supervisors may grant variances based upon a presentation
of unique factors rendering restrictions set forth herein to be both
unnecessary for the protection of the public health safety and welfare and
impractical or not feasible with which to comply. Such variances, if granted,
shall have a term of one year and be automatically renewed in the absence
of complaints or other problems. Any such variance granted may contain
such provisions as the Township Supervisors may deem necessary to protect
the health, safety and welfare of Township residents and to prevent a
nuisance. Any person granted a variance shall indemnify, defend and hold
harmless the Township from any liability that may arise wholly or partially
out of the granting of the variance.
§ 508 LOGAN CODE § 509
1:168
Chapter 11
HOUSING
§ 509 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 509
1:169

Part 1
STUDENT RENTAL UNIT OCCUPANCY REGULATIONS
§ 101. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. 02-13-14A]
It is the purpose of this Part and the policy of the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Logan (Township), in order to protect and promote the public
health, safety and welfare of its citizens, to establish rights and obligations
of owners and occupants relating to the rental of certain dwelling units and
dormitory units in the Township and to encourage owners and occupants
to maintain and improve the quality of student rental housing within the
community. It is also the policy of the Township that owners, managers
and occupants share responsibilities to obey the various codes adopted
to protect and promote public health, safety and welfare. As a means
to those ends, this Part provides for a system of inspections, issuance
and renewal of occupancy licenses, and sets penalties for violations. This
Part shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its purposes and
policies. Although the Board of Supervisors of the Township acknowledges
the significant contribution that educational institutions, their students,
faculty and staff make to the culture and economy of the Township and
surrounding area, in recent years, adverse effects of student housing on
residential neighborhoods have increased, and there has been an increase
in destructive student behavior that threatens the health, safety and welfare
of the student citizens and nonstudent citizens of the Township. Accordingly,
in considering the adoption of this Part, the Township makes the following
findings:
A. When compared to other unrelated cohabitating individuals and
traditional families, groups of students have different hours, work and
social habits and frequently cause noise, disturbances and problems in
residential neighborhoods.
B. There is a greater incidence of violations of various codes of the
Township at residential properties where owners rent such property to
students.
C. There is a greater incidence of disturbances which adversely affect the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood at residential properties where
owners rent to students than at owner-occupied residential properties,
family-occupied residential rental properties or residential properties
that are occupied by unrelated persons who are not students.
D. A concentration of student homes changes the character of a
neighborhood from one with traditional family values to one that cannot
maintain those; and most of the Township's student homes are
concentrated in the Juniata Gap and Grandview areas of the Township,
which displaces middle- and lower-income housing by absorbing
housing units and rendering the remaining units less desirable for
more-traditional residential use.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:171
§ 102. Definitions. [Ord. 02-13-14A]
For the purpose of interpreting the provisions of this Part, the following
words shall have the meaning or meanings ascribed. All other words not
defined herein shall be used with a meaning of standard usage. Words
used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number
E. Since January 2003, 1,701 reports of disruptive conduct under the
Township's Disorderly Gathering Ordinance involving student behavior
have been filed.
F. Since January 2003, the Township emergency service providers have
responded to 238 false fire alarms to student housing units.
G. Since January 2003, 1,097 prosecutions for underage drinking have
been filed against students, and 70 prosecutions were filed against
nonstudent residents of the Township.
H. Since January 2003, 290 student parties have been raided where
arrests were made for underage drinking and furnishing alcohol to
minors.
I. There are sufficient differences between student housing and
nonstudent housing and the behavior of students and nonstudent
residents to justify different regulations for each class of resident.
J. There is a significant occurrence of disruptive behavior in dwelling
units occupied by students as compared to dwelling units that are
occupied by owners, traditional families or unrelated persons who are
not students.
K. Students who remain in the occupancy of the premises for periods of
time after they are no longer students contribute to the abovedescribed
problems.
L. Because of the demand for student housing in the Township, developers
have expressed interest in developing properties for use as student
homes.
M. Dormitory-type uses are not covered by the Regulated Rental Unit
Occupancy Ordinance, which applies only to dwelling units.
N. The Board of Supervisors of the Township is desirous of providing the
same protection and standards for students who reside in dormitories
or dwelling units.
O. The Board of Supervisors of the Township is desirous of imposing the
same responsibilities upon owners of dormitory units and dwelling units
where students reside.
P. The Board of Supervisors of the Township finds that Penn State Altoona
has sufficient resources and interest to properly manage dormitories
owned by it, and there is no need to regulate such dormitories.
§ 101 LOGAN CODE § 102
1:172
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of
masculine gender include feminine gender, and words of feminine gender
include masculine gender; the word "includes" or "including" shall not limit
the term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to
all other instances of like kind and character; the words "shall" and "must"
are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are permissive; the words
"used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed, maintained or
arranged to be used or occupied."
CODE — Any code or ordinance adopted, enacted and/or in effect in and
for the Township concerning fitness for habitation or the construction,
maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any premises
or dwelling unit or dormitory unit and any duly enacted amendment or
supplement to any of the above and any new enactment falling within this
definition.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed Code Enforcement
Officer(s) having charge of the Office of Code Enforcement of the Township
and any assistants or deputies thereof.
COMMON AREA — Any open area within a structure shared by occupants
or that the occupants have the right to share, including, but not limited
to, kitchens, bathrooms, living rooms, dining rooms, attics, basements and
any room used for parties, social events or the congregation of people,
excepting bedrooms.
COMMUNITY LIVING FACILITY AND/OR ARRANGEMENT — A living
arrangement whereby unrelated individuals with diagnosed mental health
or mental retardation problems reside on a permanent basis with twentyfour-
hour supervision and whose primary purpose is the development and
maintenance of community living skills, and as defined in Chapter 27,
entitled "Zoning."
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any form of conduct, action, incident or
behavior perpetrated, caused or permitted by any occupant or visitor of a
regulated dwelling unit or dormitory unit that is so loud, untimely (as to
hour of the day), offensive, riotous or that otherwise disturbs other persons
of reasonable sensibility in their peaceful enjoyment of their premises such
that a report is made to police complaining of such conduct, action, incident
or behavior, including, but not limited to disorderly gatherings as set forth
in Chapter 6, entitled "Conduct," Part 4, of the Township's Code of
Ordinances. It is not necessary that such conduct, action, incident or
behavior constitutes a criminal offense nor that criminal charges be filed
against any person in order for a person to have perpetrated, caused
or permitted the commission of disruptive conduct, as defined herein;
provided, however, that no disruptive conduct shall be deemed to have
occurred unless the police shall investigate and make a determination that
such did occur and keep written records, including a disruptive conduct
report, of such occurrence.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A written report of disruptive conduct
on a form to be prescribed therefor, to be completed by the police, as the
§ 102 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 102
1:173
case may be, who actually investigates an alleged incident of disruptive
conduct, and which shall be maintained by the Code Enforcement Officer.
DORMITORY UNIT — A room or group of rooms within a dwelling unit and
forming a single unit and used for living and sleeping purposes, having
a bathroom with a toilet and a bathtub or shower, but no fixed kitchen
facilities. The Term "dormitory unit" shall include, but shall not be limited
to, fraternity and sorority houses.
DWELLING — A building having one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, including "apartments," used for
living and sleeping purposes, having a kitchen or kitchenette with fixed
cooking facilities and a bathroom with a toilet and bathtub or shower.
GUEST — A person on the premises with the actual or implied consent of an
occupant.
LANDLORD — One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title to the premises or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including a mortgage holder in possession of a regulated rental unit or
dormitory unit (same as "owner").
MANAGER — An adult individual designated by the owner of a regulated
rental unit or dormitory unit under this Chapter 11, Part 1, at § 103,
Subsection 2. The manager shall be the agent of the owner for service of
process and receiving notices or demands and to perform the obligations of
the owner under this Part and under rental agreements with occupants.
MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLING — A building containing two or more
independent dwelling units, including, but not limited to, double houses,
row houses, townhouses, condominiums, apartment houses and conversion
apartments.
OCCUPANCY LICENSE — The license issued to the owner of regulated
rental units or dormitory units under this Part, which is required for the
lawful rental and occupancy of regulated rental units or dormitory units.
OCCUPANT — An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit or
dormitory unit, whether or not he or she is the owner thereof, with whom a
legal relationship with the owner/landlord is established by a written lease
or by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OWNER — One or more persons, jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title to the premises or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including a mortgage holder in possession of a regulated rental unit or
dormitory unit.
OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit in which the
owner, who is not a student, resides on a regular, permanent basis.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, limited partnership, trust or any other entity.
§ 102 LOGAN CODE § 102
1:174
POLICE — The Police Department of the Township or any properly
authorized member or officer thereof or any other law enforcement agency
having jurisdiction within the Township.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property in the Township, including the
land and all buildings and appurtenant structures or appurtenant elements,
on which one or more regulated rental units or dormitory units are located.
REGULATED RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit occupied by two or more
unrelated students under a rental agreement.
RENTAL AGREEMENT — A written agreement between owner/landlord and
occupant/tenant supplemented by the addendum required under Chapter
11, Part 1, § 103, Subsection 5, embodying the terms and conditions
concerning the use and occupancy of a specified regulated rental unit,
dormitory unit or premises.
STUDENT — A person who is registered to be enrolled or who is enrolled
and matriculating at any postsecondary education facility as an
undergraduate student or who is on a semester or summer break from
studies at a postsecondary education facility.
TENANT — An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit or
dormitory unit, whether or not he or she is the owner thereof, with whom a
legal relationship with the owner/landlord is established by a written lease
or by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (same as "occupant").
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Logan, Blair County, Pennsylvania.
UNRELATED — Of or pertaining to two or more persons not related to one
another through blood to the level of second cousins, adoption or marriage.
§ 103. Owner's Duties. [Ord. 02-13-14A]
1. General. It shall be the duty of every owner to keep and maintain all
regulated rental units or dormitory units in compliance with all
applicable codes and provisions of all other applicable state laws and
regulations and local ordinances and to keep such property in good and
safe condition. The landlord shall be responsible for regularly
performing all routine maintenance, including lawn mowing and ice and
snow removal, and for making any and all repairs in and around the
premises. As provided for in this Part, every owner shall be responsible
for regulating the proper and lawful use and maintenance of every
dwelling which he, she or it owns. As provided for in this Part, every
owner shall also be responsible for regulating the conduct and activities
of the occupants of every regulated rental unit and dormitory unit
which he, she or it owns in the Township, which conduct or activity
takes place at such regulated rental unit or dormitory unit or its
premises. In order to achieve those ends, every owner of a regulated
rental unit or dormitory unit shall regulate the conduct and activity of
the occupants thereof, both contractually and through enforcement, as
more fully set forth below. This section shall not be construed as
diminishing or relieving, in any way, the responsibility of occupants or
§ 102 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:175
their guests for their conduct or activity, nor shall it be construed as
an assignment, transfer or projection over or onto any owner of any
responsibility of occupants or their guests for their conduct or activity,
nor shall it be construed as an assignment, transfer or projection over
or onto any owner of any responsibility or liability which occupants or
their guests may have as a result of their conduct or activity under
any private cause of action, civil or criminal enforcement proceeding,
or criminal law; nor shall this section be construed so as to require an
owner to indemnify or defend occupants or their guests when any such
action or proceeding is brought against the occupant based upon the
occupant's conduct or activity. Nothing herein is intended to impose
any additional civil/criminal liability upon owners other than that which
is imposed by law. This Part is not intended to, nor shall its effect be,
to limit any other enforcement remedies which may be available to the
Township against an owner, occupant or guest thereof.
2. Designation of Manager. Every owner who is not a full-time resident of
the Township, or who is not elsewhere in an area that is no more than
30 minutes from the regulated rental unit, shall designate a manager
who shall reside in an area that is no more than 30 minutes from the
said regulated rental unit. If the owner is a corporation and/or a limited
liability company or similar entity, a manager shall be required if an
officer of the corporation and/or member of the liability company does
not reside in the aforesaid area. The officer and/or member shall
perform the same function as a manager. If the owner is a partnership,
a manager shall be required if a partner does not reside in the aforesaid
calling area. Said partner shall perform the same function as a
manager. The manager shall be the agent of the owner for service of
process and receiving of notices and demands, as well as for performing
the obligations of the owner under this Part and under rental
agreements with occupants. The identity, address and telephone
numbers(s) of a person who is designated as manager hereunder shall
be provided by the owner or manager to the Township, and such
information shall be kept current and updated as it changes.
3. Disclosure.
A. The owner or manager shall disclose to the occupant in writing, on
or before the commencement of the tenancy:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the manager, if
applicable.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
premises.
B. Before an occupant initially enters into or renews a rental
agreement for a regulated rental unit or dormitory unit, the owner
or manager shall furnish the occupant with the most-recent
inspection report relating to the property.
4. Maintenance of Premises.
§ 103 LOGAN CODE § 103
1:176
A. The owner shall maintain the premises in compliance with the
applicable codes of the Township and shall regularly perform all
routine maintenance, including lawn mowing and ice and snow
removal, and shall promptly make any and all repairs necessary to
fulfill this obligation.
B. In no case shall the existence of any agreement between owner and
occupant relieve an owner of any responsibility under this Part or
other ordinances or codes for maintenance of premises.
5. Written Rental Agreement.
A. Written Rental Agreement Required. All rental agreements for
regulated dwelling units or dormitory units shall be in writing and
shall be supplemented with the addendum attached hereto as
Appendix A. No oral leases and no oral modifications thereof are
permitted. All disclosures and information required to be given to
occupants, and/or the individual(s) executing the rental agreement
as lessee if not an occupant, by the owner shall be furnished before
the signing of the rental agreement. The owner shall provide the
occupant, and the individual(s) executing the rental agreement as
lessee if not the occupant, with copies of the rental agreement and
addendum upon execution.
B. Terms and Conditions. The owner and occupant may include in a
rental agreement terms and conditions not prohibited by this Part
or other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws, including
rent, term of the agreement and other provisions governing the
rights and obligations of the parties.
C. Prohibited Provisions. Except as otherwise provided by this Part, no
rental agreement may provide that the occupant, and/or the
individual(s) executing the rental agreement as lessee if not an
occupant, and owner agree to waive or to forego rights or remedies
under this Part. A provision prohibited by this subsection included
in a rental agreement is unenforceable.
D. Attachment of this Part to Rental Agreement. Following the
effective date of this Part, a copy of this Part and a copy of Chapter
6, Part 4, of the Township Code of Ordinances, known as
"Disorderly Gatherings," provided to the owner by the Township at
the time of licensing, shall be attached to each rental agreement
delivered by or on behalf of an owner when any such agreement is
presented for signing to any occupant. If a copy of this Part and a
copy of the Disorderly Gathering Part were provided when the
rental agreement was first executed, a summary does not have to
be provided upon renewal. Where a rental agreement has been
entered into prior to the effective date of this Part, the owner shall
provide the occupants with a copy of this Part and the Disorderly
Gathering Part within 60 days after enactment of this Part.
§ 103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:177
E. Receipt Acknowledgement. The owner shall secure a written
acknowledgment from occupants and lessees that the occupants
have received the disclosures and information required by this
Part.
F. Acknowledgement Request by Township. Upon oral or written
request by the Township, the owner, within 10 days of the request,
shall furnish to the Township copies of the acknowledgment that
the occupants and lessees received the disclosures and information
required by this Part.
G. Lease Request by Township. The owner shall furnish to the
Township, for inspection purposes only, copies of the leases the
owner has entered into for regulated rental units as required by
§ 105, Subsection 1H, of this Part.
6. Complaints. The owner shall reply promptly to reasonable complaints
and inquiries from occupants and the Township.
7. Landlord-Tenant Act. The owner shall comply with all provisions of the
Landlord and Tenant Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.6
8. Common Areas. Where an owner of a regulated dwelling unit or a
dormitory unit does not regulate the use of common areas and the
behavior of occupants and guests in the common areas, the owner shall
be directly responsible for the behavior of occupants and guests in the
common area as if the owner were an occupant. The failure of the
owner to regulate behavior of occupants and guests in the common
areas that results in the following shall be a violation of this Part:
A. Engaging in fighting or threatening, or in violent or tumultuous
behavior;
B. Making unreasonable noise; or
C. Creating hazardous or physically offensive conditions by any act
which serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
9. Enforcement.
A. Within 20 days after receipt of a notice of violation, the owner shall
file with the Code Enforcement Officer, the Township Police and the
Township Manager a report, on a form provided by the Township,
setting forth what action the owner has taken to remedy the
violation and what steps he or she has taken to prevent a
reoccurrence of the violation. The report shall also set forth a plan
as to steps the owner will take in the future if the violation
reoccurs.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Township Police shall
review the report and, if adequate steps have been taken and the
6. Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 250.101 et seq.
§ 103 LOGAN CODE § 103
1:178
plan is adequate to address future violations, shall approve the
plan. The owner shall, on his or her initiative, enforce the plan, and
failure to do so shall be a violation of this Part.
C. In the event that a second violation occurs within a license year
involving the same occupant or occupants, the Code Enforcement
Officer may direct the owner to evict the occupants who violated
this Part and to not permit the occupant to occupy the premises
during the subsequent licensing period.
10. Violations. Upon receiving notice of any violations from the Code
Enforcement Officer and/or the Township Police, the owner shall
promptly take action, or cause the necessary action to be taken, to
abate the offending condition and eliminate the violation.
11. Township Authorized To Make Repairs. In case the owner of premises
shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with any notice from the Township
or its Code Enforcement Officer to correct a violation relating to
maintenance and repair of the premises under any code within the
period of time stated in such notice, the Township may cause the
violation to be corrected. There shall be imposed upon the owner a
charge of the actual costs involved, plus 10% of said costs, for each time
the Township shall cause a violation to be corrected, and the owner of
the premises shall be billed after same has been completed. Any such
bill which remains unpaid and outstanding after the time specified
therein for payment shall be grounds for the imposition of a municipal
lien upon the premises as provided by law. Such a lien may be reduced
to judgment and enforced and collected as provided by law, together
with interest at the legal rate and court costs. The remedies provided by
this subsection are not exclusive, and the Township and its Code
Enforcement Officer may invoke such other remedies available under
this Part or the applicable codes, ordinances or statutes, including,
where appropriate, condemnation proceedings or declaration of
premises as unfit for habitation; or suspension, revocation or
nonrenewal of the license issued hereunder.
12. Inspection by Township. The owner shall permit inspections of any
premises by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Township Police
at reasonable times upon reasonable notice and shall have the
manager/owner representative present to accompany the individual
conducting the inspection on behalf of the Township.
13. Postings Required. The owner shall have on file and permit inspection
by the public and the Township the following:
A. The current license and current inspection report issued by the
Code Enforcement Office of the Township of every licensed rental
unit.
B. The license application required by this Part shall show the names
of the authorized occupants of the regulated rental unit or
dormitory unit, if any.
§ 103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:179
§ 104. Duties of Occupant. [Ord. 02-13-14A]
C. A notice posted of the maximum number of persons, including, but
not limited to, guests, permitted in any regulated rental unit or
dormitory unit at any time and any common areas located within
the regulated rental unit or dormitory unit.
D. A notice of ordinances and statutes applicable to the occupants of a
regulated rental unit or dormitory unit and a placard provided by
the Township.
E. The owner shall also post in all common areas the maximum
number of persons, including, but not limited to, guest, permitted
in any common area on a form provided by the Township as defined
in this Part.
F. The notices required by this section shall be posted in such a way
so as to minimize tampering and removal.
1. General. The occupant shall comply with all obligations imposed upon
occupants by this Part, all applicable codes and ordinances of the
Township and all applicable provisions of state law.
2. Health and Safety Regulations.
A. Occupant Limit.
(1) The maximum number of occupants in any dwelling unit shall
not exceed three persons for every 850 square feet.
(2) The maximum number of persons, including, but not limited to,
guests, permitted in any regulated rental unit or dormitory unit
at any time shall not exceed one person for each 40 square feet
of habitable floor space in said regulated rental unit or
dormitory unit. The maximum number of persons permitted in
the common areas of any multiple-unit dwelling or any
dormitory at any time shall not exceed one person for each 15
square feet of common area on the premises.
B. The occupant shall deposit all rubbish, garbage and other waste
from his or her regulated rental unit or dormitory unit into
containers provided by the owner or landlord in a clean and safe
manner and shall separate and place for collection all recyclable
materials, in compliance with the Township's Solid Waste and
Recycling Ordinance (Chapter 20 of the Township Code of
Ordinances) and all other applicable ordinances, laws and
regulations.
3. Peaceful Enjoyment. The occupant shall conduct himself or herself and
require other persons, including, but not limited to, guests, on the
premises and within his or her regulated rental unit or dormitory unit
with his or her consent, to conduct themselves in a manner that will not
§ 103 LOGAN CODE § 104
1:180
disturb the peaceful enjoyment of the premises by others and that will
not disturb the peaceful enjoyment of adjacent or nearby dwellings by
the persons occupying same.
4. Residential Use. The occupant shall, unless otherwise permitted by
applicable law or ordinance, occupy or use his or her regulated rental
unit or dormitory unit for no other purpose than as a residence.
5. Illegal Activities. The occupant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor
permit others on the premises to engage in, any conduct declared
illegal under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code (18 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.),
or Liquor Code (47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.), or the Controlled Substance,
Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act (35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq.), and/or any
applicable section of the Township Code of Ordinances.
6. Disruptive Conduct.
A. The occupant shall not engage in, nor tolerate nor permit others on
the premises to engage in, disruptive conduct or other violations of
this Part, including, but not limited to, disorderly gatherings.
B. When police investigate an alleged incident of disruptive conduct,
he or she shall complete a disruptive conduct report upon a finding
that the reported incident did, in his or her judgment, constitute
disruptive conduct as defined herein. The information filled in on
said report shall include, if possible, the identity or identities of the
alleged perpetrator(s) of the disruptive conduct and all other
obtainable information, including the factual basis for the
disruptive conduct requested on the prescribed from. Where the
police make such investigation, said police officer shall then submit
the completed disruptive conduct report to the Township Chief of
Police and the Township Manager and Code Enforcement Officer. In
all cases, the police shall mail a copy of the disruptive conduct
report to the owner or manager within five working days of the
occurrence of the alleged disruptive conduct.
7. Compliance with Rental Agreement. The occupant shall comply with all
lawful provisions of the rental agreement entered into between owner
and occupant. Failure to comply may result in the eviction of the
occupant by the owner.
8. Damage to Premises. The occupant shall not intentionally cause, nor
permit nor tolerate others to cause, damage to the premises.
9. Inspection of Premises. The occupant shall permit inspections by the
Code Enforcement Officer and/or police of the premises at reasonable
times, upon reasonable notice.
10. Removal or Defacement of Notice. It shall be a violation of this Part for
any person to remove or deface any notice of a document required to be
posted within a regulated rental unit or dormitory unit, and it shall be
§ 104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 104
1:181
§ 105. Licenses and Inspection. [Ord. 02-13-14A]
unlawful for any person to occupy the regulated rental unit or
dormitory unit unless all notices and documents are posted as required.
11. Violation. It shall be a violation of this Part for any occupant or any
other person to engage in disruptive conduct as defined by this Part.
1. License Requirement.
A. As a prerequisite to entering into a rental agreement or permitting
the occupancy of any regulated rental unit or dormitory unit
(except as provided in Subsection 1C below), the owner of every
such regulated rental unit or dormitory unit shall be required to
apply for and obtain a license for each regulated rental unit or
dormitory unit.
B. A license shall be required for all regulated rental units and all
dormitory units.
C. The following categories of rental properties shall not require
licenses and shall not, therefore, be subject to the permitting
provision of this Part:
(1) Owner-occupied dwelling units, provided that not more than
two unrelated individuals, in addition to the immediate
members of the owner's family, occupy the dwelling unit at any
given time.
(2) Hotels and motels.
(3) Hospitals and nursing homes.
(4) Bed-and-breakfast units.
(5) Dormitory units owned by a secondary education facility.
(6) Dwelling units not rented and/or owned by two or more
unrelated students.
D. A license shall not be required for multiple-unit dwellings, although
a license shall be required for each regulated rental unit or
dormitory unit within the multiple-unit dwelling. The foregoing
notwithstanding, all other provisions of this Part shall apply to the
common areas of the multiple-unit dwelling.
E. The application for the license shall be in a form as determined by
the Township.
F. The owner shall maintain a current and accurate list of the
occupants in each regulated rental unit or dormitory unit, which
shall include their name, permanent address and permanent
telephone number, which shall be available to the Township for
inspection upon reasonable notice.
§ 104 LOGAN CODE § 105
1:182
G. The owner shall furnish with his or her application for license a
copy of the written lease form the owner intends to have the
occupants of each licensed dwelling unit execute. If the owner uses
more than one form of lease, the owner shall furnish a copy of each
form. The license will not be issued if the lease form does not meet
the requirements of § 103, Subsection 5, of this Part.
H. The owner shall furnish with his or her application, for inspection
purposes only, electronic copies of the leases that have been
entered into that will cover all or part of the license term. The
license will not be issued if such leases are not furnished for
inspection. Leases shall be furnished for all persons who have paid
a downpayment at the time that the owner applies for a license or
who have committed to residing in the premises. The owner shall
notify the Township of changes in the occupancy within 10 days of
the change and shall provide the name of the person who is no
longer residing in the premises in the event a person departs and
the name, permanent address and permanent telephone number of
new occupants in the event a new person is added. The Township
shall keep copies of leases that it retains in confidence and shall not
disclose their contents except as part of official Township business.
I. The owner shall furnish with his or her application for a license a
floor plan, drawn to scale, with the measurements of each room
within the regulated rental unit or dormitory unit. The owner shall
submit the scale drawing certified by a state-licensed architect and/
or engineer only with the first application submitted after the
enactment of this Part. In the event that there are changes to the
floor plan, the owner shall submit a revised floor plan with the
application first submitted after the changes to the floor plan were
made, within 10 days of the change.
J. In the event that a license is denied by the Code Office, the owner
shall have the right to appeal to the Township Board of Supervisors
within 30 days of mailing of the notice of denial of the application.
The hearing before the Board of Supervisors shall be governed by
the Local Agency Act.7
K. No license shall be issued to an owner unless the rental unit is in
compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the
Township.
2. Annual License Term, Fee and Occupancy Limit.
A. Each license shall have an annual term running from July 1 through
June 30 of the next year.
B. Upon application for a license and prior to issuance or renewal
thereof, each applicant shall pay to the Township an annual license
and inspection fee, in an amount to be established, from time to
7. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
§ 105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 105
1:183
§ 106. Grounds for Nonrenewal, Suspension or Revocation of
License. [Ord. 02-13-14A]
time, by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the Township.
Such resolution may provide for more than one fee scale for
different categories of premises, to be more specifically set forth in
the resolution.
C. The license shall indicate thereon the maximum number of
occupants in each regulated rental unit or dormitory unit.
D. No license shall be issued if the owner has not paid any fines and
costs arising from enforcement of this Part or any of the ordinances
of the Township relating to land use and/or code enforcement or if
any licensing fees under this Part are due and owing the Township.
3. Inspection.
A. All premises shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Code
Enforcement Officer and/or Township Police or another duly
authorized agent of the Township. Such inspection may take place
when an application is submitted for a license, or at any time
during the year.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer and/or Township Police is hereby
designated as the official authorized to enforce this Part and to take
appropriate measures to abate violation hereof, for and on behalf of
the Township.
C. This section shall not be construed so as to limit or restrict the
Code Enforcement Officer's and/or Township Police authority to
conduct inspections of premises, whether or not subject to the
permitting and inspection requirements of this Part, pursuant to
any other ordinance or code.
D. If, upon the initial inspection, violations of the codes of the
Township are identified, the owner shall pay a reinspection fee for
each and every time it is necessary for the Code Officer of the
Township to reinspect the property until no such violations are
found. The amount of the reinspection fee shall be determined by
the Township, by resolution, from time to time.
4. Search Warrant. Upon a showing of probable cause that a violation of
this Part or any other ordinance of the Township has occurred, the Code
Enforcement Officer and/or Township Police may apply to the District
Justice having jurisdiction in the Township for a search warrant to enter
and inspect the premises.
1. General. The Code Enforcement Officer may initiate disciplinary action
against an owner that may result in a formal warning, nonrenewal,
suspension or revocation of the owner's license, for violating any
provision of this Part that imposes a duty upon the owner and/or for
§ 105 LOGAN CODE § 106
1:184
failing to regulate the breach of duties by occupants as provided for
herein.
2. Definitions of Options.
A. Formal warning: formal written notification of at least one violation
of this Part. Upon satisfactory compliance with this Part and any
conditions imposed by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the
Board of Supervisors of the Township, the formal warning shall be
removed when the owner applies for license renewal at a time set
by the Code Enforcement Officer or by the Township Board of
Supervisors.
B. Nonrenewal: the denial of the privilege to apply for license renewal
after expiration of the license term. The Township will permit the
owner to maintain occupants in the premises until the end of the
license term but will not accept applications for renewal of the
license until a time set by the Code Enforcement Officer or
Township Board of Supervisors.
C. Suspension: the immediate loss of the privilege to rent regulated
rental units or dormitory units for a period of time set by the Code
Enforcement Officer or Township Board of Supervisors. The owner,
after the expiration of the suspension period, may apply for license
renewal without the need to show cause why the owner's privilege
to apply for a license should be reinstated. Upon suspension, the
owner shall take immediate steps to evict the occupants.
D. Revocation: the immediate loss of the privilege to rent regulated
rental units or dormitory units for a period of time set by the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Township Board of Supervisors and the
loss of the privilege to apply for renewal of the license at the
expiration of the time period. Upon the loss of the privilege to rent,
the owner shall take immediate steps to evict the occupants.
3. Criteria for Applying Discipline.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer, when recommending discipline, and
the Township Board of Supervisors, when applying discipline, shall
consider the following:
(1) The effect of the violation on the health, safety and welfare of
the occupants of the regulated rental unit or dormitory unit
and other residents of the premises.
(2) The effect of the violation on the neighborhood.
(3) Whether the owner has prior violations of this Part and other
ordinances of the Township or has received notices of
violations as provided for in this Part.
(4) Whether the owner has been subject to disciplinary
proceedings under this Part.
§ 106 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 106
1:185
(5) The effect of disciplinary action on the occupants.
(6) The action taken by the owner to remedy the violation and to
prevent future violations, including any written plan submitted
by the owner.
(7) The policies and lease language employed by the owner to
manage the regulated dwelling unit or dormitory unit to enable
the owner to comply with the provisions of this Part.
B. In addition to applying discipline as set forth above, the Code
Enforcement Officer may recommend and Township Board of
Supervisors may impose upon the existing or subsequent licenses
reasonable conditions related to fulfilling the purposes of this Part.
4. Grounds for Imposing Discipline. Any of the following may subject an
owner to discipline as provided for in this Part:
A. Failure to abate a violation of Township codes and ordinances that
apply to the premises within the time directed by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Refusal to permit the inspection of the premises by the Code
Enforcement Officer and/or police as required by § 105, Subsection
3.
C. Failure to take steps to remedy and prevent violations of this Part
by occupants of regulated rental units or dormitory units as
required by § 103 of this Part.
D. Failure to file and implement an approved plan to remedy and
prevent violations of this Part by occupants of a regulated rental
unit or dormitory unit as required by § 103 of this Part.
E. Failure to evict occupants after having been directed to do so by
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township as provided for in
§ 103 of this Part.
F. Three violations of this Part or other ordinances of the Township
that apply to the premises within a license term. For purposes of
this Part, there need be no criminal conviction before a violation
can be found to exist. Before a prior violation can be considered
under this section, the owner must have received notice, in writing,
of this violation within 30 days after the Code Enforcement Officer
received notice of the violation.
5. Procedure for Nonrenewal, Suspension or Revocation of License.
A. Notification. Following a determination that grounds for
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a license exist, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner of the action to be taken
and the reason therefor.
§ 106 LOGAN CODE § 106
1:186
(1) Such notification shall be in writing, addressed to the owner in
question, and shall contain the following information:
(a) The address of the premises in question and identification
of the particular regulated rental unit(s) or dormitory
unit(s) affected.
(b) A description of the violation which has been found to
exist.
(c) A statement that the license for said regulated rental
unit(s) or dormitory unit(s) shall be either suspended or
revoked, or will not be renewed for the next license year
beginning July 1, or that the owner will receive a formal
warning. In the case of a suspension or revocation, the
notice shall state the date upon which such suspension or
revocation will commence, and in the case of a suspension
shall also state the duration of said suspension.
(d) A statement that, due to the nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation (as the case may be), the owner or any person
acting on his, her or its behalf is prohibited from renting,
leasing or permitting occupancy of the dwelling unit(s) by
more than two unrelated individuals subject to said
enforcement action, from and during the period said
action is in effect.
(e) A statement informing the owner that he, she or it has a
right to appeal the decision suspending, revoking or
declining to renew the license to the Township Board of
Supervisors, by submitting, in writing, to the Township
Secretary, within 30 days from the date printed on the
notice, a detailed statement of the appeal, including the
grounds therefor and the reason(s) alleged as to why the
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer is
incorrect or should be overturned, and a statement of
relief requested by the appellant. Such notice of appeal
may be required to be submitted on a form to be
prescribed therefor by the Township Board of Supervisors,
to be signed by the appellant. There is hereby imposed a
fee for filing of such appeals, the amount of which shall be
determined and established, from time to time, by
resolution of the Township.
(2) Upon receipt of such an appeal in proper form, accompanied
with the requisite filing fee, the Township Secretary shall
schedule a hearing, not less than 10 days from the date on
which the appeal is filed, to be held at the time and date of the
next regularly scheduled Township Board of Supervisors
meeting.
§ 106 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 106
1:187
(3) The appellant, the Code Enforcement Officer and the owners of
properties within a radius of 300 feet from the premises for
which the license is at issue shall receive written notice of the
hearing on the appeal.
(4) The Township Board of Supervisors shall hold a hearing on the
appeal, which shall be conducted in accordance with the Local
Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551-555, as amended, and any
amendments thereto. The appellant and all other parties
having an interest may be heard. Based on the facts and
arguments of the appellant and of the Code Enforcement
Officer and any police or other public officials involved, and
any relevant factual presentations of other parties, the
Township Board of Supervisors shall make a decision either
affirming, reversing or modifying the action of the Code
Enforcement Officer from which the appeal was taken. Such
decision shall be rendered at a public meeting either
immediately following the hearing or within 30 days thereafter.
The decision shall be reduced to writing, stating clearly the
factual and legal basis for the decision, within 45 days after the
hearing. If the Township Board of Supervisors deems it
necessary or desirable, it may continue the hearing to a
subsequent time and date not later than 30 days from the
initial hearing, which time and date shall be openly announced
at the initial hearing, and in such case, the time limits for
rendering the decision and reducing it to writing set forth
herein shall be calculated from the last hearing date (at which
the substance of the decision is orally announced).
B. Delivery of Notification.
(1) All notices shall be sent to the owner and manager, if
applicable, by certified mail and/or certificate of mailing. In the
event that the notice is returned by the postal authorities
marked "unclaimed" or "refused," then the Code Enforcement
Officer shall attempt delivery by personal service on the owner
or manager, if applicable. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
also post the notice at a conspicuous place on the premises.
(2) If personal service cannot be accomplished after a reasonable
attempt to do so, then the notice may be sent to the owner or
manager at the address stated on the most-current license
application for the premises in question, by regular first-class
mail, postage prepaid. If such notice is not returned by the
postal authorities within five days of its deposit in the United
States mail, then it shall be deemed to have been delivered to
and received by the addressee on the fifth day following its
deposit in the United States mail, and all applicable time
periods set forth herein shall thereupon be calculated from
said fifth day.
§ 106 LOGAN CODE § 107
1:188
§ 107. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 02-13-14A]
§ 108. Miscellaneous Provisions. [Ord. 02-13-14A]
1. Basis for Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, as either owner
or manager of a regulated rental unit or dormitory unit for which a
license is required, to operate without a valid, current license issued by
the Township authorizing such operation. It shall also be unlawful for
any person, either owner or manager, to allow the number of occupants
of a regulated rental unit or dormitory unit to exceed the maximum
limit as set forth on the license, or to violate any other provision of this
Part. It shall be unlawful for any occupant to violate this Part.
2. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment of not more than 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this Part continues or each section of this
Part which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
3. Nonexclusive Remedies. The penalty provisions of this section and the
license nonrenewal, suspension and revocation procedures provided in
this Part shall be independent, non-mutually-exclusive separate
remedies, all of which shall be available to the Township as may be
deemed appropriate for carrying out the purposes of this Part. The
remedies and procedures provided in this Part for violation hereof are
not intended to supplant or replace to any degree the remedies and
procedures available to the Township in the case of a violation of any
other code or ordinance of the Township, whether or not such other
code or ordinance is referenced in this Part and whether or not an
ongoing violation of such other code or ordinance is cited as the
underlying ground for a finding of a violation of this Part.
1. Notices.
A. For purposes of this Part, any notice required hereunder to be
given to a manager shall be deemed as notice given to the owner.
B. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any notice required to
be given to the owner under this Part shall have been received by
such owner if the notice was given to the owner in the manner
provided by this Part.
C. A claimed lack of knowledge by the owner of any violation
hereunder cited shall be no defense to license nonrenewal,
suspension or revocation proceedings as long as all notices
prerequisite to institution of such proceedings have been given and
deemed received in accordance with the applicable provisions of
this Part.
§ 107 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 108
1:189
2. Changes in Ownership Occupancy. It shall be the duty of each owner of
a regulated rental unit or dormitory unit to notify the Code
Enforcement Officer, in writing, of any change in ownership of the
premises or of the number of regulated rental units or dormitory units
on the premises. It shall also be the duty of the owner to notify the Code
Enforcement Officer in writing of any increase in the number of
occupants in any regulated rental unit or dormitory unit or of the
changing of a dwelling unit from owner-occupied to non-owneroccupied,
which thereby transforms the dwelling into a regulated rental
unit or dormitory unit for purposes of this Part.
3. Owners Severally Responsible. If any regulated rental unit or dormitory
unit is owned by more than one person, in any form of joint tenancy, as a
partnership or otherwise, each person shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the duties imposed under the terms of this Part and
shall be severally subject to prosecution for the violation of this Part.
4. Confidentiality of Leases. The Township shall keep copies of leases that
it retains in confidence and shall not disclose their contents except as
part of official Township business.
§ 108 LOGAN CODE § 108
1:190
Chapter 13
LICENSES, PERMITS AND GENERAL BUSINESS
REGULATIONS
§ 108 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 108
1:191

Part 1
REGULATING ALARM DEVICES
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 5-7-87]
1. As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACCIDENTAL FALSE ALARM — Any false alarm which is not an
intentional false alarm as defined herein, or, not when an intrusion,
crime, fire or other emergency has actually occurred.
ALARM — A communication to the police department or Logan Fire
Base indicating that a crime, fire or other emergency situation
warranting immediate action by the police department or Logan Fire
Base has occurred or is occurring.
ALARM DEVICE — A mechanical device designed to automatically
transmit an alarm by wire, telephone, radio or other means:
CENTRAL RECEIVING STATION — The alarm or control panel installed
in the police department or Logan Fire Base for the purpose of giving
visual or audio response to direct alarm devices.
DIRECT ALARM DEVICE — An alarm device, other than a telephone
dialer alarm device, designated to transmit an alarm directly to the
police department or Logan Fire Base.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm to which the police department or fire
department responds resulting from the activation of an alarm device
when a crime, fire or other emergency warranting immediate action by
the police department has not in fact occurred.
INDIRECT ALARM DEVICE — An alarm device designed to transmit an
alarm to a person who is instructed to notify the police department or
Logan Fire Base of the alarm.
INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARM — A false alarm resulting from the
intentional activation of an alarm device by an individual under
circumstances where that individual has no reasonable basis to believe
that a crime, fire or other emergency warranting immediate action by
the police department or fire department has occurred or is occurring.
PERMIT HOLDER — A person to whom the police department has
issued an alarm device permit.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated
association or other similar entity.
A. Directly to the police department or Logan Fire Base;
To a person who is instructed to notify the police department or
Logan Fire Base of the alarm; or
B.
To activate a bell or sounding device or others to the existence of a
crime, fire or other emergency situation warranting police action.
C.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:193
§ 102. Permits Required. [Ord. 5-7-87]
TELEPHONE DIALER ALARM DEVICE — An alarm device designed to
automatically transmit a recorded message over regular telephone lines
directly to the police department, Logan Fire Base, or to a person who
is instructed to notify the police department or Logan Fire Base of the
alarm.
2. In this Part 1, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
1. It shall be unlawful for a property owner, lessee of property or a person
otherwise occupying a premises within the Township of Logan to put an
alarm device into operation on his premises or to allow an alarm device
to be put into operation on his premises without first obtaining an alarm
device permit from the police department. It shall also be unlawful for a
property owner, lessee of property or a person otherwise occupying a
premises outside of the Township of Logan to put into operation on his
premises an alarm device which terminates at the Township of Logan's
police department or Fire Base, or to allow such an alarm device to be
put into operation on his premises without first obtaining an alarm
device permit from the police department.
2. In order to apply for an alarm device permit, a person must submit an
application to the police department stating:
A. His name;
B. His home and business addresses and the telephone number of
each;
C. The location at which the alarm device will be installed and
operated;
D. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two
individuals who have keys to the premises at which the alarm
device is located and who are authorized to enter the premises at
any time, but who do not reside at the premises at which the alarm
device is located; and
E. A general written description of the device other than schematics.
If the device is to be leased or rented from, or is to be serviced
pursuant to a service agreement by, a person other than the
person making application for an alarm permit, the name, address
and telephone number of that person must be stated in the
application. In addition, each person submitting an application for
an alarm device permit shall submit a signed statement in the
following form:
§ 101 LOGAN CODE § 102
1:194
"I (We), the undersigned applicant(s) for an alarm device permit,
intending to be legally bound hereby, agree with the Township of
Logan that neither I (we), nor anyone claimed by, through or under
me (us), shall make any claim against the Township of Logan, its
officials or agents, for any damages caused to the premises at
which the alarm device, which is subject of this application, is
or will be located, if such damage is caused by a forced entry to
said premises by employees of the Township of Logan in order
to answer an alarm from said alarm device at a time when said
premises are or appear to be unattended or when in the discretion
of said employees the circumstances appear to warrant a forced
entry."
The police department shall furnish forms which any person
wishing to apply for an alarm device permit shall submit with his
application.
3. A person applying for an alarm device permit for a telephone dialer
alarm device, local sounding device, or an indirect alarm device shall
submit the required fee along with his application. The fee shall be fixed
from time to time by resolution of the Logan Township Board of
Supervisors.
4. The police department shall, within 15 workdays from receipt of an
application for an alarm device permit, either grant an alarm device
permit to the applicant or notify the applicant in writing that his
application has been denied and the reason why it has been denied.
5. An application for an alarm device permit may only be denied for the
following reasons:
A. The application submitted by the applicant does not comply with
Subsections 2 and 3 of this section.
B. The applicant's alarm device does not conform to the operational
standards set forth in § 103 of this Part 1.
6. Notwithstanding the language contained in Subsection 1 of this § 102,
it shall not be unlawful for a person to continue to operate an alarm
device on his premises without an alarm device permit for a period of
90 days after the effective date of this Part 1; provided, said alarm
device was in operation on the effective date of this Part 1.
7. The police department shall have the power to revoke an alarm device
permit. An alarm device permit shall be revoked by notifying the permit
holder in writing that his alarm device permit has been revoked and the
reason or reasons why it has been revoked. Said written notice shall be:
A. Delivered personally to the permit holder, in which case the
revocation shall be effective immediately upon delivery; or
§ 102 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 102
1:195
§ 103. Operational Standards. [Ord. 5-7-87]
B. Mailed to the permit holder at his last known address by certified
mail, postage prepaid, in which case the revocation shall be
effective three days after mailing.
8. An alarm device permit may only be revoked for the following reasons:
A. Failure of an alarm device to conform to the operational standards
set forth in § 103 of this Part 1.
B. Failure of a permit holder to pay a false alarm charge assessed to
him by the police department under the provisions of § 104 of this
Part 1 within 30 days of the mailing to him of a notice of the
assessment of a false alarm charge.
C. The occurrence of more than 12 false alarms from an alarm device
during any calendar year.
D. The occurrence of an intentional false alarm caused by the permit
holder or by an individual over the age of 15 who resides on the
premises where the alarm device is located.
E. Failure of a permit holder with a direct alarm device to pay to the
police department installation or maintenance fees assessed to him
under § 105 of this Part 1 within 30 days of the due date thereof.
9. A person who has had his alarm permit revoked under Subsections 7
and 8 of this § 102 may reapply for an alarm device permit 45 days after
the effective date of such revocation; provided, that if a person's alarm
device permit was revoked for nonpayment of a false alarm charge or
for nonpayment of installation or maintenance fees or both, the police
department shall deny said application unless such charge or fee or
both have been paid. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person who has
had his alarm device permit twice revoked on the basis of an
occurrence of an intentional false alarm may not reapply for an alarm
device permit for one year from the effective date of the second
revocation.
1. If an alarm device is designated to transmit a recorded message
directly to the police department or Logan Fire Base, the duration of
such recorded message shall not exceed 60 seconds. The contents of
the recorded message shall be intelligible and in a format approved by
the police department.
2. An alarm device need not contain a delay service which causes a delay
to occur between the time the alarm device receives a triggering
stimulus and the time the alarm device transmits an alarm.
3. A direct alarm device shall be designed to dial only specific telephone
numbers designated by the police department or Logan Fire Base; and
to allow the permit holder to abort the alarm signals.
§ 102 LOGAN CODE § 103
1:196
§ 104. False Alarms. [Ord. 5-7-87]
4. A direct alarm device shall be designed so that it interfaces with the
Central Receiving Station maintained by the police department.
5. If an alarm device is designed to cause a bell, siren or sound-making
device to be activated on or near the premises on which the alarm
device is installed at the time it gives an alarm, said alarm device shall
be designed to deactivate the bell, siren or other sound-making device
after 10 minutes of operation. Preexisting units must be modified for a
ten-minute device unless said unit cannot be modified without
replacement.
6. All alarm devices shall meet the applicable standards of the
Underwriters Laboratories and/or the National Fire Protection
Association, and/or other recognized industry standards, and shall be
permitted under this Part 1 if in conformity thereto. An alarm device
which does not meet any of the above standards or for which there is no
recognized industry standard shall require the applicant for a permit to
submit evidence of the reliability or suitability of the alarm device. Any
permit issued for such an alarm device which does not conform to the
recognized standard shall be conditionally subject to satisfactory
performance of said alarm device after installation. The applicant for a
permit may be required to submit evidence of the reliability and
suitability of the alarm device.
7. The sensory mechanism used in connection with an alarm device must
be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire or intrusion, so that the
alarm device will not be activated by impulses due to transient pressure
change in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises such as the
rattling or vibrating of doors or windows, vehicular noise adjacent to
the premises, or other forces unrelated to genuine alarm situations.
8. The alarm device must be maintained by the permit holder in good
repair to assure reliability of operation.
1. Intentional False Alarms. No permit holder or person shall create an
intentional false alarm.
2. Accidental False Alarms. Any person or permit holder causing
accidental false alarms for any reason shall pay to the Township of
Logan a charge for each and every false alarm to which the police and/
or fire departments respond, in each calendar year, as follows:
Alarms Sound After First Month of
Installation Charge
First to third alarm each year No charge
Fourth to tenth alarm each year $25 per alarm
All other alarms each year $50 per alarm
§ 103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 104
1:197
§ 105. Installation and Maintenance Fees for Direct Alarm Systems.
[Ord. 5-7-87; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
3. When a false alarm occurs, the police department, within 10 days from
the date of the false alarm, shall notify the permit holder of the alarm
device from which the false alarm emanated or other person causing
said false alarm that a false alarm charge is due and the amount
thereof. Such notice shall be in writing and mailed to the permit holder
or person causing said false alarm at his last known address by regular
mail, postage prepaid. Failure of the police department to mail notice of
assessment of false alarm charge within 10 days from the occurrence of
a false alarm shall preclude the Township of Logan from assessing a
false alarm charge for said false alarm.
4. A false alarm charge shall be due and payable at the office of the police
department 30 days from the date of the mailing of the notice of
assessment of the charge.
5. Failure of a permit holder to pay a false alarm charge on or before the
date due shall subject such permit holder to revocation of his alarm
device permit under § 102(8) of this Part 1.
6. Failure of a person causing a fire alarm, other than a permit holder, to
pay a false alarm charge on or before the date due shall constitute a
violation of this Part 1, and shall subject said person to the penalties set
forth in § 111 hereof.
1. A permit holder who has a direct alarm device which is connected to a
Central Receiving Station at police department headquarters or the
Logan Fire Base shall be required to pay to the Township of Logan or its
designee a fee for the connection of his direct alarm device to the
Central Receiving Station and a monthly fee for the maintenance of the
Central Receiving Station.
2. The fee for connection of a direct alarm device to a Central Receiving
Station at police department headquarters or the Logan Fire Base shall
be established from time to time by the Board of Supervisors plus the
actual cost of interface into the Central Receiving Station for each such
connection.
3. In addition, a permit holder who has a direct alarm device shall pay a
monthly fee for the maintenance of the Central Receiving Station. This
maintenance fee shall be determined by the Logan Township Board of
Supervisors on an annual basis by prorating the maintenance costs
among the number of permit holders at the time using the Central
Receiving Station, regardless of how long a permit holder has been
connected to the Central Receiving Station. The police department
shall annually notify each permit holder who has a direct alarm device
of the amount of the assessment for maintenance of the Central
Receiving Station, if there has been a change in such assessment. Such
notice shall be in writing and mailed to the permit holder at his last
§ 104 LOGAN CODE § 105
1:198
§ 106. Change in Location of the Police Department. [Ord. 5-7-87]
If the location of the headquarters of the police department or Logan
Fire Base should change at any time, the Township of Logan shall not
be responsible for any cost incurred by permit holders or other persons
because of said change in location.
§ 107. Testing. [Ord. 5-7-87]
No person shall conduct or test any alarm device without first obtaining
permission from the police department. Where the equipment is keyed
through an intermediary, no such permission is necessary unless the alarm
or signal is to be relayed to the Central Receiving Station.
§ 108. Liability of Municipality. [Ord. 5-7-87]
The issuance of any permit shall not constitute acceptance by the Township
of Logan of any liability to maintain any equipment, to answer alarms, nor
otherwise render the Township of Logan liable to any person for any loss or
damage relating to the alarm system or procedure.
§ 109. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. 5-7-87]
Administration and enforcement of this Part 1 shall be functions of the
Township of Logan and shall include the following:
known address by regular mail, postage prepaid. The maintenance fee
shall be due and payable at the office of the police department or its
designee 30 days from the date of the notice of assessment of the
maintenance fee.
4. The fee for connection of a direct alarm device to a Central Receiving
Station shall be due and payable at police department headquarters or
its designee at the time an alarm device permit is issued to an applicant
for such a permit. The police department shall not issue an alarm device
to an applicant until such fee is paid.
5. The police department or Logan Fire Base shall not in any way be
obligated to provide or continue to provide a Central Receiving Station
facility or facilities for direct alarm devices; provided, that if the police
department or Logan Fire Base decides to discontinue operation of a
Central Receiving Station facility it shall notify all permit holders
serviced by said facility.
6. Failure of a permit holder to pay a monthly fee for the maintenance of
the Central Receiving Station to which his direct alarm device is
connected within 30 days of the date said payment is due shall be
subject to the disconnection of his direct alarm device from the Central
Receiving Station and to the revocation of his alarm device permit
under § 102(8) of this Part 1.
§ 105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 109
1:199
§ 110. Right to Appeal. [Ord. 5-7-87]
Whenever, under the provisions of this Part 1, the police department is
empowered to make a decision with respect to the installation, operation or
maintenance of any alarm device, or with respect to the denial or revocation
of any permit relating thereto, any applicant for a permit or permit holder
aggrieved by such decision may, within 10 days following the decision, file
a written appeal therefrom with the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Logan, whereupon the Board of Supervisors shall promptly conduct a
hearing and affirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed from. The
decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be final.
§ 111. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 5-7-87; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; by Ord. 9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
§ 112. Title. [Ord. 5-7-87]
This Part 1 shall be known and may be cited as "Logan Township Police and
Fire Alarm Ordinance."
1. Authority to accept or reject a permit application or revoke a permit
because of a misrepresentation or false statement contained in any
application for a permit, failure to correct any deficiencies in equipment
or operation of an alarm device after receipt of due notice from the
Township of Logan, or not meeting other conditions and specifications
of this Part 1.
2. Authority to order the discontinuance of an alarm device until such
device is made to comply with operational standards set forth herein,
but only when evidence of failure to comply with said standards
imposes a burden upon the Township of Logan as a result of false
alarms.
3. Authority, at reasonable times and upon written notice, to enter upon
any premises within the Township of Logan to inspect the installation
and operation of an alarm device.
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 109 LOGAN CODE § 112
1:200
Part 2
JUNK AND SALVAGE YARDS
§ 201. Short Title. [Ord. 816]
This Part 2 shall be known and may be cited as "Logan Township Junk and
Salvage Yard Ordinance".
§ 202. Definitions. [Ord. 816; as amended by Ord. 2-13-97A]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall for purposes of
this Part 2 have the following meanings:
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Logan Township.
JUNK DEALER — Any person who buys, sell, salvages, stores or in any way
deals in junk or salvage or owns, leases, operates or maintains a junk or
salvage yard within the Township.
JUNK or SALVAGE — Any and all discarded and/or salvaged materials
including, but not limited to scrap metal, scrapped, inoperable, abandoned
or junked motor vehicles, machinery, equipment, paper, glass, containers,
structures or parts thereof including used lumber or other building
components or materials, household items such as refrigerators, stoves,
washing machines, plumbing and heating fixtures, furniture, et cetera, it
being the intent and purpose of this definition to include any and all items
received for the purpose of salvage, storage and re-use or resale. Junk and
salvage shall not include, however, any material which is required to be
recycled pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Code of Ordinances entitled "Solid
Waste". Any person desiring to store or accumulate materials required to
be recycled pursuant to Chapter 20 hereof, shall also comply with the
requirements thereof.
JUNK or SALVAGE YARD — Any place where junk or salvage as defined
hereinabove is kept, stored or accumulated.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm or corporation or
other legal entity; the singular shall include plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Logan, Blair County, Pennsylvania.
§ 203. License Required. [Ord. 816]
1. No person shall engage in business as a junk or salvage dealer, or own,
operate, lease or maintain a junk or salvage yard, without first having
obtained a license so to do. The license shall be effective for one
calendar year only, such year to begin on January 1st of each year and
to terminate December 31st of the same year, and must be renewed
annually. Such license shall be displayed conspicuously upon the junk or
salvage yard premises and shall be non-transferable both as to the
premises and to licensee. Any one license issued shall be valid as to the
named licensee and for one premises or place of business only.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 203
1:201
§ 204. Application for License. [Ord. 816; as amended by Ord.
2-13-97A]
Any person desiring to operate a junk or salvage yard within the Township
of Logan shall submit an application for a license therefor upon an
application form to be supplied by the Township, such application to
include, but not be limited to the applicant's name and address, the names
and addresses of any other person interested in the business, an accurate
description of the premises upon which the junk or salvage yard business
is to be conducted, including a plot plan of the premises prepared by a
registered surveyor as indicated on said plot showing the set-backs as
hereinafter required, a statement that the applicant will comply with the
provisions of this Part 2 and any Regulations of the Township which may be
adopted hereunder, shall be sworn to or affirmed by the applicant.
§ 205. License Fees. [Ord. 816; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
The license fee shall be due and payable at and immediately before the
issuance or renewal of license. The amount of the license fee shall be
established from time to time by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 206. Issuance of Licenses. [Ord. 816; as amended by Ord.
2-13-97A]
2. Any premises upon which two or more, unlicensed or scrapped or
inoperable or abandoned or junked automobiles are kept, stored or
maintained for a period in excess of 10 days shall be deemed a junk or
salvage yard under the provisions of this Part 2, the owner, operator, or
person maintaining such premises required to obtain a license, and in
default thereof or in complying with any provisions of this Part 2,
subject to the penalties as hereinafter provided.
1. The license provided for in this Part 2 shall be issued by the Township
after written application shall have been made therefor by the person
desiring to be licensed, and the license fee required herein tendered
with such application. Upon receipt of the application, the Township
shall review the same and shall examine the premises to be licensed
and if satisfied of the propriety of the application, the conformance of
the licensee and the premises with the Regulations hereinafter set
forth, the suitability of the property proposed to be used for the purpose
of the license from the standpoint of the character of the properties
located nearby and the effect of the proposed use upon the Township,
both economic and aesthetic, the Township shall cause the license to be
issued.
2. The Township may refuse to issue a license or once issued, suspend
and/or revoke such license upon notice and hearing, in any case where
it determines all or any one of the above conditions set forth in
Subsection 1 of this § 206 have not been met, or where the Township
shall determine that the proposed use would constitute a nuisance, in
§ 203 LOGAN CODE § 206
1:202
§ 207. Records and Inspection. [Ord. 816]
Every person required to be licensed under the provisions of this Part 2
shall maintain full and complete records of the operation of his junk or
salvage operation, including a description of all articles or material received
by him, or by him removed or delivered from the junk or salvage yard,
the date, and hour of such receipt or removal, and the name and address
of the person from or to whom such articles or material were received or
delivered. Such records, as well as the premises required to be licensed,
shall at all times be open and available to inspection by the Board or its duly
authorized representatives.
§ 208. Regulations. [Ord. 816; as amended by Ord. 2-13-97A]
The Township may, by Resolution, adopt and amend, from time to time,
regulations governing Junk and Salvage Yards.
§ 209. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 816; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; by Ord. 9-19-96; by Ord. 2-13-97A]
§ 210. Abatement of Nuisances. [Ord. 816; as amended by Ord.
9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97A]
In addition to the remedies provided in § 209 hereof, the Township shall
have the power to remove any nuisance or dangerous structure on any
junk or salvage yard pursuant to Township Ordinances governing dangerous
buildings and/or nuisances, after notice to the person having been issued
a license pursuant hereto, and in said person's default, to collect the cost
of such removal and/or abatement and file a municipal lien against the real
estate as provided by law. In addition, the Township may proceed against
the violator of this part in an action in equity or such other remedies as may
be provided by law.
which case the license fee will be returned to the applicant or in the
event any provision or any regulation of this Part has been violated.
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 206 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 210
1:203

Part 3
REGULATING LICENSES OF TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS
§ 301. Title. [Ord. 12-18-86; as amended by Ord. 12-5-96; as
amended and restated by Ord. 10-13-16A]
This Part 3 shall be known and may be cited as "The Regulation and
Licensing of Transient Retail Merchants."
§ 302. Definitions. [Ord. 12-18-86; as amended by Ord. 12-5-96; as
amended and restated by Ord. 10-13-16A]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part 3 shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this § 302, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
CANVASSER — Includes any person, whether a resident of the Township
or not, who goes from house to house, from place to place or from street
to street, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders from individuals
for sale of goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, or
periodicals, or for services to be performed at that time or in the future,
whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of
the subject of such order, or whether or not he or she is collecting advance
payments on such orders.
LICENSE — The written authorization by the Township Supervisors
conferring the right to operate a transient retail business within the
Township.
LESSOR — Any person who or which leases by either an oral and/or written
lease any real estate, room, apartment, store, shop, building, railway car,
and/or other place or structure to a transient retail merchant and/or any
person engaged or intending to engage in a transient retail business.
PERSON — Any association, firm, partnership, corporation or any other
entity, as well as a natural person, male or female. The singular shall include
the plural.
TOWNSHIP — Logan Township, Blair County, Pennsylvania.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — Any business conducted in Logan
Township for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever which is
temporary in location and/or in time.
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANT or PEDDLER — Every person, whether
principal or agent, entering into, beginning, or desiring to begin a transient
retail business in Logan Township for the sale of any goods, wares, or
merchandise whatsoever, and who hires, leases, occupies, or uses any room,
apartment, store, shop, building, railway car, or other place or structure for
the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, or merchandise or who sells
such goods, wares or merchandise door to door. Said terms shall include a
participant as a vendor in a flea market and a door-to-door peddler. Nothing
contained herein shall apply to farmers selling their own produce, or to
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:205
any sale of goods, wares, or merchandise, the proceeds of which are to be
applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose and/or newsboys/girls.
§ 303. Registration and License Required. [Ord. 12-18-86; as
amended by Ord. 12-5-96; as amended and restated by Ord.
10-13-16A]
No person, including, but not limited to, a transient retail merchant and/
or canvasser, shall engage in a transient retail business in the Township
without first having obtained a license, as herein provided.
§ 304. License Requirements. [Ord. 12-18-86; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; and by Ord. 12-5-96; as amended and restated by Ord.
10-13-6A]
1. General Requirements.
A. Every person desiring to engage in a transient retail business as a
transient retail merchant in the Township shall first make
application to the Chief of Police designated as the Township
Coordinator for a license, together with a license fee as established
from time to time by the Township. Said application shall be on a
blank form provided by the Township Chief of Police and shall
contain at least the following information, verified by oath or
affirmation.
(1) Full name and physical description of the applicant and local
address, if any.
(2) Name and address of employer, together with credentials
therefrom establishing the exact relationship or a statement
that such applicant is self-employed.
(3) Permanent address and telephone number.
(4) The nature of the business and goods, wares, or merchandise
offered or intended to be offered for sale.
(5) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any felony and/or misdemeanor and/or any crime
of theft, theft by deception, and/or violation of any municipal
ordinance, other than traffic violations, and if the answer is in
the affirmative, the nature of the offense or offenses and the
punishment or punishments imposed.
(6) The type of vehicle to be used, if any, by the applicant and the
registration number.
(7) If a vehicle is being used, the name of the driver, the driver's
license number, vehicle registration number and certificate of
current automobile liability coverage.
§ 302 LOGAN CODE § 304
1:206
§ 305. Investigation Authorized. [Ord. 12-5-96; as amended and
restated by Ord. 10-13-6A]
At the discretion of the Township Chief of Police, no license may be issued
under this Part until a period of at least 24 hours has elapsed from the
time the application has been filed with the Township, in order to give the
Township sufficient time to make any investigation deemed necessary by
the Township Chief of Police before issuing a license. The Township, during
the twenty-four-hour period following the application, may investigate the
(8) The source of supply of the goods or property to be sold or
orders taken for the sale thereof and the proposed method of
delivery.
B. If the applicant intends to sell any goods, wares or merchandise
whatsoever door to door in the Township, then the applicant shall
submit to fingerprinting by the Logan Township Police Department
and furnish a photograph of him or herself to, and acceptable by,
said Police Department.
2. Lessor Requirements. It shall be the duty of every person, including a
lessor, who leases property of any type, by either an oral and/or written
lease, to any person, including a transient retail merchant conducting
or intending to conduct a transient retail business on or at said
property, to secure a license and/or licenses from the Township for each
such person and/or transient retail merchant. The person so leasing,
including a lessor, shall submit to the Township the information
required in Subsection 1 of § 304 hereof for each person, including a
transient retail merchant, conducting or intending to conduct a
transient retail business on or at said property, together with a license
fee as established by the Township from time to time. Failure to comply
with this Subsection 2 of § 304 shall entitle the Township of Logan to
prosecute either the lessor or the person, including a transient retail
merchant, or both, for noncompliance.
3. Time of Application. All license fees and information required in
Subsections 1 and 2 of § 304 hereof shall be received by the Township
as follows:
A. As to any application for one license, a period of at least 48 hours.
B. As to any application for two or more licenses, a period of at least
seven days.
4. Renewal of License. Each person, including a transient retail merchant,
who or which receives a license from the Township to conduct a
transient retail business shall be required to renew such license with
the Logan Police Chief on the first day of each successive month that
the person, including a transient retail merchant, intends to continue
the operation of a transient retail business and shall pay the monthly
fee upon each such renewal of the license.
§ 304 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 305
1:207
applicant and the applicant's business and the reputation of said business
and any other information deemed necessary to protect the public safety
and health. In the event that such investigation should indicate that the
granting of such permit would or might be injurious to the public interest,
safety or health, the Chief of Police shall have the power and authority to
refuse to issue a license.
§ 306. Issuance of License Card. [Ord. 12-18-86; as amended by
Ord. 12-5-96; as amended and restated by Ord. 10-13-16A]
§ 307. Denial, Suspension and Revocation of License; Appeal. [Ord.
10-13-6A8]
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to deny, suspend or revoke any
license issued under this Part when he/she deems such denial, suspension
or revocation to be beneficial to the public health, safety or morals,
including but not limited to, providing false information on an application
for license and/or having been convicted of a felony involving physical
harm and/or for violation of any provision of this Part. Appeals from any
suspension, revocation or denial of a license may be made to the Township
Manager at any time within 10 days after such suspension, revocation or
denial, and a meeting shall be held within 30 days of the petition for appeal.
No part of a license fee shall be refunded to any person whose license shall
have been suspended or revoked.
§ 308. Noncompliance.9 [Ord. 12-18-86; as amended by Ord.
12-5-96; as amended and restated by Ord. 10-13-16A]
It shall be unlawful for any person, including a transient retail merchant,
to permit and/or to enter into or begin a transient retail business within
the limits of Logan Township without having complied with this Part and
1. Upon the approval of license application and payment of fee as set forth
in the preceding section, the Township Chief of Police or other person
designated by the Board of Supervisors of Logan Township shall issue a
license card, containing the date of issuance and the date of expiration,
as well as the name of the transient retail merchant, the transient retail
merchant's address, the location where the transient retail merchant
intends to set up a transient retail business, and as follows:
A. If the transient retail merchant is an individual, one card to the
person making such application;
B. If a partnership, firm, or corporation, one card each to such
employee upon submission by the transient retail merchant of their
names.
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 307, Noncompliance, as § 308.
9. Editor's Note: Former § 308, Enforcement and Penalty, as amended, was repealed by Ord.
10-13-6A.
§ 305 LOGAN CODE § 308
1:208
without having in his or her possession the license card as hereinbefore
mentioned.
§ 309. Religious and Charitable Organization Fee Exemption. [Ord.
10-13-6A]
§ 310. Noise Limitations. [Ord. 10-13-6A]
No license, nor any person in his or her behalf, shall make any noise in
violation of the Township's Noise Ordinance.10
§ 311. Use of Streets and Time Restrictions. [Ord. 10-13-6A]
1. Any organization, society, association or corporation desiring to solicit,
or have solicited in its name, money, donations of money or property or
financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item
of literature, various types of tokens or merchandise for which a fee is
charged or solicited from persons other than members of such
organizations upon the streets, in office buildings, by house-to-house
canvass or in public places for a charitable, religious, patriotic, and/or
philanthropic purpose, shall be exempt from the fee provisions of § 304
of this Part, provided that there is filed a sworn application, in writing,
on a form furnished by the Police Department, which will give the
following information:
A. The name and purpose of the cause for which the license is sought.
B. The name and address of the officers and directors of the
organization.
C. A period during which solicitation is to be conducted.
D. Whether or not any commission, fees or wages are to be expended
in connection with such solicitation and the estimated amount
thereof.
2. Upon being satisfied that such organization, association or corporation
is a religious, charitable, patriotic or philanthropic organization, the
Logan Chief of Police shall issue a license without charge.
1. No licensee shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets, nor shall any licensee be permitted a stationary location
thereon, nor shall any licensee be permitted to operate in a congested
area where such operations might impede or inconvenience the public
use of such streets or sidewalks. Licensees shall be required to continue
to move about or to move to a new location every 30 minutes.
2. No licensee or permit holder shall be permitted to solicit on Sundays or
legal holidays, nor before 9:00 a.m., nor after 5:00 p.m. prevailing time,
on weekdays and Saturdays.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 10, Health and Safety, Part 3, Noise Nuisance.
§ 308 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 312
1:209
§ 312. Exhibitation of Licenses; Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited.
[Ord. 10-13-6A]
§ 313. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 10-13-6A]
Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any of the provisions of
this Part shall forfeit and pay the Township for each and every separate
offense a sum of not less than $100 nor more than $600, to be used for
and recovered as other fines and penalties are now by law recoverable
and, in default of payment of the fines and costs of prosecution, shall be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day during which a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
1. Licensees are required to exhibit their license and a form of
identification approved by the Township at all times while engaging in
business activities within the Township. No license shall be
transferable.
2. It is declared to be the policy of this Township that the occupants of
residences within the Township shall determine whether peddlers,
canvassers or transient merchants shall or shall not be invited to their
respective residences. Notice of the determination not to invite said
solicitors may be given by notice posted on the premises. Such written
notice shall constitute sufficient notice to any peddlers, canvassers or
transient merchants of the determination of the occupant.
3. Any peddlers, canvassers or transient merchants who have gained
entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately
and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the
occupant.
4. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for
any peddlers, canvassers or transient merchants to go upon any
premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door or create any
sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience
with the occupant thereof, and engage in soliciting in defiance of the
notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of
this Part.
§ 312 LOGAN CODE § 313
1:210
Part 4
COIN-OPERATED DEVICES
§ 401. General Scope. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
The subject matter of this Part is regulation, licensing and fines for the
operation of machines operated for amusement by patrons who pay money
to use said machines in the Township of Logan.
§ 402. Definitions. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
§ 403. License Required. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
1. Unless otherwise herein expressly stated, the following terms shall
have for the purpose of this Part 4 the meanings hereby respectively
indicated:
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine contrivance or device which,
upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot,
crevice or other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or
may be operated solely for the emission of song, music or similar audio
entertainment.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any video, electronic or
mechanical device, machine or apparatus (except a "jukebox") which,
upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, or upon payment
of a fee may be operated by the public generally for use as a game,
entertainment or amusement, the object of which is to secure a number,
symbol, figure or groups thereof, arrangement, pattern or score, by the
exercise of skill in the operation or manipulation of such device whether
or not a prize is offered.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
organization or corporation.
2. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
1. It is the purpose of this law that after the effective date of this Part, it
shall be unlawful for any person, persons, corporations, companies, or
firms to have, keep, lease or maintain for purposes of operation any of
the aforementioned coin operated amusement machines without first
having obtained the proper license from the Township Manager.
2. This license shall be posted at all times by affixing same in a
conspicuous place so as to be easily seen and read by all parties who
visit the premise wherein the machines are operated.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:211
§ 404. License Application. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
The application for the aforementioned license shall be filed in writing with
the Township Manager on a form to be provided by the Township of Logan
and shall specify:
§ 405. License Fee. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
1. Name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation,
partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their
addresses;
2. Name and address of the owner of the machines or the business who
leases or distributes for the purpose of operation by another - if it be
different from the applicant;
3. Address of the premises where the licensed devices are to be operated,
together with the general nature of the business carried on at such
place;
4. Trade name(s), serial numbers, names of the manufacturer, and the
number of devices to be licensed along with the general description of
the devices to be licensed; and
5. Fee that is paid and the effective dates of the application, which shall be
from whatever date the applicant starts the business of that year until
December 31 of that year.
1. No license shall be issued under this Part for any coin operated
amusement devices until the annual fee shall have been paid to the
Township Manager, or such other official designated by the Board of the
Supervisors. This annual license fee, for each machine located on the
premises, shall be as set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. For
purposes of yearly renewal, the fee shall be paid on or before February
15 of each year.
2. For devices which are installed after the 15th day of February of each
calendar year, all fees shall be paid prior to the use of the device. No
deduction or refund of any fees payable under this Part 4 shall be
granted in the case of any fee payable for less than a full calendar year
or in the case of any device being destroyed, stolen, sold or otherwise
disposed of, or transferred out of the Township of Logan, after the
payment of such fee.
3. This license shall not be transferable from one applicant to another. A
new owner, proprietor, or operator shall be required to secure a new
license and pay the license fees thereof. However, he shall not be
required to secure a new, or different license when one machine is
replaced by another as long as the total number of machines remains
the same.
§ 404 LOGAN CODE § 406
1:212
§ 406. Receipt and License. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by Ord.
10-21-88]
§ 407. Nondisclosure. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
All applications filed with the Township Manager, or designated individual,
as required by this Part 4 shall be confidential, except for official purposes,
and except in accordance with proper judicial order, or as otherwise
provided by law. Any disclosure of any information, contrary to the
provisions of this section, shall constitute a violation of this Part 4.
1. The Township Manager, or designated individual, shall issue a receipt
to each person paying the license fee upon which the following
information shall be printed or inserted:
A. The name of Logan Township.
B. The number of the tag or certificate.
C. The name and address of the person paying the license fee.
D. The year for which the license applies.
E. The serial number or other identification of each of the devices for
which the license fee shall have been paid.
F. The amount of the license tee.
Whenever any fee shall have been paid under this Part 4, the
Township Manager, or designated individual, shall prepare, in
duplicate, a receipt as herein prescribed. The original of such
receipt, to which the Township seal shall be affixed, shall be given
to the person paying the license fee, and the duplicate shall be
kept on file by the Township Manager, or designated individual.
2. The Township Manager, or designated individual, shall also procure and
give to each approved applicant paying the license fee, a license to be
prominently displayed by such person in a conspicuous place at the
location of the premises upon which the device or devices are to be
installed and used. Such license shall indicate the year for which such
fee shall have been paid, the type and number of such devices.
3. In case of the loss, defacement or destruction of the original license, the
person to whom such license was issued shall apply to the Township
Manager, or designated individual, who may issue a duplicate license in
replacement thereof, upon payment of a fee of $1.
§ 406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 408
1:213
§ 408. Action for Nonpayment. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
All fees, imposed by this Part 4 together with all penalties, interest and
costs, shall be recoverable by the Township as debts of like amount are by
law recoverable.
§ 409. Use of Revenues. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
All fees, interest and penalties collected or recovered by the Township
Manager or designated individual or any other Township Officer or person
for or on behalf of the Township, shall be paid into the Township Treasury
as general revenue to be used for general revenue purposes.
§ 410. Expenses. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
All expenses incurred in the administration of this Part 4 shall be paid by
the Township.
§ 411. Gambling Devices. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
Nothing in this Part 4 shall in any way be construed to authorize, license, or
permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism which has been
determined by the Courts to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to
existing or future laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 412. Inspections. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
The Township of Logan Police Department, Zoning Officer, or any other duly
authorized official, shall make periodic inspections of all premises where
machines of amusement and games of skill for amusement are operated for
the purpose of enforcing this Part.
§ 413. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 12-30-82; as amended by
Ord. 10-27-88; by Ord. 9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 408 LOGAN CODE § 413
1:214
Part 5
ELECTRICALLY CHARGED FENCES
§ 501. Title. [Ord. 3-31-88]
This Part 5 shall be known and may be cited as "The Regulation of
Electrically Charged Fences Ordinance of Logan Township."
§ 502. Definitions. [Ord. 3-31-88]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part 5 shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ELECTRICALLY CHARGED FENCE — Any vertical or horizontal, free
standing barrier or enclosure which carries a charged current electrically
or otherwise produced, capable of producing the slightest shock.
PERSON — Any association, firm, partnership, corporation or any other
entity, as well as, a natural person male or female. The singular shall include
the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine.
TOWNSHIP COORDINATOR — The person authorized and empowered by
the Logan Township Board of Supervisors to issue permits in accordance
with this Part 5.
§ 503. Prohibited Areas. [Ord. 3-31-88]
No electrically charged fence shall be constructed or maintained in any
residential district (those including an R designation) within the Township
of Logan. Any electrically charged fence heretofore maintained in any of
the said residential districts shall cease to carry any electrical charge
whatsoever and shall be disassembled within 30 days of the Effective Date.
(April 5)
§ 504. Electrically Charged Fences Within Agricultural, Business
and Industrial Districts. [Ord. 3-31-88]
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or substantially replace
or cause to be constructed or cause to be substantially replaced, any
electrically charged fence in any agricultural, business or industrial district
within the Township of Logan, unless;
1. The owner of such property complies with the specifications found
under § 505 herein; and
2. The owner of such property, or his duly authorized agent or contractor,
shall have secured a permit from the Township Coordinator by
presenting a written application for such permit to the Township
Coordinator, in which application there shall be set out the legal
description of the property, the name of the owner, the name of the
agent or contractor, if any, and the plans and specifications of the
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 504
1:215
§ 505. Specifications for all Electrically Charged Fences. [Ord.
3-31-88]
No electrically charged fence shall be constructed or maintained in any
Agricultural, Business or Industrial District within the Township of Logan,
unless such electrically charged fence complies with § 504 above and
complies with the following specifications:
§ 506. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 3-31-88; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; by Ord. 9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
electrically charged fence proposed to be constructed. Such electrically
charged fence shall be constructed only on the property described in
the application presented to the Township Coordinator. The Township
Coordinator shall grant approval of said written applications on a case
by case basis after giving due consideration to the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of Logan Township and the public in general.
The fee for said permit shall be as established by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. Thereafter, said permit shall be renewed annually
at the established fee.
1. Every electrically charged fence must receive its sole source of power
from an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. (UL) approved pulsating
electric fence current controller for electrically charged fences, such as
those manufactured by Parker-McCrory MFG. Co., 2000 Forest Avenue,
Kansas City, Missouri 64108.
2. Every electrically charged fence must be posted with a warning sign
upon which shall be printed the following:
DANGER
ELECTRIC FENCE
Said warning signs shall be placed every 150 feet along the length of
any electrically charged fence in such a manner as to be clearly visible
from a distance of 20 feet.
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 504 LOGAN CODE § 506
1:216
Part 6
REGULATION OF TIME, MANNER AND PLACE OF SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS OPERATIONS
§ 601. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. 9-16-99]
It is the purpose of this Part 6 to regulate sexually oriented businesses
to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the
Township, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent
the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses
within the Township as has been demonstrated by the study conducted by
the City of Austin, Texas. The provisions of this Part 6 have neither the
purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content
of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this Part 6 to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent
nor effect of this Part 6 to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
§ 602. Language Interpretations. [Ord. 9-16-99]
§ 603. Definitions. [Ord. 9-16-99]
The words and phrases set forth below shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them:
1. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular shall include the plural. References to
any gender shall, unless the context indicates otherwise, include all
genders.
C. The word "person" includes a corporation, company, partnership
and association as well as an individual.
D. The word "lot" includes the words parcel and plot.
E. The term "shall" is always mandatory.
F. The words "used or occupied" as applied to any land or building
shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied".
G. The word "building" includes the word "structure".
2. The particular shall control the general.
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 603
1:217
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — A commercial
establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for
sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment, regardless of whether such establishment sells or offers
alcohol for sale, which regularly features:
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or
other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
1.
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities."
A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or
adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to
exempt such commercial establishment from being categorized as an
adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal
business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration
the specified materials which depict or describe "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
2.
1. Persons who appear in the state of nudity; or
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
2.
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
3.
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" and has
1.
§ 603 LOGAN CODE § 603
1:218
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown
which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities."
AUDIENCE — One or more persons who are permitted to view a
performance for consideration of any type in or from a public place.
CHILD-ORIENTED BUSINESS — A commercial establishment which, as one
of its principal business purposes, serves and/or sells to children and/or
their families food, apparel, goods, services, play and/or entertainment.
CONDUCT BUSINESS — Any person who does any one or more of the
following shall be deemed to be conducting business:
ENTERTAINMENT — Any act or performance such as a play, skit, reading,
revue, pantomime, scene, song, dance, musical rendition or striptease,
whether performed by employees, agents, contractors or customers. The
term "entertainment" shall also mean bartenders, waiters, waitresses or
other employees exposing "specified anatomical areas" or engaging in
"specified sexual activities" in the presence of customers.
a sign visible which advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; or
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a time period that is less than 10
hours; or
2.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sublet for a period of
time that is less than 10 hours.
3.
Operates a cash register, cash drawer, or other depository on the adult
business premises where cash funds or records of credit card or other
credit transactions generated in any manner by the operation of the
establishment or the activities conducted therein are kept;
1.
Displays or takes orders from any customer for any merchandise,
goods, entertainment or other services offered on the adult business
premises;
2.
Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise, goods,
entertainment or other services offered on the adult business premises;
3.
Acts as a door attendant to regulate the entry of customers or other
persons into the business premises;
4.
Supervises or manages other persons in the performance of any of the
foregoing activities on the business premises.
5.
§ 603 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 603
1:219
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers or advertises
to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person or who agrees or
offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
HOLIDAYS — Nationally recognized holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
KNOWINGLY — Having knowledge of, or reason to know or a belief or
ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of the
character and content of any material or performance described herein
which is reasonably susceptible of examination by a licensee or person.
Knowingly also means that a reasonable person using reasonable skills and
faculties would have known or been aware.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in a
state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast.
PERFORMANCE — Any live or reproduced exhibition, including but not
limited to any play, motion picture film, dance or appearance presented to
or performed before an audience.
PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE — A person in whose name a permit and/or
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or
license.
PERSON — An individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other entity.
SEMI-NUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
1.
The conversion of any existing business whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to a sexually oriented business;
2.
The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
3.
4. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
§ 603 LOGAN CODE § 603
1:220
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER —
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals in a state of sexual
arousal, the male buttocks and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the
female genitals, buttocks and female breasts.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
— The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%,
as the floor area exists on the date of enactment of this Part.
TRANSFER OR OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business
purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
semi-nude.
B.
1.
This term does not include the following types of commercial
enterprises:
An enterprise in which massage therapy that does not involve
"specified sexual activities" is provided by a physician,
chiropractor, registered nurse, or other medical practitioner
licensed or certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for such
area of practice.
A.
An enterprise in which massage therapy that does not involve
"specified sexual activities" is provided by a professional massage
therapist who is licensed or certified by a national massage
therapist professional organization that has an explicit and
enforced policy statement which fully deals with the concerns
raised by this Part and furthers the purposes of this Part.
B.
2.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, and female breasts;
1.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
2.
3. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in 1 through 3 above.
4.
§ 603 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 603
1:221
§ 604. Classification. [Ord. 9-16-99]
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
§ 605. Permit Required. [Ord. 9-16-99]
1. The sale, lease, sublease and/or assignment of lease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
2.
The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
3.
1. Adult arcades;
2. Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
3. Adult cabarets;
4. Adult motels;
5. Adult motion picture theaters;
6. Adult theaters;
7. Escort agencies;
8. Nude model studios; and
9. Sexual encounter centers.
1. Any person who operates a sexually oriented business without a valid
permit issued by the Township is guilty of a violation of this Part 6.
2. An application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business must
be made on a form provided by the Zoning Officer. The application shall
be filed in triplicate with and dated by the Zoning Officer.
3. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws by the
Zoning Officer.
4. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, said person must sign the application for the permit as an
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 10% or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for the permit
as an applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented
business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business, each
§ 603 LOGAN CODE § 605
1:222
§ 606. Issuance of the Permit. [Ord. 9-16-99]
individual having a direct or indirect interest in 10% or greater of the
corporation must sign the application for a permit as an applicant.
5. The fact that a person possesses other types of Township permits to
operate a business within the Township does not exempt the person
from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.
1. The Zoning Officer shall approve the issuance of a permit to an
applicant within 30 days after receipt of a completed application unless
said officer finds one or more of the following to be true:
A. An applicant is under 18 years of age.
B. An applicant or an applicant's spouse and/or agent is overdue in
such person's payment to the Township of taxes, fees, fines or
penalties assessed against such person or imposed upon such
person in relation to a sexually oriented business.
C. An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of a permit or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
D. An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
permit by the Township to operate a sexually oriented business
within the preceding 12 months, or resides with a person whose
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked
within the preceding 12 months.
E. The premises to be used for a sexually oriented business has been
reviewed and has been disapproved by the Township as not being in
compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
F. The permit fee required by this Part 6 has not been paid.
G. An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with a provision of this Part 6.
H. An individual applicant, individual holding a direct interest or more
than 10% in a corporate applicant, officer or director of a corporate
applicant, partner or limited partner if the applicant is a
partnership, or manager or other person in charge of the operation
of the applicant's business has or have been convicted of an offense
involving sexual misconduct within the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, including, but not limited to, prostitution, obscenity,
rape, statutory rape, and possession of child pornography, or
convicted of an offense in any jurisdiction other than the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that would have constituted an
offense involving sexual misconduct if committed within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In order for approval to be denied
pursuant to this subsection, the person or persons' conviction in
§ 605 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 606
1:223
§ 607. Fees. [Ord. 9-16-99]
The permit fee for a sexually oriented business shall be determined by the
Logan Township Board of Supervisors from time to time. The fee must be
reasonably related to recoup the expenses from the application process. The
Logan Township Board of Supervisors shall also determine an annual fee for
renewal of the permit.
§ 608. Inspection. [Ord. 9-16-99]
§ 609. Expiration of the Permit. [Ord. 9-16-99]
connection with the sexual misconduct offense must have occurred
within two years of the date of application in the event of a
misdemeanor and within five years of the date of application in the
event of a felony.
2. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of
the sexually oriented business. The permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that it may be easily read at any time.
3. The Zoning Officer shall complete the certification that the premises
are in compliance or not in compliance within 30 days of receipt of the
completed application by the Township.
1. An applicant, or permittee, shall permit the Police Department and/or
the Zoning Officer to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented
business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any
time that the sexually oriented business is occupied or open for
business.
2. A person who operates a sexually oriented business, or said person's
agent or employee, violates this Part 6 if said person refuses to permit
such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open
for business.
1. Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 605. Application
for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date
and, when made fewer than 30 days before the expiration date, the
pendency of the application will not prevent the expiration of the
permit.
2. If the Zoning Officer denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a permit for one year from the date of denial, except that after
90 days have elapsed since the date of denial, the applicant may be
granted a permit if the Zoning Officer finds that the basis for denial of
the renewal permit has been corrected or abated.
§ 606 LOGAN CODE § 610
1:224
§ 610. Suspension of Permit. [Ord. 9-16-99]
The Zoning Officer shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 30 days
if said officer determines that a permittee or an employee of a permittee
has:
§ 611. Revocation of Permit. [Ord. 9-16-99]
1. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this Part 6;
2. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this Part 6.
3. Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on sexually
oriented business premises;
4. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on sexually oriented
business premises;
5. Demonstrated an inability to manage or operate a sexually oriented
business in a peaceful or lawful manner thus necessitating action by
law enforcement officers.
1. The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit if any cause of suspension set
forth in § 610 occurs and the permit has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.
2. The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit if said officer determines that:
A. A permittee, or any of the persons specified in § 606(1)(H), is or has
been convicted of the offenses specified in § 606(1)(H);
B. A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the Township during the application process;
C. A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
D. A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;
E. A permittee or an employee of a permittee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the
permittee's permit was suspended;
F. A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or other explicit sexual conduct to occur in or on the
permitted premises;
G. A permittee is delinquent in payment of the Township,
Commonwealth and/or Federal taxes or fees relating to the
involved sexually oriented businesses.
§ 610 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 611
1:225
§ 612. Transfer of Permit/Site of Operation. [Ord. 9-16-99]
A permittee shall not transfer said permittee's permit to any other person. A
permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority
of a permit at any place and/or site other than the address designated in the
application and approved by the Township.
§ 613. Display of a Permit. [Ord. 9-16-99]
The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous, public place in the sexually
oriented business.
§ 614. Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses. [Ord. 9-16-99]
3. A transfer of the permit involved and/or any interest in said permit shall
automatically and immediately revoke the permit.
4. When a Zoning Officer revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue
for one year, and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually oriented
business permit for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. If subsequent to the revocation, the Zoning Officer finds that
the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date
the revocation became effective. If the revocation is pursuant to
Subsection 2A above, the revocation shall be effective for two years in
the event of a misdemeanor or five years in the case of a felony.
5. After denial of an application, denial of renewal of a permit, or
suspension or revocation of a permit, the Zoning Officer shall send to
the applicant or permittee, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
written notice of his action. The written notice shall contain the specific
reasons for denial of the permit or for the suspension or revocation of
the permit. The applicant or permittee shall have the right to appeal
said action and to seek prompt judicial review of such administrative
action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
1. A person is guilty of a violation of Logan Township's Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter 27) and this Part 6 if said person operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business outside of the zoning district in
which a sexually oriented business is allowed by that Ordinance.
2. A person is guilty of a violation of Logan Township's Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter 27) and this Part 6 if said person operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:
A. A church;
B. A public or private pre-elementary, elementary or secondary
school;
C. A public library;
§ 611 LOGAN CODE § 614
1:226
D. A child care facility or nursery school;
E. A public park adjacent to any residential district;
F. A child-oriented business;
G. The boundary of any residential district as defined by the zoning
ordinance.
3. A person is guilty of a violation of Logan Township's Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter 27) and this Part 6 if such person causes or permits the
operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of
ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of
another sexually oriented business.
4. A person is guilty of a violation of this Part 6 if such person causes or
permits: the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one
sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion
thereof or; the increase of floor areas of any sexually oriented business
in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually
oriented business.
5. For the purposes of this Part 6 and Logan Township's Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter 27), measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of
the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a
sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of
the premises of a church, public or private pre-elementary, elementary,
or secondary school, public library, child care facility, child-oriented
business, or nursery school, the nearest boundary of an affected public
park; or to the nearest boundary of any residential district. The
presence of a municipal, county, or other political subdivision boundary
shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance
requirements of this section.
6. For purposes of Subsection 3 of this section, the distance between any
two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest
exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
7. A sexually oriented business that was lawfully operating on the date of
the enactment of this Part 6 or the relevant amendments to the Logan
Township Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 27) (whichever applies) that is in
violation of Subsection 1, 2, 3, or 4 of this section shall be deemed a
nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use.
8. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the
grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit, of a church,
public or private pre-elementary, elementary, or secondary school,
§ 614 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 614
1:227
§ 615. Hours of Operation. [Ord. 9-16-99]
Operating hours of sexually oriented businesses which apply for an initial
permit and/or any renewal permit after passage of this Part shall be
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Mondays through Saturdays,
and closure of such businesses on Sundays and holidays. This section
is intended to reduce the adverse secondary effects of such businesses
including particularly, but not limited to, late night noise levels, crime,
sexually offensive materials and activities in public areas, and promotes the
public health, safety and welfare.
§ 616. Exemptions. [Ord. 9-16-99]
It is a defense to prosecution under § 605 and § 613 that a person appearing
in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
§ 617. Injunction. [Ord. 9-16-99]
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid permit or in violation of this Part 6 is subject to an
action in equity or a suit for injunction as well as citations for violations of
this Part 6.
public library, child care facility, child-oriented business, nursery
school, public park or residential district within 1,000 feet of the
sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of
a valid permit, and does not apply when an application for a permit is
submitted after a permit has expired or has been revoked.
1. By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
3. In a structure:
A. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for
viewing; and
B. Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
C. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
§ 614 LOGAN CODE § 618
1:228
§ 618. Penalty. [Ord. 9-16-99]
In addition to any other remedies and/or penalties provided in this Part 6,
any person found guilty before a District Justice of violating any provision
of this Part 6 shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $500
and not more than $1,000 plus cost and in default of payment undergo
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day a violation of
this Part continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
§ 618 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 618
1:229
Chapter 15
MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 618 LOGAN CODE § 618
1:230
Part 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 101. Definitions and Interpretation. [Ord. 10-27-88]
1. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
Parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in The Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162 No. 81), as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
2. The following terms shall have the following definitions:
COMBINATION — Two or more vehicles physically interconnected in
tandem.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A fire department vehicle, police vehicle,
ambulance, blood delivery vehicle, Armed Forces emergency vehicle,
one private vehicle of a fire or police chief or assistant chief, or
ambulance corps commander or assistant commander, or of a river
rescue commander used for answering emergency calls, or other
vehicle designated by the State Police under Section 6010 of the
"Vehicle Code" (relating to name of emergency vehicles by Pennsylvania
State Police).
GROSS WEIGHT — The combined weight of a motor vehicle and its load
and driver.
LEGAL HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
LOCAL TRAFFIC — The following shall be regarded as local traffic:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle or combination as defined and/or
governed by the "Vehicle Code," 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as amended.
PERSON — Any natural person of either sex, firms, co-partnerships and
corporations, and all associations of natural persons, whether acting by
themselves, or by a servant or employee.
A. Emergency vehicles;
B. School buses;
Vehicles and combinations of governmental agencies and utilities
or their contractors engaged in construction or maintenance on a
posted highway or in a location which can be reached only via a
posted highway; and
C.
Vehicles and combinations going to or coming from a residence,
commercial establishment, or farm located on a posted highway or
which can be reached only via a posted highway, including vehicles
used for public transportation.
D.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 101
1:231
§ 102. Manner of Adopting Permanent Traffic and Parking
Regulations. [Ord. 10-27-88]
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 103. Provisions to be Continuation of Existing Regulations. [Ord.
10-27-88]
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 104. Temporary and Emergency Regulations. [Ord. 10-27-88]
SCHOOL BUS — A motor vehicle designated for carrying more than
10 passengers, exclusive of the driver, and used for transportation of
school children.
3. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
1. The Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate traffic
and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
A. In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
B. In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
2. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter 15 for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
§ 101 LOGAN CODE § 105
1:232
§ 105. Experimental Regulations. [Ord. 10-27-88]
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time by resolution, designate
places upon and along the highways in the Township of Logan where, for a
period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate
such locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective as if they had been specified in this
chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of
any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by
authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth
in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and
in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law
or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with
costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for
the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of
permanent changes in the ordinances of the Township of Logan relative to
traffic and parking.
§ 106. Traffic on Streets Closed or Restricted for Construction,
Maintenance or Special Events. [Ord. 10-27-88]
§ 107. Use of Streets by Processions and Assemblages. [Ord.
10-27-88]
1. Board of Supervisors shall have authority to close any street or specific
part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion, while construction or
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such closed portion.
2. Board of Supervisors shall have authority to establish a restricted
traffic area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is
under way and to station flagman at each end of the restricted portion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such
restricted traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign
directing that vehicle to stop, or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or
other device, not to proceed.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street;
§ 105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 107
1:233
§ 108. Authority of Police Officers. [Ord. 10-27-88]
The police officers of the Township of Logan are hereby given authority to
direct traffic on the highways of the Township of Logan and at intersections
thereof.
§ 109. Authorization for Use of Speed Timing Devices. [Ord.
10-27-88]
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week
in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held,
but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be
used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks
in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in
any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used,
application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is under way, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by
which the end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route
of the procession and the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall
be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted, or under any conditions as to
time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The Township of Logan Police Department is hereby authorized to use
all speed timing devices for the determination of speed of a motor
§ 107 LOGAN CODE § 109
1:234
vehicle as are approved or will be approved by the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance
with Title 75, Pa. C.S.A. § 3368.
2. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Township of Logan, be they Township of Logan, county or state
highways, and does also hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to
"local authorities" under the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 6101 et seq. (1977), as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 109 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 109
1:235

Part 2
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 201. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Streets. [Ord.
10-27-88; as amended by Ord. 8-1-91; and by Ord. 8-17-95]
1. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph)
ELDORADO
58th Street SR07023 and City line 25
Creekside
Drive
Timberline Road and
Lakeside Drive
25
Edison
Avenue
Valley Avenue and Poland
Avenue
15
Edison
Avenue
Hillside Avenue and
Poland Avenue
15
Edison
Avenue
59th Street and Hillside
Avenue
25
Hillside
Avenue
58th Street and Poland
Avenue
15
Locust Street 58th Street to dead end 25
Oak Avenue City Line and Allegheny
Township
25
Poland
Avenue
58th Street and
Timberline Road
15
Valley Avenue 58th Street and
Timberline Road
25
GRANDVIEW
5th Street SR07027 and City line 25
6th Street City line to dead end 15
7th Street SR4015 and Vickers
Lane
15
8th Street 19th Avenue and Vickers
Lane
15
19th Avenue 7th Street and 8th Street 15
Gwin Road City line to WR860 25
Spook Hollow City line and SR07026 25
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 201
1:237
Street Between
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph)
Vickers Lane 8th Street and 7th Street 15
GREENWOOD
7th Street SR07027 and Second
Avenue
25
S. Carlisle
Lane
Princeton Road and Utah
Lane
25
S. Dartmouth
Lane
SR55 and Sandy Run 25
Dixie Lane Entire length 15
Erin Drive Entire length 15
E. Hamilton
Lane
SR4016 to dead end 15
Lafayette
Lane
SR55 and Princeton
Road
35
Lasalle Lane Rice Road and Utah Lane 25
Lehigh Lane Princeton Road and
SR55
15
Lycoming
Road
Utah Lane and S. Carlisle
Lane
25
Mountain
Avenue
9th Street to dead end 35
Pinewood
Drive
Linwood Drive and
Sherwood Drive
25
Pottsgrove
Road
Rosehill Drive and SR55 25
Princeton
Road
Rutgers Lane and
Bellemead Drive
25
Princeton
Road
SR55 and Antis Township
line
25
Rice Road S. Carlisle Lane to S.
Carlisle Lane
25
Rosehill Drive City line and Pottsgrove
Road
25
Rutgers Lane SR55 and Princeton
Road
25
St. Francis
Lane
S. Dartmouth Lane to
dead end
15
Sandy Run SR07027 and Antis
Township line
15
§ 201 LOGAN CODE § 201
1:238
Street Between
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph)
Sycamore
Street
SR55 and SR493 15
Temple Lane SR55 and Princeton
Road
25
Wilson Street SR07027 and City line 25
JUNIATA GAP
3rd Street Bakers Lane and 30th
Avenue
15
4th Street Bakers Lane and 30th
Avenue
15
Avalon Road SR860 and SR221 15
Bakers Lane SR860 and City line 15
Brookside
Drive
Park to Juniata Springs
Drive
15
Cogan Road SR860 and dead end 15
Fourth
Avenue
Juniata Gap Road and
City line Juniata
(SR4013)
35
Franklin
Drive
Logandale and
Homewood Drive
15
Glenwood
Drive
Logandale and Juniata
Springs Drive
15
Homewood
Drive
Parkside Drive and dead
end
15
Juniata Spgs.
Drive
SR860 and dead end 15
Logandale
Drive
SR860 and Parkside
Drive
15
Miller SR221 and dead end 15
Park Drive Parkside Drive and
SRS60
15
Parkside
Drive
Logandale and
Homewood Drive
15
Rider Road SR860 and Gwin Road 15
LAKEMONT
2nd Avenue 6th Street and dead end 25
6th Street Leslie and Frankstown
Road
25
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 201
1:239
§ 202. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Bridges and
Elevated Structures. [Ord. 10-27-88]
Street Between
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph)
Jaggard
Street
City line and dead end 25
Lake Avenue 6th Street and
Frankstown Road
35
Leslie Avenue N. Pine and 6th Street 35
Park Avenue 6th Street and
Frankstown Road
35
MILL RUN
Coburn
Access
Weaver Street and
Coburn
25
Old Mill Run Cashman Road and
SR07024
25
Porta Road Railroad Crossing to
dead end
25
Porta Road Railroad Crossing and
City line
25
Weaver
Street
Dead end to access road
for Coburn
25
Willow Drive SR07024 to dead end 15
NEWBURG
16th Street 28th Avenue and 29th
Avenue
25
29th Avenue 16th Street and 13th
Street
25
Washington
Avenue
SR221 and City line 25
Wingate Road SR221 and SR07024 25
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
§ 201 LOGAN CODE § 202
1:240
§ 203. Maximum Speed Limits Established for Certain Vehicles on
Hazardous Grades. [Ord. 10-27-88]
§ 204. Maximum Speed Limits Established in Parks. [Ord. 10-27-88]
§ 205. Traffic Signals at Certain Locations. [Ord. 10-27-88]
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Gross
Weight
Speed
Limit
Required
to
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over
the maximum speed limit.
1. A speed limit of 35 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Township
of Logan, except in the following locations, where the lower maximums,
as specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
§ 202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 205
1:241
§ 206. Intersections Where Turn Prohibited on Red Signal. [Ord.
10-27-88]
§ 207. One-Way Streets Established. [Ord. 10-27-88; as amended by
Ord. 11-6-97; and by Ord. 12-13-01]
1. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location
Bellemead Drive at Pleasant Valley Boulevard/SR55
Cayuga Avenue at Plank Road/SR55
Rosswell at Logan Boulevard/SR55 (Lakemont)
Service Road F at Orchard Avenue/SR07062
2. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling on Facing
(Reserved)
2. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To Location
Cogan Road S.R. 4017 Stephenson
Street
Juniata Gap
North Pine Logan Boulevard Bridge Street Lakemont
Park Avenue
(at such times and
portions deemed
appropriate by the
Chief of Police or
designate)
6th Street and
Lake Avenue
Frankstown
Road
Lakemont
Yale Lane SR55 Pitt Road Greenwood
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 205 LOGAN CODE § 208
1:242
§ 208. Turning at Certain Intersections Prohibited or Restricted.
[Ord. 10-27-88]
§ 209. Right Turns Only Permitted at Certain Intersections. [Ord.
10-27-88; as amended by Ord. 2-9-89]
§ 210. U-Turns Prohibited at Certain Locations. [Ord. 10-27-88]
§ 211. No-Passing Zones Established. [Ord. 10-27-88]
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction of
Travel
Not to Make
Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable
to
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the directions or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at
any time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction of
Travel Times
Not to Make
Left Turn Into
or Travel
Straight Across
Sixth Street
(Lakemont)
East All Frankstown Road
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 208 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 211
1:243
§ 212. Through Highways Established. [Ord. 10-27-88; as amended
by Ord. 12-22-94A]
1. The following are established as no passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Street Direction of Travel Between
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by Section 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, as
the case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through
highway until he has followed all applicable requirements of that
section of the law:
Highway Between
ELDORADO
58th Street SR07023 and City line
Hillside Avenue 58th Street to Poland Avenue
Oak Avenue City line to Allegheny Township
line
Poland Avenue 58th Street to Timberline Road
Valley Avenue 58th Street to Timberline Road
GRANDVIEW
5th Street City line to SR07026
Davis Road SR07026 to Gwin Road
Gwin Road City line to SR860
Homers Gap Road SR07026 to Antis Township line
GREENWOOD
Atlantic Avenue SR493 to dead end
Bellemead Drive SR55 to Antis Township line
S. Carlisle Lane Bellemead Drive to Utah Road
S. Dartmouth Lane SR55 to Sandy Run Road
Pottsgrove Road Rosehill Drive to SR55
§ 211 LOGAN CODE § 212
1:244
§ 213. Stop Intersections Established. [Ord. 10-27-88; as amended
by Ord. 11-16-89; by Ord. 6-07-90; by Ord. 10-11-90; by Ord.
12-22-94A; by Ord. 8-17-95; and by Ord. 11-6-97]
Highway Between
Princeton Road Rutgers Lane to Bellemead Drive
Rosehill Drive City line to Pottsgrove Road
JUNIATA GAP
Avalon Road SR860 to SR221
Baker Lane City line to SR860
Logandale Drive Parkside Drive to SR860
Park Drive Parkside Drive to SR860
LAKEMONT
2nd Avenue 6th Street to dead end
4th Avenue Frankstown Road to dead end
6th Street Leslie to Frankstown Road
Beech Street Logan Boulevard to 1st Avenue
Lake Avenue 6th Street to Frankstown Road
Park Avenue 6th Street to Frankstown Road
Roswell Logan Boulevard to dead end
Shand Lake Avenue to 11th Street
MILL RUN
Old Mill Run Road SR07024 to dead end
NEWBURG
28th Avenue SR221 to City line
Washington Avenue City line to SR221
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 212) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting of through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code, and shall not proceed into or across the second-named or
intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
§ 212 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 213
1:245
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
ELDORADO
Edison Avenue 59th Street
Hillside Avenue Poland Avenue
Poland Avenue Timberline Drive
Riling Lane Pierce Road
Timberline Drive Creekside Drive
GRANDVIEW
2nd Street 15th Avenue
4th Street 15th Avenue
15th Street 2nd Street
15th Street 3rd Street
16th Street 3rd Street
GREENWOOD
9th Street Mountain Avenue
Dixie Lane Erin Drive
E. Hamilton Lane Sharon Avenue
Hamilton Lane Sycamore Street
Mountain Avenue 9th Street
Notre Dame Road Temple Lane
Overlook Drive Caroline Avenue
Pitt Road Bucknell Lane
Pitt Road Yale Lane
Princeton Road Yale Lane
Sandy Run Road South Dartmouth Road (4-way)
Sycamore Street Hamilton Lane
Wilson Street East Second Avenue
JUNIATA GAP
Fourth Street Bakers Lane
Glenwood Drive Juniata Springs Drive
Hope Lane Patterson Road
Patterson Road Hope Lane
Westwood Park Drive Stephenson Street
Woomer Road Bloom Road
LAKEMONT
4th Street 8th Street
4th Street 11th Street
§ 213 LOGAN CODE § 213
1:246
§ 214. Yield Intersections Established. [Ord. 10-27-88]
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
5th Street 8th Street
8th Street 4th Avenue
Bridge Street Sprankle Avenue
Eldon Avenue Rebecca Street
Elm Street Leslie Avenue
Front Street Leslie Avenue
Leslie Avenue South Pine Street
Shand Avenue 11th Street
Spruce Street Lotz Avenue
MILL RUN
14th Street Weaver Street
Mennonite Road Old Mill Run Road
Weaver Street Weaver Street
NEWBURG
15th Street 29th Avenue
28th Avenue 15th Street
29th Avenue - northbound 15th Street
Washington Avenue 28th Avenue (4-way)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 213) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(c) of
the Vehicle Code, and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 213 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 215
1:247
§ 215. Engine Brakes. [Ord. 5-11-06]
1. The operation of an engine brake on a gasoline powered or diesel
powered motor vehicle not equipped with exhaust mufflers, or equipped
with defective or modified exhaust mufflers, so as to create excessive
noise through the use of such engine brake, adversely affects the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township of Logan
and, therefore, is hereby declared to be a nuisance in fact.
2. No person shall operate a gasoline powered or diesel powered motor
vehicle on any of the streets located within the Township of Logan,
utilizing, in such operation, an engine brake, without exhaust mufflers,
permitting excessive noise to be created by such motor vehicle.
3. This section shall not apply to emergency driving situations requiring
the utilization of an engine brake to protect the safety and property of
the residents of the Township of Logan, other motor vehicles and
operators, pedestrians, and operators and passengers of the motor
vehicle involved in such emergency situation.
4. The Township is hereby authorized to erect warning signs, where
deemed necessary to alert drivers of the contents of this section.
5. Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than $75 and not
more than $600 plus costs and, in default of the payment thereof, shall
be imprisoned in the County Jail for not more than 30 days.
§ 215 LOGAN CODE § 215
1:248
Part 3
RESTRICTIONS ON SIZE, WEIGHT AND TYPE OF VEHICLE AND
LOAD
§ 301. Vehicle Weight Limits Established on Certain Streets and
Bridges. [Ord. 10-27-88; as amended by Ord. 7-22-93; by Ord.
12-02-93A; by Ord. 9-15-94; by Ord. 2-12-98; and by Ord. 07-09-09]
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a
gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge
or street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum Gross
Weight
14th Avenue (Mill
Run)
Old Mill Run Road to 32nd
Street
10 tons
32nd Street (Mill
Run)
Weaver Street to N. Tenth
Avenue
10 tons
58th Street (T-406) State Route 4008 and the
boundary line between
Logan Township and the
City of Altoona
10 tons
Avalon Road
(T-476)
State Road 4017 (Juniata
Gap Road) and State Route
0036
10 tons
Burgoon Run
Bridge
(Eldorado) 10 tons for single
vehicles and 13 tons
for combination
vehicles
Colgate Lane (Greenwood) 20 tons
Davis Road (T-480) State Route 4015
(Grandview Road) and
State Route 4017 (Juniata
Gap Road)
10 tons
Dunkle Lane
(Grandview)
Gwin Road to S.R. 07026 10 tons
Homer Gap Road
(T-483)
State Route 4015
(Grandview Road) and the
boundary line between
Logan Township and Antis
Township
10 tons
North Tenth
Avenue (Mill Run)
32nd Street to Coburn
Road (Railroad Crossing)
10 tons
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:249
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum Gross
Weight
Oak Avenue
(T-489)
Boundary line between
Logan Township and the
City of Altoona and
boundary line of Logan
Township and Allegheny
Township
10 tons
Old Mill Run Road
(T-456)
State Route 4005 and dead
end
10 tons
Richland Road Pa. Route 860 (Wopsy
Road) to Township line
10 tons
Shannon Road Pa. Route 36 to dead end 10 tons
Weaver Street
(Mill Run)
Old Mill Run Road to 32nd
Street
10 tons
Weaver Street
bridge
(Mill Run) 11 tons
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(a) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code,
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75, except
that any person convicted of operating a vehicle with a gross weight in
excess of a posted limit shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of $150 plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of
3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight, and costs.
3. Local Traffic, as defined herein, shall be exempted from the restrictions
imposed under § 301(1), above, however, if the Township determines
that any local traffic is likely to damage the road, the Township will so
notify the registrants of the motor vehicle and will also notify the State
Police. After two business days following delivery of the notice, or after
five days following mailing the notice, such local traffic vehicles shall
not exceed the weight limits except in accordance with Subsection 5
hereof.
4. The Township, through its authorized, agents shall erect or cause to be
erected and maintained restriction signs designating the weight
restrictions at such places deemed appropriate by the Township. In the
case of a weight restriction on a bridge or on a road which does not
begin or end at an intersection with an unrestricted road, the Township
through its authorized agents, shall also place an advance informational
sign at the intersection nearest each end of the restricted bridge or
portion of road which would allow drivers to avoid the restricted bridge
or portion of road.
5. The Township may issue permits for the movement of motor vehicles
with weights in excess of the restrictions imposed under Subsection 1,
above, and may require such undertaking or security as it deems
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:250
§ 302. Restrictions on Size of Vehicles on Certain Streets and
Bridges. [Ord. 10-27-88]
§ 303. Restrictions as to Weight and Size of Vehicles on Certain
Streets and Bridges. [Ord. 10-27-88]
§ 304. Truck Traffic Restricted on Certain Streets. [Ord. 10-27-88]
necessary to cover the costs of anticipated or probable repairs and
restoration necessitated by the permitted movement of vehicles. All
action taken under the authority of this section shall be taken in
accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation.
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902(a) and Section 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle
Code, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 and
costs.
1. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by Section 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation
of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of
street.
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902(b) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code,
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$25 and not more than $100 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets;
provided nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving
an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or from
driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other
commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises
located along that street or part of a street.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 304
1:251
Street Between
Creekside Drive Timberline and Hill Top Drive
(Eldorado)
S. Dartmouth Lane SR55 and SR07027 (Greenwood)
S. Dartmouth Lane SR55 and Bellemead Drive (Greenwood)
Sandy Run Road SR07027 and Antis Township line
(Greenwood)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 304 LOGAN CODE § 304
1:252
Part 4
GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 401. Vehicles to be Parked Within Marked Spaces. [Ord. 10-27-88]
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this Part for any person to
park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 402. Angle Parking Required on Portions of Certain Streets. [Ord.
10-27-88]
§ 403. Parking Prohibited at All Times in Certain Locations. [Ord.
10-27-88; as amended by Ord. 11-16-89; by Ord. 6-17-93; by Ord.
12-22-94A; by Ord. 11-6-97; by Ord. 11-09-06A; and by Ord.
09-22-11]
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
ELDORADO
Creekside Drive Both Timberline to Hilltop Drive
Creekside Drive Both Hilltop to Lakeside Drive
Hillside Avenue
[Added by Ord.
02-14-13]
East Poland Avenue to Pierce Street
Poland Avenue Both Beside Edison School
GRANDVIEW
2nd Street (Juniata) Left 16th Avenue to 17th Avenue
Gwin Road (Juniata) Left Campus Dorms/Bloom Road to
Fisher's
Park Avenue Both Grandview Road and the Logan
Township/City of Altoona
boundary
GREENWOOD
2nd Avenue Left 7th Street to Alley
1. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
2. On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at
the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 403
1:253
Street Side Between
Atlantic Avenue Right Caroline Avenue to SR493
East Hudson Avenue
[Added by Ord.
04-23-15]
Interior
boundary of
cul-de-sac
900 block
Hamilton Lane Both Sycamore Street To E. Walton
Avenue
Johns Street Both Rosehill Drive to dead end
Pottsgrove Road Right Pitt Road to SR55
Princeton Road Right Cornell to Yale Lane
Rosehill Drive Right City line to Johns Street
Yale Lane Right Princeton Road to Pitt Road
JUNIATA GAP
Bakers Lane SR860 for 400 feet
Becker's Lane SR860 to dead end
Gwin Road Both Bloom Road and Rider Road
Juniata Springs Road Right Juniata Gap Road to Glenwood
Drive
LAKEMONT
2nd Avenue Both 6th Street to N. Pine
7th Street Both Shand to Park
8th Street Both Shand to Park
9th Street Both Shand to Park
Cayuga Avenue Both Plank Road to dead end
Jaggard Street Both City Line to Junkyard
Lotz Right Spruce to Elm Street
Park Avenue Both 6th Street to 10th Street
Shand Both Lake to 11th Street
Spruce Street Both Logan Boulevard to Logan
Boulevard Alley
Sterling Road Right Orchard Avenue to Highland
Avenue (A paper street)
MILL RUN
SR 4005 (Mill Run
Road)
Both Firehouse Road to Mennonite
Road
Mennonite Road Both Mill Run Road and Old Mill Run
Road
NEWBURG
28th Avenue Both 400 feet of Washington Avenue
§ 403 LOGAN CODE § 403
1:254
Street Side Between
Shannon Road Right SR221 for 800 feet
Washington Avenue Both 400 feet of 28th Avenue
§ 404. Parking Prohibited in Certain Locations Certain Days and
Hours. [Ord. 10-27-88]
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
ELDORADO
Novack Road
[Added by
Ord.
10-12-17]
East Poland
Avenue and
Valley Avenue
Mon. — Fri.
(except
federal
holidays)
All
Poland
Avenue
[Added by
Ord.
10-12-17]
North Edison
Avenue and
Novack Road
Mon. — Fri.
(except
federal
holidays)
All
§ 405. Parking of Trucks, Buses and Certain Other Vehicles
Prohibited in Certain Locations. [Ord. 10-27-88]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked,
on any of the following streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a
passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or passenger
car attached to a trailer of any kind):
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 406. Parking Time Limited in Certain Locations Certain Days and
Hours. [Ord. 10-27-88; as amended by Ord. 12-22-94A]
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days
Parking
Time Limit
GRANDVIEW
2nd Street Right 16th Avenue
to 17th
Avenue
Every day 2 hours
GREENWOOD
§ 403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 406
1:255
Street Side Between Days
Parking
Time Limit
2nd Avenue Right 7th Street to
Alley
Every day 2 hours
LAKEMONT
2nd Avenue Right By 4th Street Every day 30 min.
NEWBURG
28th Avenue Right 18th Street
and
Washington
Avenue
Every day, 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
15 minutes
§ 407. Special Purpose Parking Zones Established; Parking
Otherwise Prohibited. [Ord. 10-27-88; as amended by Ord. 6-17-93]
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked,
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle
Hamilton Lane Both No parking 30 feet
from each corner
None
Sycamore
Street
Southeast berm 20 feet from corner 15 minute parking
§ 408. Standing or Parking on Roadway for Loading or Unloading.
[Ord. 10-27-88]
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
on the following named streets on Monday through Saturday, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and
4:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 409. Penalties.11 [Ord. 10-27-88; as amended by Ord. 5-16-91]
Any person who violates any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 plus costs; provided it shall
11.Editor’s Note: See also § 411.
§ 406 LOGAN CODE § 409
1:256
be the duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement personnel of
the Township of Logan to report to the appropriate official all violations of
any provision of this Part, indicating, in each case: the Section violated; the
license number of the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where
the violation took place; and any other facts that might be necessary in
order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation. The police officer or other person making the report shall also
attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle
was parked in violation of this Part. The notice shall contain instructions to
the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he will report to the office of the
Chief of Police and pay the sum of $15 within 48 hours after the time of
the notice, or if he will place the sum of $15, enclosed within the envelope
provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes which may be installed
from time to time in the Township of Logan, that act will save the violator
from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs prescribed in the
first sentence of this section.
§ 410. Business, Industrial and Other Parking Areas. [Ord.
10-27-88; as added by Ord. 5-16-91; as amended by Ord. 6-17-93]
In addition to all other regulations delineated in this Part affecting business,
industrial or other parking areas, it shall also be unlawful for anyone
operating a motor vehicle on or in a business, industrial or other area to:
§ 411. Disabled Person and Severely Disabled Veteran Parking.
[Ord. 10-13-16B]
A. Park a motor vehicle any place in the said area except in the actual
spaces so provided for parking by the business, industrial or other use
by the owners.
B. Park a motor vehicle in any of the running or driving lanes of the said
business, industrial or other area parking lots.
C. Park a motor vehicle in any area along a curbing painted yellow and
designated for fire safety purposes.
D. Park a motor vehicle not bearing a handicapped license plate or
dashboard card in any designated handicapped parking area in any
zoning district of the Township.
1. Definitions. As used in this section, all words, terms and phrases shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code,
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as amended (hereinafter "Vehicle Code").
2. Reserved Parking Areas. Any Township resident who has been issued a
disabled person or severely disabled veteran plate or who has been
issued a disabled person or severely disabled veteran parking placard
as prescribed in Vehicle Code (hereinafter collectively referred to as
"disabled person" or "disabled persons") who shall meet all of the
established criteria set forth in Subsection 3 of this section and who
§ 409 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 411
1:257
shall have paid the required fees, shall be accorded a permit for one
reserved parking area on a public street near his or her dwelling.
3. Criteria for Reserved Parking Space.
A. Any disabled person desiring to reserve a parking space by his or
her residence shall complete an application form supplied by the
Township Police Department and pay the applicable fee.
B. The granting of these signs shall be the responsibility of the Board
of Supervisors, based upon an investigation of the application
conducted by the Township Police Department.
C. There must be no off-street parking available for the disabled
person in question. It shall be presumed that no off-street parking
is available if the topography, turning radius, nature of the
disability or other factors effectively prohibit the use of the
available off-street parking.
D. Disabled persons who are tenants must have signed authorization
from the landlord/owner and submit the same with their
application before receiving a permit/sign.
E. Signs and permits will be renewed after their initial one-year
period upon the presentation of required documentation of the
continuation of the disability and the other required criteria.
Failure to annually apply for and receive a renewal will result in
removal of the sign and cancellation of the permit.
F. Signs shall be erected by and remain the property of the Township
and shall not be transferable.
4. Establishment of Fees. Fees shall be as established by the Township
Supervisors from time to time by resolution.
5. Payment Arrangements. Payment arrangements on any of these fees
shall be made for disabled persons requesting them.
6. Disabled Person Parking Spaces Established. In accordance with the
authority vested in the Township by Section 3354 of the Vehicle Code,12
there are hereby established the following disabled person and/or
severely disabled veteran parking spaces:
Name of Street Side Use by Person
Located at
(Reserved)
7. Authorization to Erect Traffic Signs. The Township of Logan may erect
signs at the appropriate places to advise those traveling said streets of
the provisions provided herein.
12.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3354.
§ 411 LOGAN CODE § 411
1:258
8. Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 and not more than $600, and in default of payment, to
undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this section continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 411 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 411
1:259

Part 5
REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
§ 501. Purpose. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as amended by Ord. 07-09-09A]
The Board of Supervisors of the Township believes that it is necessary to for
the health and safety of Township residents to provide for a convenient and
equitable towing system for the timely removal of motor vehicles damaged,
abandoned, immobilized, illegally parked or disabled on public right-of-way
or public property within the Township of Logan.
§ 502. Definitions. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as amended by Ord. 07-09-09A]
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Township of Logan or the
said Chief's designee.
LOGAN TOWNSHIP — The Township of Logan, County of Blair, and State of
Pennsylvania.
STORAGE FACILITY — A secured area for the storage of towed vehicles.
TOWING COMPANY — Any business engaged in the towing, removing or
storing of motor vehicles at the request of the Township of Logan. This
includes the towing company owner and its employees.
TOWING LIST — The list of licensed towing companies maintained by the
Chief of Police.
VEHICLE — For the purposes of this Part, all automobiles, trucks, trucktractors,
trailers and other vehicles of any kind shall hereafter be referred
to as "vehicle(s)".
WRECKER — A vehicle designed and used for removing and transporting
motor vehicles. This term shall also include a rollback truck, tow truck or
other vehicle commonly used to perform towing services.
§ 503. Authority to Remove and Impound. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as
amended by Ord. 07-09-09A]
The Chief of Police and any police officer and or authorized employee of the
Logan Township Police Department designated by the Chief of Police shall
be authorized to:
1. Order to be removed, cause to be removed, or remove and/or impound
vehicles parked illegally and otherwise in accordance with the
appropriate sections of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, as amended
from time to time.
2. Order to be removed, cause to be removed, or remove and impound any
vehicle parked on any Township street, highway, or public property of
the Township in violation of any other provision of the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code, Township ordinance or traffic rule.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 503
1:261
§ 504. Annual License Required. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as amended by
Ord. 07-09-09A]
Any towing company engaged in the business of towing vehicles at the
request of the Township of Logan from highways, public rights-of-way,
or other public property in the Township shall be licensed annually in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
3. Order to be removed, cause to be removed, or remove and/or impound
any vehicle used in the commission of a crime in violation of any local,
Commonwealth and/or federal law.
A. Any licensed towing company, at the request of the Township,
having impounded any vehicle used in the commission of a crime as
set forth herein, shall immediately submit a statement of charges
for towing said vehicle to the Logan Township Impound Garage.
Although the Township shall not be liable for any charges listed on
the said statement of charges, the Township shall undertake to
submit the same to be considered as part of any restitution imposed
by a court upon the person(s) convicted of the crime for which the
vehicle was impounded.
B. Under no circumstances, shall the owner of the impounded vehicle,
who is a victim of the crime for which the vehicle was impounded,
be assessed fees of the impound company.
C. Any towing company licensed pursuant to this Part which shall
obtain and/or attempt to obtain payment of towing and/or impound
fees from an owner who is also the victim of the crime for which the
motor vehicle has been towed and/or impounded, shall be subject
to termination of license of such towing company as set forth in
§ 514. Furthermore, such license termination may be instituted
upon the first such violation of this Subsection 3.
1. Applications for License. Applications for license shall be submitted to
the Chief of Police upon forms prepared and made available by the
Township. The application form shall be properly completed, signed and
accompanied by the license fee. The Chief of Police shall review and
inspect the required storage facility and towing equipment and all
applications for compliance with the terms of this Part.
2. Application/License Fee. The non-refundable application/license fee
shall be in the amount as established by the Township from time to
time. This fee is imposed to cover the cost of wrecker/storage facility
inspection and license documentation processing.
3. Issuance of License. A towing license shall be issued only to towing
companies that comply with the provisions of this Part. The issuance of
a towing license shall not create a property right for the towing
company.
§ 503 LOGAN CODE § 504
1:262
§ 505. Minimum Qualifications. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as amended by Ord.
07-09-09A]
To be licensed to tow vehicles at the request of the Township, towing
companies shall maintain the following:
4. License Renewal. All licenses, except those terminated for just cause as
provided herein, are subject to an annual renewal fee as established by
the Township from time to time to be paid to the Township each January.
This fee is imposed to cover the cost of re-inspection and license
renewal document processing.
1. At least one wrecker that is in safe mechanical condition, and properly
titled and registered.
2. The wrecker shall be owned or leased by the towing company and shall
not be used or operated by any other towing company.
3. All wreckers shall be clearly marked with the towing company's name
and telephone number on each side of the vehicle.
4. All wreckers shall be equipped with appropriate safety equipment (fire
extinguisher, warning devices, etc.) and any other equipment necessary
to perform the function and complies with the Pa. Vehicle Code
regarding removal of debris.
5. Towing companies shall provide its employees training on the proper
clean up of accident debris from the roadways.
6. Established Place of Business and Storage Facility.
A. The towing company shall be directly accessible 24 hours a day, by
no more than one phone number. The employment of answering
machines or other such devices is not considered as making the
company directly accessible.
B. All Towing Companies and storage facilities used for impoundment
of vehicles towed at the request of the Township shall be located
within five road miles of the Township Municipal Building, 100
Chief Logan Circle, Altoona, Pa.
C. The storage facility shall be owned or leased by the towing
company owner.
D. The storage facility shall be capable of storing no less than three
standard sized vehicles and of being locked preventing general
access to vehicles therein by means of a barrier at least six feet
high. The towing company owner shall be responsible for the
security of the stored vehicles.
E. The storage facility shall be regularly open for the conduct of
business, receiving of payments due, release of vehicles, etc., a
§ 504 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 505
1:263
§ 506. Towing Rotation. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as amended by Ord.
07-09-09A]
minimum of 40 hours, Monday through Friday, between 7:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m.
7. Insurance. Towing companies shall be required to carry insurance at
the minimum policy limits as follows:
A. Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than $500,000,
combined single limits.
B. Workers' compensation insurance, as required by Pennsylvania law.
C. Garage keepers liability insurance in an amount not less than
$50,000 per single limit.
D. Garage liability insurance in an amount not less than $500,000
combined single limit.
E. Miscellaneous coverage to provide complete protection to the
Township against any and all risks of loss or liability including
comprehensive General Liability.
F. Collision coverage for vehicles in tow.
G. The Township shall be listed as an additional insured party on all
policies and such policies shall contain a provision requiring
notification to the Township prior to any policy revision or
termination.
H. Towing companies shall provide the Township of Logan with a
letter of Bonding indicating coverage in the minimum of $50,000.
I. Each insurance policy covering a towing company shall indicate
that the Township of Logan shall be held harmless once a vehicle
has been booked to the towing company's wrecker in preparation
to be towed from a roadway.
1. The Chief of Police shall maintain the list of licensed towing companies,
listed alphabetically, which may be requested to tow by authorized
Township employees on a rotating basis.
2. Rotating basis means the towing company appearing on top of the list
shall be requested first to do the tow. Once the towing company on the
top of the list is requested, that name shall be placed on the bottom of
the list. Thereafter, for each subsequent request, the process shall be
repeated. However, in the event that the owner and/or operator of a
vehicle needing a tow requests a specific towing company, that request
shall not affect the requested towing company's placement on the
rotation list.
§ 505 LOGAN CODE § 506
1:264
§ 507. General Regulations. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as amended by Ord.
07-09-09A]
§ 508. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as amended by Ord.
07-09-09A]
It shall be a prohibited act for any towing company to:
3. If a towing company refuses, is not available, does not answer the
phone or can't meet the required response time, said towing company
shall be replaced by the next towing company. Any towing company that
refuses a call or is unavailable three times within a two month period
shall be placed on review with the Chief of Police with the possibility of
removal from the rotation list and non-renewal of license.
4. This rotation may be waived when removal of a vehicle is critical to
public safety, as determined by the investigating police officer at the
incident scene. However, nothing herein shall be intended to permit or
encourage towing companies to respond to accident/incident scenes
without being summoned in accordance with the requirements of
herein.
1. The towing company requested shall respond to the tow location within
20 minutes of the request, unless there are circumstances, such as
adverse road conditions that are beyond the towing companies control
that would prohibit them from doing so.
2. Nothing in this Part is intended to permit or encourage the towing
company to violate any provision of the Pa. Vehicle Code or to operate a
vehicle in an unsafe manner.
3. Towing companies licensed by the Township shall be available to tow
vehicles 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
4. All vehicles removed, transported or conveyed at the request of the
Township, shall be stored at the towing company's storage facility, or at
a property owned or controlled by the Township, or to a location
specified by the vehicle owner or operator.
5. Towing company owners shall comply with all local, state and federal,
laws and regulations and are responsible for insuring that all of their
employees adhere to them.
6. Towing companies shall be responsible for the conduct of all drivers
and employees. The driver's license of persons towing for a towing
company is subject to inspection by the Chief of Police.
1. Sub-contract towing services requested by the Township.
2. Respond, tow or move a vehicle from or within public property without
the consent of the owner or operator, or without being summoned by
the Township pursuant to § 506.
§ 506 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 508
1:265
§ 509. Record of Vehicles Towed or Stored. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as
amended by Ord. 07-09-09A]
Every licensed towing company shall make a written record of each vehicle
towed or stored and maintain such records for a period of two years which
shall be subject to inspection by the Chief of Police. The records shall,
contain the following information:
§ 510. Restrictions Upon Removal of Vehicles. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as
amended by Ord. 07-09-09A]
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this Part if, at the time
of the intended removal thereof, the owner or person for the time being in
charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove such vehicle immediately.
§ 511. Owner/Operator Liability for Fine/Penalty. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as
amended by Ord. 07-09-09A]
The payment of towing and storage charges authorized by this Part shall
not operate to relieve the owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for
3. Use the "Township of Logan" in the name of the towing company.
4. Arriving at the scene of any incident/accident without being requested
to do so by the Township or the Blair 911 Center and/or the owner/
operator of a vehicle to be towed.
"Responding/arriving at the scene of any incident/accident" shall mean
by wrecker, or by any other means of transportation including private
vehicle.
5. It shall be unlawful for any owner and or employee of any towing
company to approach any vehicle operator or passenger at the scene of
any incident/accident to solicit a towing job.
1. Registration plate number and state.
2. Make and color of vehicle.
3. Time call for service was received.
4. Time wrecker arrived at scene.
5. Date the vehicle was returned to owner/custodian.
6. Towing and storage charges for each towed vehicle.
7. Name of wrecker driver.
8. Each location to which the vehicle was towed.
9. Person authorizing the tow (owner/operator, police dept. etc.)
§ 508 LOGAN CODE § 511
1:266
any fine or penalty for violation of any law or ordinance on account of which
such vehicle was removed and impounded.
§ 512. Effect of Payment of Towing and Storage Charges Without
Protest/Reports and Disposition of Unclaimed Vehicles. [Ord.
6-27-02B; as amended by Ord. 07-09-09A]
§ 513. Fines for Violation. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as amended by Ord.
07-09-09A]
Upon conviction for violation of any provision of this Part, in addition to the
penalty in § 514, a towing company may be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $300.
§ 514. Termination of License. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as amended by Ord.
07-09-09A]
1. The payment of any towing and storage charges, authorized by this Part
shall, unless made "under protest," be final and conclusive and shall
constitute a waiver of any right to recover the fees paid.
2. In the event that towing and impounding charges are paid "under
protest," the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District
Justice having jurisdiction, in which case the offender shall be
proceeded against as is provided for by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle
Code in other cases of summary offenses.
3. The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner
or driver of any vehicle or other person found in violation of this Part
from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision of
this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
4. If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with Penn DOT in accordance with Section 7311 of
the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, by the person having legal
custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle has not been claimed after 30 days,
the vehicle may be transferred to a licensed salvor who will then be
responsible for filing the proper reports and disposing of the vehicle in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 73 of the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as amended from time).
1. Any towing company or its employee who violates any provision of this
Part shall be issued a written warning for the first violation. Any
subsequent violation may cause the termination of the towing
company's license. The towing company is not entitled to a warning for
any violation of § 508 of this Part and may have their license terminated
for the first violation.
2. The towing company shall be notified in writing, by registered mail, no
less than five calendar days prior to the termination of their license. The
notice of termination shall state the reason(s) for termination and the
§ 511 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 514
1:267
§ 515. Tow Away Zones Designated. [Ord. 6-27-02B; as amended by
Ord. 07-09-09A]
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice
that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Township parking
regulations:
Street or Parking Lot Side Between
(Reserved)
effective date of termination. The towing company shall have 14
calendar days to appeal the termination in writing to the Township
Manager. The Township Manager or designee shall hold a hearing
within 10 calendar days of written receipt of the towing company's
request for appeal. The towing company may appeal the Township
Manager's decision in writing to the Blair County Court of Common
Pleas within 10 calendar days of the receipt of the Township Manager's
decision.
§ 514 LOGAN CODE § 515
1:268
Part 6
SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCY
§ 601. Declaration of Snow and Ice Emergency. [Ord. 10-27-88; as
amended by Ord. 6-17-93A]
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of
snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 603 of this Part,
the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, in his discretion, may declare a
snow and ice emergency (designated in this Part as a "snow emergency").
Information on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the
Township of Logan through radio, newspaper or other available media, and
information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the
same media.
§ 602. Parking Prohibited, Driving Motor Vehicles Restricted, on
Snow Emergency Routes During Emergency. [Ord. 10-27-88]
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 603. Snow Emergency Routes Designated. [Ord. 10-27-88; as
amended by Ord. 6-17-93A]
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Between
South Carlisle Lane (Township Route
401)
Bellmeade Drive and Upper Rice
Road
Upper and Lower Rice Road (Township
Route 415)
Entire length
§ 604. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. 10-27-88]
1. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 603 of this
Part; or
2. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
1. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under § 601
of this Part, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle
to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency route, that person
shall be guilty of a violation of this Part, and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
2. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under § 601
of this Part, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route, without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 604
1:269
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this Part, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 604 LOGAN CODE § 604
1:270
Part 7
CRUISING IN THE TOWNSHIP
§ 701. Title. [Ord. 6-11-92]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Logan Township Cruising
Ordinance."
§ 702. Legislative Findings and Purpose. [Ord. 6-11-92]
The Board of Supervisors hereby finds that certain commercial areas of the
Township are experiencing threats to the public health, safety and welfare
of its residents, as well as the public in general, arising from the ongoing
congestion resulting from consistent and repetitive unnecessary use and
driving of motor vehicles on traffic ways within the several shopping centers
and malls within the Township of Logan. Furthermore, it is specifically the
finding of the Board of Supervisors that, although the said shopping centers
and malls located within the Township are situated on private property, due
to the voluminous and constant interaction by the public with the retail
merchants, said shopping centers and malls are in effect quasi-public areas
requiring protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public. The
purpose of this Part is to reduce the dangerous traffic congestion, as well as
the excess noise and pollution resulting from such unnecessary repetitive
driving, to insure sufficient access for emergency vehicles to and through
the designated thoroughfares now hampered by this repetitive driving of
motor vehicles and to safeguard the voluminous number of pedestrians
frequenting the shopping centers and malls located in the Township.
§ 703. Definitions. [Ord. 6-11-92]
For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply:
CRUISING — Driving a motor vehicle on a traffic way past a traffic control
point, as designated by the Logan Township Police Department from time
to time, more than twice in any two-hour period, between the hours of 3:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., on any day of the week. The passing of a designated
control point a third time under the aforesaid conditions shall constitute
unnecessary repetitive driving and therefore a violation of this Part.
DESIGNATED AREA — Any traffic way located within or around any parking
lot of any shopping center or mall located within the Township of Logan.
These designated traffic ways shall be clearly marked with signs advising
the public that the area is subject to regulation under this Part.
SHOPPING CENTER OR MALL — Any real estate located in Logan
Township upon which there is erected a building or buildings wherein
commercial retail establishments are or are intended to be located
including, but not limited to, the Logan Valley Mall, K-Mart Plaza, the
Pleasant Valley Shopping Center, Park Hills Plaza, Morningside Plaza,
Orchard Plaza and Greenwood Center.
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 703
1:271
TRAFFIC CONTROL POINT — A clearly identified reference point on a
designated traffic way, as determined and identified from time to time by
the Logan Township Police Department.
TRAFFIC WAY — Any area within a shopping center or mall parking lot not
used or intended for parking or marked as a parking space and which said
area is for the use of a motor vehicle to either gain access to or leave said
shopping center or mall or for access or leaving any of the parking areas
and spaces of a shopping center or mall.
§ 704. Cruising Prohibited. [Ord. 6-11-92]
No person shall engage in unnecessary repetitive driving, also known for
purposes of this Part as "cruising." For purposes of this Part, the person
having control and/or ownership of a motor vehicle shall be considered the
person cruising, without regard as to whether that person was actually
driving the motor vehicle each time it passed the traffic control point.
Having control or ownership of a motor vehicle means either the owner of
the vehicle, as stated on the vehicle registration, if said owner is present in
the vehicle at the time of the violation, or if the owner is not present in the
vehicle, the person operating the vehicle at the time of the violation of this
Part.
§ 705. Exclusions. [Ord. 6-11-92]
This Part shall not apply to any municipal, emergency, police, fire,
ambulance or other governmental vehicle when the same is being operated
in an official capacity. In addition, the Part shall not apply to any duly
licensed public transportation vehicle.
§ 706. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 6-11-92; as amended by Ord.
9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 703 LOGAN CODE § 706
1:272
Chapter 16
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 706 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 706
1:273

Part 1
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 4-14-88]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PARK or PARKS — Unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to include
all parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, tennis courts, beaches, recreation
structures and facilities, and also entrances and approaches thereto, and all
other land or property or structures, now or hereafter owned or acquired by
the Township of Logan for park or recreational purposes.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Any rules and regulations hereby or
hereafter promulgated by the Logan Township Board of Supervisors under
the authority herein conferred.
§ 102. Park Hours. [Ord. 4-14-88]
All parks shall be opened daily to the public at such hours as the Logan
Township Board of Supervisors may from time to time designate, but in no
event shall any person be permitted to be in attendance in any park between
9:00 p.m. and sunrise, unless special permission be granted by the Logan
Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 103. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. 4-14-88; as amended by Res.
8-26-93; by Ord. 2-11-99A; and by Ord. 4-27-00]
No person in attendance at a park shall:
1. Injure, defect, remove, cut or damage any of the trees, plants, shrubs,
turf, buildings, structures, signs or fixtures, or any other property of the
Township of Logan located within the park.
2. Litter any area of the park with garbage, paper, bottles, cans or other
waste material; nor dispose of the same in any way except in
receptacles designated for such purpose.
3. Kindle or maintain any fire in the park except in fireplaces or areas
specially designated for that purpose and located by authority of the
Logan Township Board of Supervisors.
4. Remove any bench, seat, table or other appliance without permission of
the Logan Township Board of Supervisors.
5. Injure, deface, destroy or remove any notice, rule or regulation posted
at any place within the park by authority of the Logan Township Board
of Supervisors; nor shall any notice or placard be posted within the park
other than by authority of the Logan Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:275
6. Set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any article or service
whatsoever within the limits of the park without permission of the
Logan Township Board of Supervisors; distribute, sell, service or rent
any services or commodity or solicit for any purpose without permission
of the Logan Township Board of Supervisors.
7. Operate, stop or park any vehicle, bicycle or other means of conveyance
except in areas where permitted or designated by proper authority of
the Logan Township Board of Supervisors, or operate the same in a
reckless or negligent manner or in excess of any posted speed limit or in
such a manner as to become a nuisance to other area users.
8. Operate commercial vehicles, unless providing authorized services.
9. Bring onto the premises, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or
illegal drugs of any kind; no person shall enter the park in an
intoxicated state or otherwise be under the influence of alcohol or
illegal drugs.
10. Carry or discharge any firearms, slingshots, firecrackers, fireworks or
other missile propelling instruments or explosives or arrows, or other
dangerous weapons which have such properties as to cause annoyance
or injury to any person or property, unless permission has been granted
by the Logan Township Board of Supervisors in designated areas; police
officers in the performance of their duties will be exempt from these
provisions.
11. Play ball, swim, golf, pitch horseshoes, engage in archery, camp or
launch, dock or land any boat, engage in finding buried objects with
special detectors, or participate in any other form of recreation,
sporting endeavor or pastime except in those areas which may be
designated from time to time for that purpose by the Logan Township
Board of Supervisors.
12. Disrobe or change clothing except in buildings or facilities made
available for that purpose.
13. Disturb the peace by any conduct so as to annoy any other person using
the park for recreational purposes.
14. Operate a snowmobile, minibike, motorcycle, or any vehicle,
recreational or otherwise, except on designated roads, trails, or areas
set aside for their use.
15. Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene language or
words.
16. Commit any disorderly or immoral acts.
17. Hold any public meetings or rally with more than five persons or engage
in any marching or driving as members of a military, political or other
organization without permission of the Logan Township Board of
Supervisors, which requires a statement of information, including the
§ 103 LOGAN CODE § 103
1:276
§ 104. Fishing. [Ord. 4-14-88]
All laws pertaining to fishing in the Commonwealth shall apply to fishing in
parks and recreation areas, and provisions thereof are hereby incorporated
by reference.
§ 105. Reservation for Specific Uses. [Ord. 4-14-88]
The use of all parks shall be on a first-come, first-served basis unless
otherwise reserved:
name of the organization, its purpose, number of persons expected to
be invited, expected duration and name(s) of person(s) in charge.
18. Disobey a proper order of a police officer or disobey or disregard or fail
to comply with any rule or regulations, warning, prohibition, instruction
or direction given by an authorized person and posted or displayed by
sign, notice, bulletin, card, poster, or when notified or informed as to its
existence by an authorized person.
19. Hunt for, capture or kill, or attempt to capture or kill, or aid or assist in
the capturing or killing of, in any manner, any wild bird or wild animal
of any description, either game or otherwise, and to that end, it is
unlawful for any person to carry onto or possess in any park, a shotgun
or rifle or pistol or firearm of any make or kind unless specific
permission is granted for a designated area by authority of the
Township of Logan.
20. Take or cause to be taken or allow any dog, domesticated and/or farm
animal in the park excluding a seeing eye animal required by
handicapped persons for assistance purposes.
21. Permit or cause to be permitted any pet on, in or about the Township's
Newberg Recreation site. This prohibition shall not apply to any pet
necessary for assisting those persons who are visually impaired.13
22. Ride upon or utilize in any manner within any park any skateboard,
roller skates/blades, scooters, or any other human powered device,
other than bicycles and other than a motorized vehicle.
23. Ride upon or utilize in any manner beyond designated points within any
park any motorized vehicle, including, but not limited to, automobile,
motorcycle and/or all-terrain vehicles.
A. By annual permission granted by the Logan Township Board of
Supervisors for the scheduling of various league games, etc.;
B. For school or college athletic games, practice, contests, or exhibitions;
13.Editor's Note: See § 106 for authority to promulgate additional rules and regulations by
resolution.
§ 103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 105
1:277
§ 106. Authorization to Promulgate Additional Rules. [Ord. 4-14-88]
The Logan Township Board of Supervisors are authorized to establish
additional rules and regulations as deemed necessary.
§ 107. Authority to Close Areas. [Ord. 4-14-88]
Recreation facilities which become hazardous for public use due to weather,
water, fire or unforeseeable conditions may be closed only at the discretion
of the Logan Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 108. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 4-14-88; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; by Ord. 9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
C. For regularly scheduled school district or municipal recreation
programs;
D. By permission granted by the Logan Township Board of Supervisors for
a specific requested use.
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 105 LOGAN CODE § 108
1:278
Chapter 18
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 108 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 108
1:279

Part 1
SANITARY SEWER REGULATIONS
§ 101. Title. [Ord. 6-28-73]
This Part I shall be known as and designated "Logan Township Sanitary
Sewer Ordinance."
§ 102. Definitions. [Ord. 6-28-73; as amended by Ord. 12-27-84; by
Ord. 2-18-93; by Ord. 9-15-94A; by Ord. 2-9-95; by Ord. 5-16-96; and
by Ord. 1-03-05]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of the
terms used in this Part shall be as follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
ABNORMAL INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any industrial waste having a
suspended solid content or BOD appreciably in excess of that normally
found in municipal sewage. For the purposes of this chapter any industrial
waste containing more than 350 parts per million of suspended solids, or
having a BOD in excess of 300 parts per million, shall be considered an
abnormal industrial waste regardless of whether or not it contains other
substances in concentrations differing appreciably from those normally
found in municipal sewage.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Logan or its duly authorized agent or representative.
AUTHORITY — Central Blair County Sanitary Authority.
BOD — Of sewage or industrial waste shall designate its "biochemical
oxygen demand" and shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of the organic matter in said sewage or industrial
waste under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20º C., expressed
in parts per million by weight. It shall be determined by one of the
acceptable methods described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Sewage published by the American Public
Health Association.
BUILDING DRAIN — The part of the lowest horizontal piping or drainage
system or discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet outside the outer face or wall of the building.
BUILDING or HOUSE — Includes but not be limited to any house, mobile
home, school, church, hospital or commercial or industrial structure.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the lateral
of a public sewer.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — The National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or Pretreatment Standards.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 102
1:281
CITY OF ALTOONA DISTRICT — Any building or house and/or residential
equivalent and/or commercial and/or industrial unit serviced by a public
sanitary sewerage system whereby sewage emanating therefrom is treated
by the City of Altoona/Altoona City Authority and for which the City of
Altoona/Altoona City Authority charges and bills the Township of Logan.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ELDORADO SPRINGS SEWER AREA — That area of Logan Township having
been developed pursuant to development plans submitted as Eldorado
Springs Development and such other areas as may be assigned by the
Township whereby any building or house and/or residential equivalent and/
or commercial and/or industrial unit is serviced by a public sanitary
sewerage system wherein sewage emanating from said area is conveyed
through sewer lines owned by the Township of Logan and/or Central Blair
County Sanitary Authority for ultimate disposal at the City of Altoona/
Altoona City Authority sewerage system.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also
be as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of
said agency.
FRANKSTOWN TOWNSHIP SEWER DISTRICT — That area of Logan
Township whereby any building or house and/or residential equivalent and/
or commercial and/or industrial unit is serviced by a public sanitary
sewerage system wherein sewage emanating from said area is conveyed
through sewer lines owned by the Frankstown Township Sewer Authority
and/or Frankstown Township for ultimate disposal at the Borough of
Hollidaysburg sewerage system.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GREENWOOD SEWER AREA — The northeasterly area of the Township
where the public sanitary sewerage system and any additions thereto, and
which serves any building or house and/or residential equivalent and/or
any commercial and/or any industrial building or house and/or residential
equivalent and any additions thereto.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid gaseous or water-borne waste from
industrial processes or commercial establishments, as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
INNOVATIVE AND ALTERNATIVE SEWER AREA — Any building or house
and/or residential equivalent and/or any commercial and/or any industrial
building or house and/or residential equivalent serviced by a public sanitary
sewerage system constructed pursuant to U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency Project No. C-421266-03 (with the exception of any separate district
and/or sewer area established by the Township which may connect to
the Innovative and Alternative Sewer Area) and/or whereby septic tanks
owned by the Township/Township Authority are used, with the exceptions
as hereinafter set forth, wherein only effluents emanating therefrom are
conveyed through the public sanitary sewerage system and the solids
§ 102 LOGAN CODE § 102
1:282
placed in said septic tanks are collected by a collection vehicle and
ultimately disposed of at a treatment plant. The Township may, however,
include in the Innovative and Alternative Sewer Area, any building, house
and/or residential equivalent, whether residential, commercial and/or
industrial in use, in which septic tanks are not used, in those situations
deemed necessary in the sole and absolute discretion of the Board of
Supervisors by resolution of said Board from time to time.
INSPECTOR — The person or persons appointed by the Township of Logan
to inspect sewage works, including both public, semipublic and private
sewers, and including also inspection of building sewers and all other
connections between occupied building and the public sewers.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of public sanitary sewerage
system's treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation
of any requirements of the Authority's NPDES permit. This term includes
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the public sanitary sewerage
system in accordance with Section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any
criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or more
stringent Commonwealth of Pennsylvania criteria applicable to the method
of sludge disposal or use employed by the Township and Authority.
LAKEMONT SEWER AREA — The southeasterly area of the Township where
a public sanitary sewer system has hereto before been constructed by the
Authority and any additions thereto, and which serves any building or house
and/or residential equivalent and/or any commercial and/or any industrial
building or house and/or residential equivalent and additions thereto.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the
curb line or, if there shall be no curb line, to the property line or, if no such
lateral shall be provided, then a lateral shall mean that portion of, or place
in a sewer which is provided for connection of any building sewer.
LOGAN TOWNSHIP SEWER DISTRICT — This District includes the
Eldorado Springs Sewer Area, Greenwood Sewer Area, Innovative and
Alternative Sewer Area and the Lakemont Sewer Area.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter; the milligram per liter multiplied by 8.34 shall
be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
MOBILE HOME — Any structure intended for or capable of human
habitation with or without wheels, and capable of being driven, propelled,
transported or towed from place to place. The terms, however, shall not
include transport trucks or vans equipped with sleeping space for driver or
drivers.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any site, lot or field or tract of land, privately or
publicly owned operated, upon which two or more mobile homes, used for
living, eating or sleeping quarters by persons not related to the proprietor
or his agent, are, or are intended to be located, whether operated for or
without compensation.
§ 102 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 102
1:283
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b)
and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a specific category
of person discharging industrial waste into the public sanitary sewerage
system.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE
STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the authority of Section
307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals, and from which structure sanitary sewage or industrial wastes, or
either of them, is or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any building.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or other group or entity.
pH — The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed in moles per liter. It shall be determined by one of
the acceptable methods described in the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Sewage published by the American Public
Health Association.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment
Standard imposed on a person.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM — All separate sanitary sewers,
all sewage pumping stations, all sewage treatment plants, and all other
facilities provided and owned or leased as lessee by the Township of Logan
for the collection and transportation of sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes with their appurtenances, and any additions, extensions or
improvements thereto that may be made or accepted by the Township or
the Authority. It shall also include sewers within or outside the Township
limits which serve two or more persons and discharge into the Township
sanitary sewerage system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with Township or Authority funds. In addition, this definition
shall also include any building or house and/or residential equivalent and/or
any commercial and/or any industrial building or house and/or residential
§ 102 LOGAN CODE § 102
1:284
equivalent and any additions thereto which are located within the
Township's political boundaries and the sewage emanating therefrom is
treated by a public sanitary sewerage system whether or not said public
sanitary sewerage system is owned by the Township. It does not include
separate storm sewers or culverts which have been constructed for the sole
purpose of carrying storm and surface runoff.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer which is owned or controlled by the Authority
or the Township.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT — A single dwelling unit including but not
limited to individual apartment units or other multifamily dwelling units,
having therein at least one kitchen or kitchen facility and one bathroom or
powder room.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residence, business buildings, institutions, industries and
commercial establishments, exclusive of storm water runoff, surface water
or ground water.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of water-carried waste from residence, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage and other waste liquids.
SHALL — Is mandatory, and MAY is permissive.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — That portion of the rainfall which reaches a
drain.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface or are in
suspension in water, sewage, industrial waste or other liquids, and which
are removable by laboratory filtration. The quantity of suspended solids
shall be determined by one of the acceptable methods described in the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Sewage published by the American Public Health Association.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Logan, Blair County, Pennsylvania.
UNPOLLUTED — Water or waste shall mean any water or waste containing
none of the following free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali; phenols
or other substances imparting taste and odor to receiving waters; toxic or
poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; obnoxious
or odorous gases. It shall contain not more than 10,000 parts per million
by weight of dissolved solids of which not more than 2,500 parts per
million shall be as chloride and not more than 10 parts per million each
of suspended solids and BOD. The color shall not exceed 50 parts per
million. Analysis for any of the above-mentioned substances shall be made
in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
§ 102 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 102
1:285
Examination of Water and Sewage published by the American Public Health
Association.
WATER COMPANY — Any publicly or privately owned duly authorized
agency, corporation or organization that supplies water to customers within
the limits of the Township.
§ 103. Connections Required. [Ord. 6-28-73; as amended by Ord.
12-1-94A]
§ 104. Septic Tanks. [Ord. 6-28-73]
1. From and after the passage of this Part 1, any occupied building, a
portion of which is within 150 feet from a public sanitary sewer system,
and on premises now accessible to a public sanitary sewer system or
which may hereafter become accessible to a public sanitary sewer
system shall be connected to said public sanitary sewer system. Said
connection shall be made by the owner, tenant or occupant of any such
building to the public sanitary sewer system within 60 days after the
public sanitary sewer system becomes accessible to the premises upon
which said building is situated, in the manner hereinafter provided.
Where the sewage cannot flow by gravity from the building to the public
sanitary sewer system, the owner, tenant or occupant may be required
to install a pump and to pump the sewage into the public sanitary
sewer.
2. Said sixty-day period within which connection to the public sanitary
sewer system must be made as stated in Subsection 1 above, may be
extended by the Board of Supervisors from time to time, for an
additional period not to exceed 120 days from the said 60th day, due to
extreme unfavorable weather conditions as determined in the sole and
absolute discretion of said Board. No owner, tenant or occupant shall be
granted an additional period of time as provided herein, unless said
owner, tenant or occupant shall have first, within the original sixty-day
connection period: (1) paid any and all fees, including but not limited to
tax and connection fees; (2) secured a sewer permit; and (3) submitted
a copy of a properly executed written agreement with a duly qualified
contractor indicating the date within the said additional time period
upon which the necessary connection to the public sanitary sewer
system shall occur.
1. When connection has been made with the public sanitary sewer system,
the owner, tenant or occupant of such property shall forthwith abandon
any and all privies, privy vault, cesspools, and septic tanks then existing
on said premises and shall use them no longer. Any and all connection
or connections with the occupied building which has been served shall
be broken or destroyed in such a manner that sanitary sewage can no
longer enter therein. The Township may require that privies, privy
vaults, cesspools and septic tanks be cleansed and filled where
conditions so warrant, or if the Township finds that there is a seepage
or drainage from said receptacles. A written notice from the Township
§ 102 LOGAN CODE § 104
1:286
§ 105. Building Service Lines. [Ord. 6-28-73; as amended by Ord.
5-16-96; and by Ord. 08-11-11]
to clean and fill same shall be complied with within 30 days by the
owner, tenant or occupant.
2. From and after the passage of this Part 1, it shall be unlawful for any
person to construct or erect and privy, privy vault, cesspool or septic
tank or any other type of disposal, receptacle or structure in, on or
under any premises accessible to any public sanitary sewerage system
in the Township.
3. From and after the passage of this Part 1, it shall be unlawful for any
person to connect any privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or any
other type of disposal, receptacle or structure to any public sanitary
sewerage system in the Township.
4. From and after the passage of this Part 1, it shall be unlawful, in areas
where a public sanitary sewer system has been provided, and where the
owner or tenant or occupant of the premises has connected with the
public sanitary sewer or is, by this Part 1 required so to do, to connect
the building with a privy, privy vault, cesspool, septic tank or other type
of disposal, receptacle or structure.
1. At such time as the public sanitary sewerage system becomes
accessible to any property, the Township shall provide the owner,
occupant or tenant with a written notice, specifying that connection
shall be made within 60 days after such notice is given or served upon
the owner, occupant or tenant and the Township shall provide with such
notice a copy of this Part 1. Such notice may be given or served at any
time after a sewer is in place which can receive and can convey sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes for treatment and disposal from the
particular building. Such notice may be served personally upon the
owner, occupant or tenant or mailed by certified mail to the owner,
occupant or tenant.
2. The owner, tenant or occupant shall install the building sewers at his
own expense from the building drain to the lateral sewer supplied in the
public sewer. Maintenance and repair of the building sewer and lateral
sewer from the building to the wye in the public sewer is the
responsibility of the owner, tenant or occupant of the building.
Connections to public sewers and rights-of-way, shall, in all respects,
meet the same specifications as when the sewer is in a public street.
3. Except as hereinafter provided, a separate tap-in or connection shall be
required for each individual building, whether constructed as a
detached unit or as one of a pair or row, but a single building tap-in or
connection shall be permitted to serve a school, factory, apartment
building or other permanent multiple unit structure with an internal
plumbing waste system, which serves such building.
§ 104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 105
1:287
§ 106. Specifications. [Ord. 11-08-07A]
Specifications for sanitary sewerage construction shall comply in all
respects with such specifications as may be adopted by resolution of the
Township from time to time.14
4. A single building tap-in or connection shall be permitted to serve a
double house in which the internal plumbing waste system is common
to both units or is not readily separable. In such case, a tap-in or
connection application shall state the specific conditions of the house to
be connected or tapped in.
5. A single tap-in or connection shall be permitted to serve a mobile home
park, provided that the sanitary sewer or sewer system within the
mobile home park complies with the provisions of Specifications for
Sanitary Sewerage System Construction. In the event that an existing
sanitary sewer or sewer system within a mobile home park does not
comply with the provisions of Specifications for Sanitary Sewerage
System Construction, then the owner shall either provide a separate
tap-in or connection for each mobile home and residential equivalent
within the mobile home park or construct and build a sanitary sewer or
sewer system within such mobile home park in accordance with the
provisions of § 115 of this chapter; provided, however, that in the event
the owner constructs or builds a sanitary sewer or sewer system within
such mobile home park, the owner shall not be required to comply with
the provisions of § 115(6) of this chapter.
6. Any building sewer intended to serve any building and/or house
constructed prior to January 1, 2011, and intended to be connected to
the public sanitary sewerage system, shall be required to have a
building and/or house trap as set forth in § 106, entitled
"Specifications," and Resolution Number 12-13-07, adopted by the
Township pursuant thereto, as amended from time to time, including
the drawings of the U-bends (traps) made a part of said resolution. Any
building intended to serve any building and/or house constructed after
January 1, 2011, and intended to be connected to the public sanitary
sewerage system shall not be permitted to have a building and/or house
trap as set forth in said "Specifications." Notwithstanding any
requirement herein set forth to the contrary, any building and/or house
constructed prior to January 1, 2011, and connected to the public
sanitary sewerage system as of the date of the adoption of this
subsection without having a building and/or house trap, shall not be
required to install such a trap, however, in the event that any such
building is hereafter repaired and/or replaced in whole or in part, such
repair and/or replacement shall be required to have a building and/or
house trap as set forth herein.
14.Editor's Note: Said specifications are included as § 601 of this chapter.
§ 105 LOGAN CODE § 107
1:288
§ 107. Unlawful Use of Sanitary Lines. [Ord. 6-28-73; as amended by
Ord. 12-16-93]
§ 108. Right of Inspection. [Ord. 6-28-73]
The inspector and other duly authorized representatives and employees
of the Township, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter upon all property for the purpose of inspection,
observation, sampling, testing and retesting building drains, sewers,
connections and all other matter pertaining to the disposal of sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes to insure compliance with the provisions of
this Part 1.
§ 109. Procedure. [Ord. 6-28-73; as amended by Ord. 12-16-93; by
Ord. 9-19-96; and by Ord. 3-09-06A]
1. No basement seepage, ground water, drainage, foundation drainage,
storm water or other uncontaminated or unpolluted source of water,
shall be admitted to the public sanitary sewer system, nor shall any
connection from roofs, gutters, downspouts, pavements, driveways,
garages, drains or from any source other than the building drain
carrying sewage be discharged into any sanitary sewer. Before
attachment to the public sanitary sewerage system, the owner and/or
applicant for service shall remove any such connections and adequately
and properly design the system so as to prevent the entrance of any
downspout, roof, surface or other drainage.
2. No cross connection shall be made between the public sanitary
sewerage system and the potable water system whereby vacuums or
back siphonage could permit sanitary wastes to enter the potable water
system. No cross connections shall be made between the public
sanitary sewerage system and storm drainage or storm sewers.
3. No person shall connect, cause or permit to be connected with the
public sanitary sewerage system, directly or indirectly, any team
exhaust, boiler, blow-off, sediment, drip, or any pipe carrying or
constructed to carry hot water, acid, germicide, grease, gasoline,
naphtha, benzene, oil or any other substance detrimental to the public
sanitary sewerage system.
4. No person shall connect, cause, or permit to be connected with the
public sanitary sewerage system, directly or indirectly, any industrial
wastes without complying with the provisions of § 111 of this Part 1 and
such other reasonable regulations and requirements as the Township
may impose from time to time, and without first receiving the written
consent of the Township.
5. No existing private sanitary sewer or sewer system shall be permitted
to be tapped-in or connected to the public sanitary sewer system unless
such private sanitary sewer or sewer system shall comply with the
provisions of § 106 or § 115 of this Part 1.
§ 107 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 109
1:289
1. No person shall make or cause to be made, any connection with the
public sanitary sewerage system until said person has fulfilled all of the
following conditions and procedures:
A. Said person shall have applied for and obtained a sewer permit
from the Township. No work shall commence before the issuance of
said permit. All sewer permits issued after March 15, 2006, shall
remain valid for a period of two years only. In the event the permit
holder is not able to carry out the terms of such sewer permit
within the said two-year period, said permit holder may, in writing
submitted to the Township Manager, not later than 60 days prior to
the expiration of said two-year period request and receive a refund
of 50% of the original permit fee, or said permit holder may request
in writing within said sixty-day period, to have the permit extended
for an additional one-year period for an additional fee of $50.
Granting of such an extension shall be contingent upon the
availability of conveyance and/or treatment capacity at the time of
the request for extension. If the extension is denied for any reason,
the permit holder shall be entitled to the 50% refund of the original
permit fee. If the extension is granted and the permit holder is
unable to carry out the terms of the permit for any reason, no
refund of any fee shall be available and the permit application
process must begin anew for such a permit.
B. Said person shall pay such tapping fee, connection fee, inspection
fee and expenses as are fixed for said services by the Township or
Authority.
C. Said person shall have given the inspector for the Township and/or
Authority at least 24 hours' notice of the time when said person
desires to make said connection in order that said inspector may
schedule within five working days the inspection and be present to
supervise and inspect the work or connection. The said inspector,
after ensuring that all conditions of this Part 1 have been satisfied,
shall signify approval of the connection by endorsing said
inspector's name and the date of approval on the aforementioned
sewer permit.
D. Said person shall permit and allow the full and complete sewer
inspection of all sanitary and drainage arrangements and facilities
in the building(s) and/or house(s) and in and about all parts of said
person's property by the Township's or Authority's inspector, and in
furtherance said person shall give the said inspector access to any
part of the building(s) or house(s) and/or the property on which the
same are located, from which the sewage is emanating. In the
event that any part of a building sewer is covered before so being
inspected and approved, the owner and/or occupant shall be
required to uncover the said building sewer at the sole cost and
expense of the owner and/or occupant of the building or house to
be connected to the public sanitary sewerage system so as to
permit inspection.
§ 109 LOGAN CODE § 109
1:290
§ 110. Failure to Connect. [Ord. 6-28-73]
§ 111. Admission of Industrial Wastes into public sanitary sewerage
system. [Ord. 6-28-73; as amended by Ord. 12-27-84; and by Ord.
12-16-93; and by Ord. 5-16-96]
E. All work completed pursuant to this Part I shall be under the direct
supervision and inspection of the inspector appointed by the
Township and/or Authority and no building sewer shall be covered
over or in any matter concealed until after it is inspected or
approved by said inspector.
F. All inspections contemplated pursuant to this subsection, shall be
made and scheduled by the inspector during regular business
hours of the Township.
2. Building sewers shall be hydrostatically, pneumatically, or smoke-tested
for leakage at the discretion of and in the manner required by the
Township and/or Authority.
3. No person shall make or cause to be made any repair to any component
to a building sewer and/or building drain and/or any other part of the
sanitary sewer until said person has paid an inspection fee for said
service as fixed by the Township or Authority. Said person shall give the
inspector for the Township and/or Authority at least 24 hours’ notice of
the time when said person desires to make said repair in order that the
said inspector may schedule within five working days the inspection
and be present to supervise and inspect the work. The said inspector,
after ensuring that all conditions have been satisfied, shall signify
approval of the connection by endorsing said inspector's name and the
date of approval on the appropriate form.
1. If the owner, tenant or occupant of any building shall neglect or refuse
to comply with the provisions of this Part 1, the Township may serve a
written notice upon said owner, tenant or party in possession of the
premises, requiring said owner, tenant or occupant to comply in every
respect with the provisions of this Part 1.
2. If said owner, tenant or occupant shall neglect or refuse to comply with
this Part 1, the Township may perform or cause to be performed such
work and labor, and furnish or cause to be furnished such material as
may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this Part 1, at the
cost and expense of such owner, tenant or occupant, together with 10%
additional thereof and all charges and expenses incident thereto, which
sum shall be collected from said owner, tenant or occupant for the use
of the Township as debts are by law collectible, or the said Township
may, by its proper officer, file a municipal claim or lien therefore against
said premises as provided by the Act or Acts of Assembly in such cases
made and provided.
§ 109 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 111
1:291
1. The economy and desirability of the combined treatment of industrial
waste and sanitary sewage is recognized. The treatment facilities of the
Township are of the type and design to permit reasonable flexibility in
the treatment of various types of industrial wastes. In general, any and
all industrial wastes may be discharged to the public sanitary sewerage
system except those which are deemed harmful to the system or are
specifically prohibited by this Part 1. However, it is also recognized that
the treatment of abnormal industrial wastes may add to the cost of
operating and maintaining the public sanitary sewerage system.
Industrial Waste discharged into the Altoona City Authority's public
sanitary sewerage system shall comply with Article VI and VII of the
Altoona City Authority's Wastewater System Regulation (as amended
from time to time) entitled, "Industrial Wastewater and Pretreatment,"
which said Regulations are hereby incorporated herein by this
reference.
2. The Township reserves the right to refuse connection to its public
sanitary sewerage system, or to compel discontinuances of the use of
such system for deleterious industrial wastes, or to require
pretreatment and equalization of flow of such wastes in order to
prevent harmful or adverse effect upon the system. The design,
construction and operation of such pretreatment and flow equalization
facilities shall be made at the sole expense of the person discharging
said wastes and subject to the approval of the Township or its
designated representatives.
3. In general any industrial waste will be considered harmful to the public
sanitary sewerage system that may cause any of the following
damaging effects:
A. Chemical reaction either directly or indirectly with the materials of
construction of the public sanitary sewerage system in such a
manner as to impair the strength or durability of any sewerage
structures.
B. Mechanical action that will destroy any sewerage structures.
C. Restriction of the hydraulic capacity of any sewerage structures.
D. Restriction of the normal inspection or maintenance of sewerage
structures.
E. Danger to public health and safety.
F. Obnoxious conditions inimical to public interest.
4. When required by the Township, any person discharging to the public
sanitary sewerage system industrial wastes or industrial wastes and
sanitary sewage together shall install a suitable manhole or manholes
on his connecting sewer or sewers to facilities observation, sampling
and measurement of the combined flow of wastes from his premises.
Such manhole or manholes shall be accessible and safely located and
§ 111 LOGAN CODE § 111
1:292
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Township. The manhole or manholes shall be installed by the owner
at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible to the Township or its authorized representatives at all
times. The construction and maintenance of such manholes shall be
mandatory for the producers of abnormal or substantial industrial
wastes.
5. Any person discharging to the public sanitary sewerage system
industrial wastes or industrial wastes and sanitary sewage together
shall:
A. Permit the employees or authorized representatives of the
Township to enter upon the property of the person discharging said
wastes at reasonable times for the purpose of making such tests of
the industrial wastes or sanitary sewage, making inspections of any
facility of the person discharging said waste which contributes
wastes to the public sanitary sewerage system and examining and
copying any records pertaining to the industrial waste or sanitary
sewage discharge or discharges as the Township may deem
necessary or appropriate. A representative of the person may
accompany any Township inspection of the facilities.
B. (1) Make analyses of the discharge or discharges to the
Township's sanitary sewers at intervals required by the
Township to insure that the restrictions on the nature or
composition of the discharge defined hereinafter are met;
(2) Furnish to the Township the results of such tests;
(3) Promptly investigate all complaints made by the Township as
to the nature or composition of the wastes discharged to the
Township's sanitary sewers; and
(4) Take steps promptly to exclude, or reduce to acceptable limits,
waste which may overload or adversely affect the proper and
efficient operation of public sanitary sewerage system or
otherwise violate the limits provided hereinafter. Said tests
shall be made in accordance with latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage, as
published by the American Public Health Association.
C. Be solely responsible for any damages which occur to the public
sanitary sewerage system and are directly attributable to wastes
discharged by said person in excess of the limits provided
hereinafter. It is understood that commonly accepted scientific
methods shall be used in determining the cause of any damage.
D. Understand that information and data on a person obtained from
reports, questionnaires, permit application, permits, monitoring
programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or
other governmental agency without restriction unless said person
§ 111 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 111
1:293
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Township that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of said person. When requested by
the person furnishing the information and data, the portions of
the information and data which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by
the public but shall be made available upon written request to
governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the NPDES
permit, Commonwealth water quality management permit, and/or
the Pretreatment Programs; provided, however, that such portions
of information and data shall be available for use by the
commonwealth or its agencies in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the information and
data. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information. Information and data
accepted by the Township as confidential shall not be transmitted
to any governmental agency or to the general public by the
Township until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the
person providing the information and data.
E. Comply with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards as they
are promulgated.
F. Within 180 days after the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the persons subject to such standards shall
submit to the Township the following information set forth below:
(1) A statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance and/or
additional pretreatment is required for the person to meet
applicable pretreatment standards.
(2) If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance
will be required, the shortest schedule by which the person will
provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and
maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable
Pretreatment Standard. The following conditions shall apply to
this schedule:
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the person to meet
the applicable Pretreatment Standards.
(b) No increment referred to in Subsection 5F(2)(a) shall
exceed nine months.
§ 111 LOGAN CODE § 111
1:294
(c) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the person shall submit
a progress report to the Township including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increments
of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress,
the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the
person to return construction to the schedule established.
In no event shall more than nine months elapse between
such progress reports to the Township.
G. Provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Facilities
to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the person's own cost and expense. In
the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the
person discharging to the public sanitary sewerage system to
immediately telephone and notify the Township of the incident. The
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of
waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Within
five days following an accidental discharge, said person shall
submit to the Township a detailed written report describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve said
person of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the public sanitary sewerage
system, fish kills, or other damage to people or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the person of any fines, civil penalties, or
other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other
applicable federal, commonwealth, county or municipal law.
6. The Township may discontinue all service to persons discharging
industrial wastes or industrial wastes and sanitary sewage upon
notification to the person prior to its discontinuance of service upon the
happening of any one or more of the following conditions:
A. Upon notice of a violation of any federal, state, county or municipal
law or ordinance or rule or regulation of any duly constituted
authority relating to the discharge of effluent from the public
sanitary sewerage system which violation is directly attributable to
the industrial wastes of said person. In such event, the Township
shall notify said person in writing of discontinuance of service
based upon such violation.
B. In the event that the industrial waste discharge exceeds the
concentration limitations imposed hereinafter. In such event, the
Township shall notify said person in writing of discontinuance of
service.
C. In the event that the industrial waste discharge causes any damage
whatsoever to the public sanitary sewerage system or causes
§ 111 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 111
1:295
interference to the public sanitary sewerage system and such
damage or interference is directly attributable to the discharge.
In such event, the Township shall notify said person in writing of
discontinuance of service.
D. In the event that the actual or threatened industrial waste
discharge, in the opinion of the Township, may present an imminent
or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of people or
the environment. In such event, the Township shall immediately
notify said person, by telephone or visit to the property, of
discontinuance of service.
Any person notified of a discontinuance of service shall
immediately stop or eliminate the noncomplying discharge. In the
event of the failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the
discontinuance order, the Township shall take steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection. Service shall be resumed upon proof of correction
of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement
describing the causes of the noncomplying discharge and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be
submitted to the Township within 15 days of the date of
occurrence. The expense of such severance of the sewer
connection and the expense of restoring the sewer connection by
the Township shall be a debt due the Township of Logan and lien
upon all of the property of said person, and may be recovered by
civil action in the name of the Township.
7. Any person discharging to the public sanitary sewerage system
industrial wastes and sanitary sewage together subject to Pretreatment
Standards and Requirements shall submit the following reports to the
Township.
A. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable Pretreatment Standards or following commencement of
the introduction of an industrial waste discharge or an industrial
waste and sanitary discharge into the public sanitary sewerage
system, as applicable, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all pollutants in the discharge which are limited by
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements and the average and
maximum daily flow-rates for the process unit in the person's
facility which are limited by such Pretreatment Standards or
Requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable
Pretreatment Standards or Requirements are being met on a
consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and
maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the person
into compliance with the applicable Pretreatment Standards or
Requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of said person, and certified by a qualified
professional.
§ 111 LOGAN CODE § 111
1:296
B. After the compliance date of such Pretreatment Standard or after
commencement of the discharge into the public sanitary sewerage
system, as applicable, on or before June 15 and December 15 of
each year, unless required more frequently in the Pretreatment
Standard or by the Township, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by
such Pretreatment Standards. In addition, this report shall include
a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period
exceeded the average daily flow reported in the discharge permit
application.
C. In the cases where the Township determines that imposition of
mass limitations on persons is appropriate, the report required by
Subsection B of § 111(7) shall indicate the mass of pollutants
regulated by Pretreatment Standards in the discharge of said
person. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and
analysis of the discharge including the flow and the nature and
concentration, or production and mass where requested by the
Township, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the
applicable Pretreatment Standards. The frequency of monitoring
shall be prescribed in the applicable Pretreatment Standard, unless
the Township directs more frequent monitoring. All analysis shall
be performed in accordance with procedures established by the
EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR
Part 136 and amendments thereto or with other test procedures
approved by the EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance
with the techniques approved by the EPA. Where 40 CFR Part 136
does not include a sampling or analysis technique for the pollutant
in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication,
Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial
Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments
thereto, or with any other sampling and analysis procedures
approved by the EPA.
D. In the case of a slug load as defined by Subsection O of § 112(4) of
this Part 1, it is the responsibility of the person to immediately
notify the Township of the incident. The notification shall include
the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, and corrective actions. Within five days following a slug
load, said person shall submit to the Township detailed written
report describing the cause of the slug load and the measures to be
taken to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve said person of any expense, loss, damage, or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the public
sanitary sewerage system, fish kills, or other damage to people or
property; nor shall notification relieve the person of any fines, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this Part 1 or
other applicable federal, commonwealth, county or municipal law.
§ 111 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 111
1:297
§ 112. Prohibitive Wastes. [Ord. 6-28-73; as amended by Ord.
12-27-84; and by Ord. 12-16-93]
E. Any and all reports required as a part of a specific Federal
Categorical Pretreatment Standard. Service shall be resumed upon
the correction of any such deficiency.
1. The discharge of unpolluted water or waste to a separate sanitary
sewer is expressly prohibited.
2. The discharge of garbage to the public sanitary sewerage system is
expressly prohibited unless said garbage is first shredded.
3. No sanitary sewage or industrial waste from any property other than
that for which a permit has been issued as provided by ordinance shall
be discharged to the public sanitary sewage system.
4. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge any sanitary
sewage or any industrial waste having any of the following
characteristics to the public sanitary sewerage system:
A. Wastes containing liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quality may cause fire, explosion or be in any other way
injurious to persons, the structures of the sewerage system or its
operation.
B. Wastes having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in
the public sanitary sewerage system resulting interference, but in
no case wastes having a temperature in excess of 104º F. or less
than 32º F.
C. Wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0, or having
any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to
structures, equipment, or personnel of the public sanitary
sewerage system. Where the Township deems it advisable, it may
require any person discharging industrial wastes to install and
maintain, at his own expense, in a manner approved by the
Township or its authorized representative, a suitable device to
continuously measure and record the pH of the wastes so
discharged.
D. Wastes containing any noxious or malodorous gas or substance
which either singly or by interaction with sewage on other wastes
is, in the opinion of the Township, likely to create a public nuisance
or hazard to life, or prevent entry to sewerage structures for their
maintenance and repair.
E. Wastes, containing ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, hair, chemical or
paint residues, greases, lime slurry or viscose material of such
character or in such quantity that, in the opinion of the Township,
they may cause an obstruction to the flow in sewer or otherwise
§ 111 LOGAN CODE § 112
1:298
interfere with the proper operation of the public sanitary sewerage
system. Attention is called to the fact that the maximum
permissible concentration will vary throughout the system,
depending upon the size of the particular receiving sewer and the
flows therein.
F. Wastes containing insoluble, non-flocculent substances having
specific gravity in excess of 2.65.
G. Wastes containing soluble substances in such concentrations as to
cause the specific gravity of the waste to be greater than 1.1.
H. Wastes containing any of the following substances in solution or in
suspension, in concentrations exceeding those shown in the
following table, with the exception of those industrial wastes
discharged to the Altoona City Authority's public sanitary sewerage
system pursuant to § 111 of Part 1, of this chapter 18.
Substance
Maximum Permissible
Concentration
(mg/l)
Phenolic compounds as C5H6
OH
0.0005
Cynanides as CN 0.025
Cyanates as CNO 0.5
Iron as Fe 1.5
Trivalent chromium as Cr 0.5
Hexavalent chromium as Cr 0.05
Nickel as Ni 0.5
Copper as Cu 0.5
Lead as Pb 0.10
Tin as Sn 0.5
Zinc as Zn 1.0
Cadmium as Cd 0.1
Methylene blue active
substances
1.0
Nitrogen (TKN) 80.0
Sulfates 200.0
Phosphorus 10.0
Arsenic 0.1
Barium 1.0
Mercury 0.01
Chlorine demand 10.0
§ 112 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 112
1:299
I. Wastes containing more than 30 mg/l by weight of fat, oil or grease.
J. Wastes containing more than 10 mg/l of any of the following gases:
hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide, or any of the
halogens.
K. Wastes containing gases or vapors, either free or occluded, in
concentrations toxic or dangerous to humans or animals.
L. Any wastes containing toxic substances in quantities sufficient to
interfere with the biochemical processes of sewage treatment
works or that will pass through the sewage treatment works and
exceed the state, federal or interstate requirements for the Little
Juniata River.
M. Any toxic radioactive isotopes without a special permit.
N. Wastes containing any substance which may cause any product of
the public sanitary sewerage system such as residues, sludges, or
scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere
with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance
discharged into the public sanitary sewerage system cause the
public sanitary sewerage to be in noncompliance with the sludge
use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed under
Section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations
affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control
Act, or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used.
O. Wastes containing any pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow-rate and/or pollutant
concentration which the person knows or has reason to know will
cause interference to the public sanitary sewerage system. In no
case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentrations or
quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than
15 minutes more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentrations, quantities, or flow during normal operations.
5. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as
prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the
Township and any person whereby any industrial waste of unusual
character may be admitted to the public sanitary sewerage system
either before or after pretreatment by the producer of such industrial
waste. However, in no case, shall the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards for a particular industrial subcategory be modified by such
agreements or arrangements unless the limitations imposed under such
agreements or arrangements are more stringent.
6. Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the Federal Standard,
if more stringent than other limitations imposed under this chapter for
§ 112 LOGAN CODE § 112
1:300
§ 113. Sewerage Service Charge Tap-in or Connection Charge. [Ord.
6-28-73; as amended by Ord. 9-25-75; by Ord. 12-28-78, by Ord.
12-27-79; by Ord. 12-27-83; by Ord. 12-24-87A; by Ord. 11-30-89A;
by Ord. 2-18-93; by Ord. 6-24-93; by Ord. 9-15-94A; by Ord. 2-9-95;
by Ord. 5-16-96; by Ord. 1-15-98; by Ord. 3-4-99; by Ord. 7-15-99A;
by Ord. 12-13-01; by Ord. 01-03-05; by Ord. 3-9-06A; by Ord.
11-08-07A; by Ord. 12-13-07; by Ord. 01-07-08; by Ord. 12-10-09; by
Ord. 03-10-11C; and by Ord. 08-11-11]
sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the
limitations imposed under this chapter. The Township shall notify all
affected persons of the applicable reporting requirements under 40
CFR 403.12.
1. The following separate Sewer Districts are hereby created:
A. City of Altoona District.
B. Frankstown Township Sewer District.
C. Logan Township Sewer District.
2. There is hereby levied and assessed against all persons, firms and/or
corporations making any connection with the public sanitary sewerage
system or otherwise discharging sewage, industrial waste, water or
other liquids either directly or indirectly into said system or any part
thereof, a tapping and/or connection fee and a service charge, payable
in the amounts as hereinafter provided. The Township shall have the
option, at its sole and absolute discretion, to charge any or all such
amounts for tapping and/or connection fee and service charge to and
collect the same from such persons, firms and/or corporations making
such connections and/or the Township may charge any or all such
amounts to and collect the same from the owner and/or occupant of any
building or house and/or residential equivalent, be it residential,
commercial and/or industrial in use, so connected to the public sanitary
sewerage system.
A. City of Altoona Sewer District.
(1) A connection fee as follows:
(a) Three hundred dollars plus a building sewer inspection
fee, as defined in Chapter 1, Part 3, hereof, for a
connection made in any way to the public sanitary
sewerage system into which sewage from any proposed or
existing structure shall pass.
(b) For any connection made to a lateral installed by the
person making such connection, an inspection fee as
defined in Chapter 1, Part 3, hereof shall be imposed. The
installation of the lateral, together with the cost thereof,
shall be borne solely by the person making such
§ 112 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 113
1:301
connection the same to be done under constant inspection
by the Township. Said person making such connection
shall also comply with Chapter 21 (as amended from time
to time) hereof with regard to any road disturbance permit
requirements.
(2) A service charge for any house, building, mobile home, house
trailer or any residential equivalent, used for dwelling
purposes, having any connection with the said public sanitary
sewerage system, in discharging sewage, water or other
liquids into said system, shall be the amount charged and billed
by the City of Altoona and/or Altoona City Authority to Logan
Township for the above structures, plus 25% for expenses and
sewer line maintenance incurred by Logan Township.
[Amended by Ord. 01-07-13]
B. Frankstown Township Sewer District.
(1) A connection fee as follows:
(a) Three hundred dollars plus a building sewer inspection
fee, as defined in Chapter 1, Part 3, hereof, for a
connection made in any way to the public sanitary
sewerage system into which sewage from any proposed or
existing structure shall pass.
(b) For any connection made to a lateral installed by the
person making such connection, an inspection fee as
defined in Chapter 1, Part 3, hereof shall be imposed. The
installation of the lateral, together with the cost thereof,
shall be borne solely by the person making such
connection the same to be done under constant inspection
by the Township. Said person making such connection
shall also comply with Chapter 21 (as amended from time
to time) hereof with regard to any road disturbance permit
requirements.
(2) A service charge for any building or house, mobile home, house
trailer or any residential equivalent, having any connection
with the said public sanitary sewerage system, and discharging
sewage, water or other liquids into said system, shall be at the
time of and in the amount charged to Logan Township for such
building or house, mobile home, house trailer or any
residential equivalent by Frankstown Township, which shall be
based upon the sewer service rates for Frankstown Township
District 1 for customers using a metered public water supply
(as set forth in the Intermunicipal Sanitary Sewage
Conveyance Service Agreement by and between the Township
of Logan and the Township of Frankstown dated 2013, a copy
of which is on file with the Township) plus an administrative/
§ 113 LOGAN CODE § 113
1:302
maintenance charge of 25% of said amount charged.
[Amended by Ord. 02-13-14]
(3) The service charge for any commercial, industrial, or
institutional building or house, upon having any connection
with the Township's public sanitary sewerage system and
discharging sanitary sewage, industrial waste or other liquids
into said system, shall be at the time of and in the amount
charged to Logan Township for such building or house, mobile
home, house trailer or any residential equivalent by
Frankstown Township, which shall be based upon the sewer
service rates for Frankstown Township District 1 for customers
using a metered public water supply (as set forth in the
Intermunicipal Sanitary Sewage Conveyance Service
Agreement by and between the Township of Logan and the
Township of Frankstown dated 2013, a copy of which is on file
with the Township) plus an administrative/maintenance charge
of 25% of said amount charged for the following categories for
each building or house connected to the Township's public
sanitary sewerage system: [Amended by Ord. 02-13-14]
Category Schedule
Residential
Equivalents
1. Each Retail Store
(a) 10 or fewer employees 1
(b) Each additional 10 employees or
fraction thereof
1
2. Each Business or Professional Office
(a) 10 or fewer employees 1
(b) Each additional 10 employees or
fraction thereof
1
3. Each Business or Professional Office
Attached to a Building or House for
Public Transactions
(a) 10 or fewer employees 1
(b) Each additional 10 employees or
fraction thereof
1
4. Each Hotel, Motel or Boardinghouse
(in addition to any charge for
restaurant facilities), per 2 rental
rooms
1
5. Each Restaurant, Club or Tavern
(whether a separate building or
house or located within a building or
house), per 20 seats or fraction
thereof
1
§ 113 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 113
1:303
Category Schedule
Residential
Equivalents
6. Each Church 1
7. Each Service Station, Garage and/or
Automotive Repair Shop
(a) 3 bays or fewer (excluding car
wash facilities)
1
(b) Each additional bay over 3 0.50
(c) Each car washing bay located in
service station, garage or
automotive repair shop
1
8. Each Car Wash, per bay 2
9. Each Laundromat
(a) 2 washers or fewer 1
(b) Each additional 2 washers or
fraction thereof
1
10. Each Barbershop or Beauty Shop
(a) 2 chairs or fewer 1
(b) Each chair over 2 0.50
(c) If attached to a building or
house - for both [2 chairs
maximum]
2
11. Each Fire Company 1
12. Each Building or House Having a
Commercial Garbage Grinder, 3
horsepower or greater, per each
such grinder, which charge shall be
in addition to any charge for any
other category applicable to such
building or house as set forth herein
1
13. Each Financial Institution 1
14. Each Funeral Home 1
15. Each Convenience Store -
Combination Gas/Grocery
3.5
16. Each Nursing Home, Hospital or
Similar Institution
(a) 4 or fewer patients and/or
employees
1
(b) Each additional 4 patients and/
or employees, or fraction thereof
1
§ 113 LOGAN CODE § 113
1:304
Category Schedule
Residential
Equivalents
17. Each School (private or public), per
18 pupils or fraction thereof
1
18. Each Industry (excluding process
waste)
(a) 10 or fewer employees 1
(b) Each additional 10 employees or
fraction thereof
1
Service charges for schools payable hereunder shall be
computed on the basis of the number of pupils enrolled on
September 30th of each school year. Teachers and employees
shall be included as pupils for purposes of such computation.
Service charges for commercial and industrial buildings or
houses payable hereunder shall be computed on the basis of
the number of employees (including individual owners and
employers) for the quarter ending September 30th of each
year.
If 2 or more buildings or houses are connected to the public
sanitary sewerage system through a single lateral or if 2 or
more types of use are made of the same building or house,
the service charges payable hereunder shall be computed as
though each such building or house and each such type of use
were a separate building or house with a separate connection
to a public sewer.
The Township reserves the right, from time to time, to
establish additional categories and establish monthly rates
therefore; and the Township reserves the right, from time to
time, to alter, modify, revise and/or amend the categories and
the monthly rates applicable thereto.
(4) Any and all sanitary sewer collection systems constructed and/
or connected within the Frankstown Township Sewer District
of Logan Township shall comply in all respects with the
requirements set forth in that certain Intermunicipal Sanitary
Sewage Conveyance Service Agreement as amended from time
to time among the Township of Logan, the Central Blair County
Sanitary Authority, the Township of Frankstown and the
Frankstown Township Sewer Authority.
C. In the Logan Township Sewer District:
(1) A connection fee as follows:
(a) Three hundred dollars plus a building sewer inspection
fee, as defined in Chapter 1, Part 3, hereof, in the event a
§ 113 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 113
1:305
connection is made to a lateral previously installed by the
Township.
(b) For any connection made to a lateral installed by the
person making such connection, an inspection fee as
defined in Chapter 1, Part 3, hereof shall be imposed. The
installation of the lateral, together with the cost thereof,
shall be borne solely by the person making such
connection the same to be done under constant inspection
by the Township. Said person making such connection
shall also comply with Chapter 21 (as amended from time
to time) hereof with regard to any road disturbance permit
requirements.
(2) Tapping Fee. For each building or house and/or residential
equivalent (per connection) there is hereby imposed a tapping
fee, as defined in P.L. 1227 of December 19, 1990, Act 203, 53
Pa. Stat. Ann. § 306, $1,200 per residential equivalent for the
following categories for each building or house connected to
the Township's public sanitary sewerage system:
Category Schedule
Residential
Equivalents
1. Each Retail Store
(a) 10 or fewer employees 1
(b) Each additional 10 employees
or fraction thereof
1
2. Each Business or Professional Office
(a) 10 or fewer employees 1
(b) Each additional 10 employees
or fraction thereof
1
3. Each Business or Professional Office
Attached to a Building or House for
Public Transactions
(a) 10 or fewer employees 1
(b) Each additional 10 employees
or fraction thereof
1
4. Each Hotel, Motel or Boardinghouse
(in addition to any charge for
restaurant facilities), per 2 rental
rooms
1
5. Each Restaurant, Club or Tavern
(whether a separate building or
house or located within a building or
house), per 20 seats or fraction
thereof
1
§ 113 LOGAN CODE § 113
1:306
Category Schedule
Residential
Equivalents
6. Each Church 1
7. Each Service Station, Garage and/or
Automotive Repair Shop
(a) 3 bays or fewer (excluding car
wash facilities)
1
(b) Each additional bay over 3 0.50
(c) Each car washing bay located in
service station, garage or
automotive repair shop
1
8. Each Car Wash, per bay 2
9. Each Laundromat
(a) 2 washers or fewer 1
(b) Each additional 2 washers or
fraction thereof
1
10. Each Barbershop or Beauty Shop
(a) 2 chairs or fewer 1
(b) Each chair over 2 0.50
(c) If attached to a building or
house - for both [2 chairs
maximum]
2
11. Each Fire Company 1
12. Each Building or House Having a
Commercial Garbage Grinder, 3
horsepower or greater, per each such
grinder, which charge shall be in
addition to any charge for any other
category applicable to such building
or house as set forth herein
1
13. Each Financial Institution 1
14. Each Funeral Home 1
15. Each Convenience Store -
Combination Gas/Grocery
3.5
16. Each Nursing Home, Hospital or
Similar Institution
(a) 4 or fewer patients and/or
employees
1
(b) Each additional 4 patients and/
or employees, or fraction
thereof
1
§ 113 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 113
1:307
Category Schedule
Residential
Equivalents
17. Each School (private or public), per
18 pupils or faction thereof,
computed on the basis of the design
enrollment. Teachers and employees
shall be included as pupils for
purposes of such computation.
1
18. Each Industry (excluding process
waste)
(a) 10 or fewer employees 1
(b) Each additional 10 employees
or fraction thereof
1
Tapping fees for commercial and industrial building or houses
payable hereunder shall be computed upon the basis of the
maximum number of employees (including individual owners
and employers) that could occupy said building or house as
determined by the Township.
If 2 or more buildings or houses are connected to the public
sanitary sewerage system through a single lateral or if 2 or
more types of use are made of the same building or house, the
tapping fee payable hereunder shall be computed as though
each such building or house and each such type of use were
a separate building or house with a separate connection to a
public sewer.
The Township reserves the right, from time to time, to
establish additional categories and establish residential
equivalents therefor; and the Township reserves the right,
from time to time, to alter, modify, revise and/or amend the
categories and the residential equivalents applicable thereto.
(3) Residential Service Charge. A service charge for any house,
building, mobile home, house trailer or any residential
equivalent, used for dwelling purposes, having any connection
with the said public sanitary sewerage system, and discharging
sewage, water or other liquids into said system, a flat rate of
$636 per annum or $53 per month, beginning January 1, 2013.
[Amended by Ord. 01-07-13]
(4) Commercial/Industrial/Church or School Service Charge. The
service charge for any commercial, industrial, school or church
user having any connection with the Township's public sanitary
sewerage system and discharging sewage, industrial wastes,
water or other liquids into said system, shall be based upon the
quantity of water used on or in said premises as the same is
measured by the Water Company meter or meters there in use,
§ 113 LOGAN CODE § 113
1:308
and shall be charged monthly at the following rates:
[Amended by Ord. 01-07-13]
First 500 cu. ft. or less per
month
$53 per month as of 01/01/
2013
All over 500 cu. ft. per month $10.60 per 100 cu. ft. as of 01/
01/2013
The minimum charge in all
cases shall be:
$53 per month as of 01/01/
2013
(5) The service charge for any commercial, industrial or
institutional building or House, upon having any connection
with the Township's said public sanitary sewerage system and
discharging sanitary sewerage, industrial waste or other
liquids into said system, shall be on a flat rate basis as follows:
$636 per annum per residential equivalent, payable at the rate
of $53 per monthly billing period beginning January 1, 2013,
for the following categories for each building or house
connected to the Township's public sanitary sewerage system
in not connected to a water meter: [Amended by Ord.
01-07-13]
Category Schedule
Residential
Equivalents
1. Each Retail Store
(a) 10 or fewer employees 1
(b) Each additional 10 employees or
fraction thereof
1
2. Each Business or Professional Office
(a) 10 or fewer employees 1
(b) Each additional 10 employees or
fraction thereof
1
3. Each Business or Professional Office
Attached to a Building or House for
Public Transactions
(a) 10 or fewer employees 1
(b) Each additional 10 employees or
fraction thereof
1
4. Each Hotel, Motel or Boardinghouse
(in addition to any charge for
restaurant facilities), per 2 rental
rooms
1
§ 113 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 113
1:309
Category Schedule
Residential
Equivalents
5. Each Restaurant, Club or Tavern
(whether a separate building or
house or located within a building or
house), per 20 seats or fraction
thereof
1
6. Each Church 1
7. Each Service Station, Garage and/or
Automotive Repair Shop
(a) 3 bays or fewer (excluding car
wash facilities)
1
(b) Each additional bay over 3 0.50
(c) Each car washing bay located in
a service station, garage or
automotive repair shop
1
8. Each Car Wash, per bay 2
9. Each Laundromat
(a) Two washers or fewer 1
(b) Each additional 2 washers or
fraction thereof
1
10. Each Barbershop or Beauty Shop
(a) 2 chairs or fewer 1
(b) Each chair over 2 0.50
(c) If attached to a building or
house - for both [2 chairs
maximum]
2
11. Each Fire Company 1
12. Each Building or House Having a
Commercial Garbage Grinder, 3
horsepower or greater, per each
such grinder, which charge shall be
in addition to any charge for any
other category applicable to such
building or house as set forth herein
1
13. Each Financial Institution 1
14. Each Funeral Home 1
15. Each Convenience Store -
Combination Gas/Grocery
3.5
16. Each Nursing Home, Hospital or
Similar Institution
§ 113 LOGAN CODE § 113
1:310
Category Schedule
Residential
Equivalents
(a) 4 or fewer patients and/or
employees
1
(b) Each additional 4 patients and/
or employees, or fraction thereof
1
17. Each School (private or public), per
18 pupils or fraction thereof
1
18. Each Industry (excluding process
waste)
(a) 10 or fewer employees 1
(b) Each additional 10 employees or
fraction thereof
1
Service charges for schools payable hereunder shall be
computed on the basis of the number of pupils enrolled on
September 30th of each school year. Teachers and employees
shall be included as pupils for purposes of such computation.
Service charges for commercial and industrial buildings or
houses payable hereunder shall be computed on the basis of
the number of employees (including individual owners and
employers) for the quarter ending September 30th of each
year.
If 2 or more buildings or houses are connected to the public
sanitary sewerage system through a single lateral or if 2 or
more types of use are made of the same building or house,
the service charges payable hereunder shall be computed as
though each such building or house and each such type of use
were a separate building or house with a separate connection
to a public sewer.
The Township reserves the right, from time to time, to
establish additional categories and establish monthly rates
therefore; and the Township reserves the right, from time to
time, to alter, modify, revise and/or amend the categories and
the monthly rates applicable thereto.
3. Late Payment Penalty.
A. The service charge imposed upon users of the public sanitary
sewerage system within Frankstown Township Sewer Districts as
set forth herein shall be billed by the Township, on a quarterly basis
in accordance with the billing practices of the Township. If any
account in said Districts is not paid in full within 20 days after the
date of the bill for the service charge, a penalty of 10% shall be
added to any such account.
§ 113 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 113
1:311
B. The service charge imposed upon users of the public sanitary
sewerage system within the City of Altoona and Logan Township
Sewer Districts as set forth herein shall be billed by the Township
on a monthly basis in accordance with the billing practices of the
Township. If any account in said Districts is not paid in full within
20 days after date of the bill for the service charge, a penalty of
10% shall be added to any such account.
4. The registration of water on two or more meters at one premise, and
used by one consumer, may be combined and billed to said user as
though registered on one meter if the Township so elects.
5. Charges to commercial, industrial, institutional, school or church users.
[Amended by Ord. 09-14-17]
A. Unless a different service charge is otherwise set forth herein, in
the event any commercial, industrial, institutional, school, church
or similar user is discharging sanitary sewage, industrial waste,
water or other liquids into the public sanitary sewerage system
either directly or indirectly, the service charge to such users shall
be determined by such users water usage as the same may be
measured and/or recorded by any Water Company plus 25% for
expenses and sewer line maintenance.
B. Unless a different service charge is otherwise set forth herein, in
the event any user set forth in Subsection 5A and any residential
user uses water from a source other than a Water Company, then
such users shall be required to install and maintain, for measuring
and/or recording, a meter as set forth in Specifications for Sanitary
Sewerage System Construction for such water usage at no cost to
the Township and such meters shall be read in the manner and at
times deemed appropriate by the Township. Any such meter that is
15 years or older from and after September 30, 2017, and any such
meters that become 15 years old after that date, shall be replaced
with a new meter complying with the specifications set forth in the
Specifications for Sanitary Sewerage System Construction within
90 days of such date or the date after which the meter becomes 15
years old.
6. In the event that a user is able to prove to the satisfaction of the
Township that a portion of the water measured and/or recorded as set
forth in Subsection 5 of this § 113 does not and cannot enter the public
sanitary sewerage system, the Township may determine, in such
manner and by such method as it, in its sole discretion, may deem
practical, the actual percentage of the metered water entering the
public sanitary sewerage system, or the Township may require or
permit the installation of additional meters in such manner as to
determine either the quantity of water excluded from the public
sanitary sewerage system or the quantity of water, sewage and/or
industrial waste actually entering the public sanitary sewerage system.
The sewerage service charge for the actual percentage of water
§ 113 LOGAN CODE § 113
1:312
§ 114. Surcharge for Certain Industrial Wastes. [Ord. 6-28-73]
calculated in this Subsection 6 shall be based upon the quantity of
water, sewage and/or industrial waste estimated, measured and/or
recorded by the Township to be actually entering the public sanitary
sewerage system and shall be subject to the sewage charge set forth in
§ 113 hereof.
7. Any person requesting consideration for the reduction in the sewerage
service charge because of water not entering the public sanitary
sewerage system shall make written application to the Township for
such consideration, which application shall include the name of the
applicant, Township account number, and supporting data fully
describing other sources of water, if any, as well as disposition of water
alleged not to be entering the sewerage system. The application shall
be accompanied by a sketch to approximate scale showing the plan of
property, water distribution system, sewer layout, existing meters, and
proposed meters in the scheme to determine the quantity of flow
entering or not entering, the sewerage system. The cost of furnishing,
installing and maintaining any meters other than those to measure
water purchased from the Water Company shall be borne by the
applicant. The type, size, location, arrangement and maintenance of
such meters shall be subject to the approval of the Township and the
Water Company.
8. Nothing in the foregoing paragraphs shall preclude the right of the
Township entering into contracts with neighboring municipalities for
the collection and transportation of their sewage under a schedule of
charges.
9. Billing for sewer service charges for all new construction of any
building, house and/or structure will commence when the certificate of
occupancy is issued for such building, house and/or structure. An
existing building, house and/or structure which is in any way conveyed
to another person shall have all charges for sewerage service paid
through the date of closing on the same and the new owner shall be
responsible for notifying the Township of the change in ownership
within 10 days of such change.
1. Although the Township sewage treatment works will be capable of
treating certain abnormal industrial wastes as hereto before defined in
§ 102 of this Part 1, the actual treatment of such wastes may increase
the cost of operating and maintaining the Township's sewage treatment
works. Therefore, there is hereby levied and assessed against each
person discharging such industrial waste into the Township's public
sanitary sewerage system, a surcharge, or surcharges, which are
intended to cover such additional cost to the Township. Such surcharge
shall be in addition to the regular sewerage service charge set forth in
§ 105 of this chapter, and shall be payable as hereinafter provided and
in the amount hereinafter provided.
§ 113 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 114
1:313
2. The strength of any industrial waste, the discharge of which is to be
subject to surcharge, shall be determined monthly, or more frequently,
from samples taken at the manhole described in § 111(4) or at any other
sampling point mutually agreed to by the Township and the producer of
said waste. The frequency and duration of the sampling period shall be
such as, in the opinion of the Township, will permit a reasonably reliable
determination of the average composition of the said wastes. Samples
shall be collected, by a representative of the Township, in proportion to
the flow of waste and composited for analysis in accordance with the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Sewage, as published by the American Public Health Association.
Except as hereinafter provided, the strength of the waste as found by
analysis shall be used for establishing the surcharge, or surcharges
hereinafter provided for. However, the Township may, if it so elects,
accept the results of routine sampling and analysis by the producer of
said wastes in lieu of making its own samplings and analysis.
3. In the event any industrial waste is found, by the Township, to have a
BOD in excess of 300 parts per million, the producer of said waste shall
be surcharged in an amount equal to the product of the actual volume of
wastes in 1,000 gallons per billing period, discharged to the public
sanitary sewerage system and the "BOD surcharge rate". The "BOD
surcharging rate" shall be determined by the Township by the following
formula:
Rc = 0.00834 P (C-300)
Where:
Rc = The BOD surcharge rate in cents per 1,000 gallons of
waste discharged.
P = The average annual fixed, operating and maintenance
cost of secondary treatment processes per pound of BOD
received at the treatment works. Such secondary
processes shall include chlorination as well as activated
sludge processes. (Prior to completion of the first year of
operation, the value of "P" shall assumed to be 0.05
dollars.)
C = The average BOD of the industrial waste expressed in
parts per million as determined in accordance with § 602
of this chapter.
The figure 300 appearing in the above formula corresponds to the
maximum BOD permissible without surcharge. The figure 0.000834 is
the factor to convert parts per million to pounds per 1,000 gallons. No
discount will be permitted for sewage or industrial wastes having a
BOD less than 300 parts per million.
4. In the event any industrial waste, the volume of which is found by the
Township, to have an average suspended solid concentration in excess
of 350 parts per million, the producer of said waste shall be surcharged
§ 114 LOGAN CODE § 114
1:314
§ 115. Construction of System by Developers. [Ord. 6-28-73; as
amended by Ord. 12-27-84; and by Ord. 5-16-96]
an amount equal to the product of the actual volume of waste in 1,000
gallons per billing period, discharged to the public sanitary sewerage
system and the "suspended solids surcharge rate". The "suspended
solids surcharge rate" shall be determined by the Township and by the
following formula:
Rs = 0.00834 B (S - 350)
Where:
Rs = The suspended solids surcharge rate in cents per 1,000
gallons of waste discharged.
B = The average annual fixed, operating and maintenance cost
of the sludge digestion, sludge drying and sludge disposal
operations per pound of suspended solids received at the
treatment works. (Prior to the completion of the first year
of operation the value of "B" shall be assumed to be 0.05
dollars.)
S = The average suspended solids concentration of the
abnormal industrial waste, expressed in parts per millions
as determined in accordance with § 114(2).
The figure 350 appearing in the above formula corresponds to the
maximum suspended solids concentration permissible without
surcharge. As before, the figure 0.00834 is the factor to convert parts
per million to pounds per 1,000 gallons. No discount will be permitted
for sewage or industrial wastes having a suspended solids
concentration less than 350 parts per million.
5. The surcharge provided for in this chapter will be added to the normal
sewerage service charge set forth in § 113. They will be billed quarterly
and shall be subject to the same penalty as set forth in § 113(3).
6. In the case of a waste containing substances or materials that can only
be treated by the Township with extra care and costs and where the
surcharge as stated does not apply, the Township may accept the waste
after a study of it has been made and a formula for the discharge has
been made.
7. In the case of wastes containing heavy metals, either in suspension or
solution when in the opinion of the Township the suspended solids do
not represent the true characteristics of the solids loading the Township
reserves the right to use total solids instead of suspended solids for the
surcharge rate provided in § 114(4).
1. Any person (hereinafter, for purposes of this § 115, called "developer")
who desires to construct or build, at said person's sole cost and
expense, a sanitary sewer or sewerage system which is capable of
§ 114 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 115
1:315
§ 116. Billing Practices. [Ord. 12-16-93; as amended by Ord.
11-08-07A]
servicing two or more houses, buildings, mobile homes and/or house
trailers and/or residential equivalent and/or in the event a sanitary
sewer or sewerage system is proposed to utilize a six-inch or larger
sanitary sewer, and connect such sanitary sewer or sewerage system
with the public sanitary sewerage system shall comply with the
provisions of this § 115.
2. The developer shall execute an agreement, prepared by the Township
Solicitor, with the Township setting forth the obligations of the parties
as determined by the Township, and submit plans for the proposed
extension of the sanitary sewer to the Township in accordance with
Chapter 22 paying the cost of preparation of said agreement.
3. Prior to final acceptance of any sanitary sewer extension by the
Township, the developer shall furnish to the Township "as built plans" in
accordance with Specifications for Sanitary Sewerage System
Construction.
4. Easements for the sanitary sewer shall be recorded in the name of the
Township or the Authority for all sewers to be constructed outside of
dedicated street rights-of-way.
5. All sanitary sewer and/or sewerage system shall be constructed as
specified by Specifications for Sanitary Sewerage System Construction.
6. The Developer shall pay the Township for all costs of inspection of
construction of all sanitary sewers and sewer connections in
accordance with Chapter 1, Part 3, hereof.
7. No sanitary sewer extension constructed by a Developer will be
approved for use and acceptance by the Township until said sanitary
sewer is formally approved by the Township, all collection connections
and inspection fees have been paid, the Township has been reimbursed
in full for all inspection costs incurred for inspection during
construction, testing, approval and all cost set forth in Chapter 1, Part
3, hereof, and the sanitary sewer extension has been dedicated to the
Township and/or the Authority.
A. All fees, penalties and charges imposed, collected and/or received
under this Part 1 of Chapter 18, shall be used solely for the purpose of
operating, maintaining and replacing the public sanitary sewerage
system or the retirement of debt incurred for the same.
B. Vandalism of the public sanitary sewerage system shall be prohibited.
C. Any purchased sewer tap previously placed into service by any person
shall permit said person to connect to, convey and/or discharge sanitary
sewage into the public sanitary sewerage system. In order to retain the
right to connect to, convey and/or discharge sanitary sewage into the
§ 115 LOGAN CODE § 116
1:316
§ 117. Collection of Delinquent Accounts. [Ord. 12-16-93; as
amended by Ord. 01-26-12B]
§ 118. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 6-28-73; as amended by Ord.
12-27-84; by Ord. 10-27-88; by Ord. 9-19-96; by Ord. 2-13-97; and
by Ord. 11-08-07A]
public sanitary sewerage system, payment of the rental service charge
must be paid when due in the full amount at all times. In the event
a person desires to no longer connect to, convey and/or discharge
sanitary sewage into the public sanitary sewerage system, said person
shall permanently cap the sewer lateral, per Township specifications, at
the property line and have the same inspected by the Township prior
to in any way covering said capped sewer lateral. If the capped sewer
lateral is approved by the Township, all rights to connect to, convey
and/or discharge sanitary sewage into the public sanitary sewerage
system shall cease, as will all such rental service charges, so long
as the same have been paid to date. In the event a sewer lateral is
desired to be reconnected to the public sanitary sewerage system, a
new sewer tap application shall be filed and appropriate fees (including,
but not limited to, any unpaid rental charges) paid to the Township, at
which point, a new tap may be issued, if the same is available and if in
compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances.
A. Collection of delinquent sanitary sewer charges shall be either through
an action in assumpsit filed against the record owner of the property
receiving service or by use of the scire facias procedure provided for by
53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., as amended from time to time. In the event that
the Township elects to proceed via the scire facias procedure, a
municipal lien shall be filed against the property.
B. Once collection proceedings have begun, the Township shall be entitled
to collect interest at the annual rate of 10% on all overdue sanitary
sewer charges calculated cumulatively from the date of the first unpaid
statement. The interest will be included in any amount collected
through a settlement of the claim or, if a judgment is taken against the
property owner, added to the amount of the lien and made part of the
judgment.
C. The Township shall collect from the property owner all costs associated
with collection of the delinquent account, along with attorneys' fees in
the amount of 15% of the total amount due and owing on the sewer
account, at the time of either settlement of the claim or entry of
judgment on the writ of scire facias.
1. Each sewerage service charge or surcharge levied hereby pursuant to
this Part 1 shall be a debt due the Township of Logan and shall be lien
upon all the property of the user of such service, and if the same is not
paid within 30 days after it shall have been rendered, it shall be deemed
delinquent and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the
§ 116 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 118
1:317
§ 119. Regulation by the Township Supervisors. [Ord. 6-28-73]
The Township Supervisors may make and enforce such rules and
regulations for the safe, economical and efficient management, control
and protection of the Townships public sanitary sewerage system, for the
construction and use of house sewers and connections to the sewerage
system, for the construction and use of all other connections thereto, and
Township. In the event of failure to pay the sewerage service charge or
surcharges within 60 days after they become delinquent, the Township
shall be authorized to remove or close the sewer connection and shall
have the right to enter upon the property of the user of the service for
such purpose and to take such steps as may be necessary to accomplish
such removal or closing, as well as the expense of restoring any such
service, shall likewise be a debt due the Township of Logan and a lien
upon all of the property of the user and may be recovered by civil
action in the name of the Township, or such sewage service shall not
again be turned on, nor the sewage connection restored until all service
charges, including the expense of removal, closing and restoration
shall have been paid. Change of ownership or occupancy of premises
found delinquent shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating these
penalties.
2. All persons violating any portion of the rules and regulations
promulgated in this Part 1 will be in violation of this Part 1. Notice of
such violation shall be sent through the U.S. mails and if, after 30 days
of elapsed time, no action on the violation is taken, the sewer
connection may be removed or closed and reconnection will not be
made until after a correction of the violation has been made. The
expense of such removal or closing and the expense of restoring the
sewer service shall be a debt due the Township of Logan and a lien upon
all of the property of the user, and may be recoverable by civil action in
the name of the Township.
3. A. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by
the Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
B. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $300 and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution,
and/or be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Every day that a violation of this Part continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense which shall be subject to
the aforesaid penalties.
4. If any person discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes into the public sanitary sewerage system in violation of the
provisions of this Part 1, Federal or Commonwealth Pretreatment
Requirements, or any order of the Township, the Township Solicitor
may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in
the Court of Common Pleas of Blair County.
§ 118 LOGAN CODE § 119
1:318
for the regulation, collection, rebating and refunding of such sewerage
service charges as may be needful or necessary from time to time.
§ 119 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 119
1:319

Part 2
ALTERNATE SEWAGE SYSTEM MANAGEMENT
§ 201. Purpose. [Ord. 08-23-07B]
§ 202. Definitions. [Ord. 08-23-07B]
ABSORPTION AREA — Component of an individual or community sewage
system where liquid from a septic tank seeps into the soil; it consists of an
aggregate filled area containing piping for the distribution of liquid and the
soil or sand/soil combination located beneath the aggregate.
ALTERNATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) approved individual sewage handling system not classified
as conventional in nature, requiring a special permit issued by DEP and/
or Logan Township. This shall include individual spray irrigation systems
(ISIS), small flow treatment facilities (SFTF), holding tanks or any other
system considered non conventional in nature.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — All employees and authorized individuals
representing the Township in respect to permitting, inspection, and/or
enforcement.
BLAIR COUNTY SANITARY ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE (BCSAC) —
The entity responsible for sanitary sewage treatment other than publicly
treated sanitary sewage.
DEPARTMENT — Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
HOLDING TANK — A tank, whether permanent or temporary, to which
sewage is conveyed by a water carrying system where sewage is retained
for a temporary period and is not a component of a system used for
treatment and disposal.
A. This Part shall be known and may be cited as "Alternate Sewage System
Management for Logan Township."
B. As mandated by the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. § 691.1) and the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of January 24, 1966, as
amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., known as Act 537), municipalities have
the power and the duty to provide for adequate sewage treatment
facilities and for the protection of the public health by preventing the
discharge of untreated or inadequately treated sewage. The Sewage
Facilities Plan Update for Logan Township indicates a commitment to
formulate and implement an on-lot alternate sewage management
program for all lots within the Township utilizing alternate on-lot
sewage systems.
C. The purpose of this Part is to provide for the maintenance, inspection
and repair of all present and future individual alternate sewage
disposal systems, as hereafter described; and to establish
responsibilities for the proper administration of a sewage management
program.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:321
INDIVIDUAL RESIDENTIAL SPRAY IRRIGATION SYSTEM (IRSIS) — An
individual sewage system which serves a single dwelling and which treats
and disposes of sewage using a system of piping, treatment tanks and soil
renovation through spray irrigation.
LICENSED SEWAGE HAULER — A sewage hauler licensed by the
designated regulatory agency.
PERSON — An individual, association, public or private corporation forprofit
or not-for-profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department, board,
bureau or agency of the United States, commonwealth, political subdivision,
municipality, district, authority or other legal entity which is recognized by
the law as the subject or rights and duties. The term includes members
of an association, partnership or firm and the officers of a local agency or
municipal, public or private, corporation for-profit or not-for-profit.
SMALL FLOW TREATMENT FACILITIES — An individual or community
sewage system designed to adequately treat sewage flows not greater than
2,000 gallons per day for final disposal using a stream discharge or other
disposal method approved by the Department.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Logan.
TREATMENT TANK — A tank that provides for aerobic or anaerobic
decomposition of sewage to take place prior to discharge.
§ 203. Existing Individual Alternate Sewage Systems. [Ord.
08-23-07B]
A. Responsibilities of Persons Who Own Properties Served by Alternate
Sewage Systems. Every person who owns a property within Logan
Township on which one of the alternate sewage systems is located and
was in existence on the effective date of the Part or for permits issued
thereafter or which is subject to a separate agreement with the
Township, shall comply with the following;
(1) Have the treatment tank on the property cleaned a minimum of
every three years or more often if the treatment tank is filled with
solids or scum in excess of 1/3 the liquid depth of the tank, in the
case of small flow treatment facilities and individual spray
irrigation systems. In the case of holding tanks the tank shall be
pumped at a rate no less than that directed by the permitting
agency, or more often as necessary.
(2) Provide the Township with a receipt documenting the date on
which the tank was cleaned by a licensed sewage hauler. Such
receipt must be submitted to the Township within 10 days of the
cleaning, and in any event, prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy permit on the resale or other transfer of the property.
B. Occupancy. Prior to the occupancy involving new construction, resale,
or change of tenants in a dwelling using an alternate sewage system,
§ 202 LOGAN CODE § 203
1:322
§ 204. Operation and Maintenance of Alternate Sewage Systems.
[Ord. 08-23-07B]
the owner shall provide the Township with a receipt documenting the
date the treatment tank was cleaned by a licensed sewage hauler.
A. Requirements. Every person who applies for a building permit to
construct a new residence or other structure which is to be serviced by
an alternate sewage system for which a BCSAC or DEP permit is issued
after the effective date of this Part shall comply with the provisions of
this § 204 as hereafter set forth.
B. Recording. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any lot whose
sewage needs are proposed to be served by an alternate sewage
system, the property owner shall execute an operation and
maintenance agreement for the system in a form which can be recorded
in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Blair County.
C. Escrow Fees. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any
residential dwelling for which an alternate sewage system is proposed,
property owner shall pay to the Township the amount established by the
Township from time to time, as a maintenance fee, which is to be held in
escrow for the purpose of maintenance and repair should the property
owner fail in their responsibilities. In the event any monies are utilized
from this fund, the amount so utilized shall be replaced by the property
owner within 10 days of written notice to the property owner from the
Township such that the fund shall be maintained with the full amount as
originally determined by the Township at all times. In the event the
property owner fails to replace any monies so utilized, the Township, in
addition to any other remedies it may have available, including but not
limited to an action for violation of this Part, may file and/or cause to be
filed, a municipal lien against the said owner's property.
D. Alternate Sewage System Approval. The alternate sewage system shall
be approved by the BCSAC, DEP, and Logan Township as to its design,
construction and installation. The consultant for the property owner
shall certify to the authorizing agencies that the design, construction
and installation of the facility and its "start up" have been completed for
each lot in accordance with permits granted by the BCSAC, DEP and/or
Logan Township.
E. Operation and Maintenance Submission. Simultaneously with
submission of an alternate sewage system application to the BCSAC, or
DEP, property owner shall submit to Township, for review, an Operation
and Maintenance Manual for the system together with a pamphlet or
other document in form satisfactory to the Township, summarizing the
operation and maintenance requirements of the system and include the
estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining same. Two sets of
design plans for the system shall be submitted with the Operation and
Maintenance Manual.
§ 203 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 204
1:323
F. Forwarding of Material. Prior to the execution of an agreement of sale
for any property or lot whose sewage disposal needs are to be met by an
alternate sewage system (including resales of such lots), seller shall
provide buyer with a copy of the pamphlet approved by the Township
summarizing the operation and maintenance requirements of the
system and provide in the agreement of sale buyer's acknowledgement
of the receipt of same. The Operation and Maintenance Manual shall be
provided to the buyers at the time of settlement.
G. Operation And Maintenance Manual Description. The Operation and
Maintenance Manual shall describe in reasonable detail the method of
operation and required periodic inspection and maintenance of the
components of the alternate sewage system, including, but not limited
to, as applicable, spray nozzle heads, treatment tank, holding tank,
dosing tank, intermittent sand filters, chlorine contact tank, ultraviolet
disinfection system, storage tank, chlorinator, and all electrical and
mechanical control mechanisms.
H. Operation And Maintenance Manual Contents. The Operation and
Maintenance Manual shall include formatted charts for the purpose of
keeping a record as to the dates of all required inspections,
maintenance, repair and/or replacements of components of the
alternate sewage system together with a check mark system indicating
the performance of the specific inspection, maintenance, repair and
replacement task, an indication of the type of service, repair or
replacement performed and the name of the person(s) who performed
the inspection, maintenance, repair or replacement. The forms of the
inspection, maintenance, repair and replacement charts shall be
included in the Operation and Maintenance Manual.
I. Recordkeeping. The owner of any property whose sewage disposal
needs are met by an alternate sewage system shall maintain an up-todate
record of all service calls, inspections, maintenance, repairs and
replacements performed on the system which records shall be available
for inspection by the BCSAC or other designee of the Township without
prior notice. Property owners shall forward quarterly copies of above
records to the BCSAC or other Township designee.
J. Right Of Inspection. The alternate sewage system shall have external
controls placed in a weather proof locked box accessible to the BCSAC
or other designee of the Township. The BCSAC, or other Township
designee, shall be provided with keys to the locked box. Property
owners shall consent to the BCSAC, or other Township designee,
entering upon the property, as often as necessary, without prior notice,
to inspect all components of the alternate treatment system as
identified in Section 73.167 of the Pennsylvania Code, and to perform as
necessary a water analysis of the discharged effluent to confirm that
said discharge meets or exceeds the required levels of treatment
required of such systems by BCSAC testing shall occur at the nozzle
heads or other final discharge point and shall include testing for
residual chlorine, fecal coliform, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD),
§ 204 LOGAN CODE § 204
1:324
suspended solids (SS) as well as for any other substances for which
testing is required by BCSAC the Department and/or Logan Township.
K. Repair Replacement. In the event that it is determined upon any
inspection by the BCSAC or other designee of the Township, that any
repair and/or replacement of any component is required to bring the
system into compliance with BCSAC or DEP regulations. The BCSAC or
other Township designee shall issue a correction order designating the
system repair required and the date by which such correction and/or
replacement shall be accomplished. The correction order may require
that a qualified hauler pump the effluent from the alternate sewage
system until such system repair and/or replacement is accomplished.
Upon completion of the repair and/or replacement, the BCSAC, or other
designee of the Township, shall reinspect the system to determine
compliance with the correction order and issue a certificate of
correction or a further correction order, if deemed necessary.
Additionally, the BCSAC, or other Township designee, at the time of its
inspection shall also inspect the records maintained by the lot owner to
determine whether the system is being properly maintained. The
BCSAC, or other Township designee, shall have the authority to issue a
maintenance order directing that any required maintenance be
performed, at what intervals, as well as directing the proper
recordkeeping with reference to the maintenance and repair of the
system.
L. Refusal of Entry. In the event a property owner fails or refuses to permit
BCSAC, or other Township designee, on the property to perform the
inspections the inspections required, or to perform any work required
by the correction order or the maintenance order, the Township,
BCSAC, or other designee of the Township, shall have the right (but no
obligation) to enter upon the premises, conduct said inspections, and to
perform any repairs or replacements with respect to the alternate
sewage system, all of which shall be made at the cost and expense of
the property owner. Prior to entering upon the premises and
performing any repairs or replacements of the system or its component
parts, the Township, BCSAC, or other designee of the Township, shall
provide property owner sufficient advance written notice by registered
mail, or posting of the property said notice of its intention to enter upon
the premises for these purposes. The property owner shall have the
right to comply with the terms of this agreement within a five-day
period. Any notice required by the terms of this agreement shall be
sufficient if sent to property owner's last known address by regular mail
or posted on property.
M. System Malfunction. During the period of time when the alternate
sewage system is inoperable and/or incapable of treating the
discharged effluent so as to meet and/or exceed those standards of the
Department as aforesaid, property owner shall make the necessary
arrangements to remove said effluent and arrange for the appropriate
disposition of same at a properly certified and licensed sewage disposal
§ 204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 204
1:325
facility. In the event the property owner shall fail to make the necessary
arrangements for the removal of said effluent, the BCSAC, or other
Township designee, shall have the right to enter upon the premises and
cause said effluents to be removed. Where the property owner causes
the effluents to be removed, he, she or they, upon request of the BCSAC,
or other Township designee, shall provide an agreement with a hauler
providing for the removal and an agreement with the receiving facility.
The terms of removal provided in such Agreement shall be determined
at such time as the alternate sewage system is in operation and its
loading rate determined and the recommendations of the Department
and/or BCSAC as to said requirements shall be binding on the parties.
The property owner agrees to continue hauling effluent until such time
as, the system has been properly certified, as being operable, by the
Department, BCSAC and/or Township designee.
N. Alternative Sewage System Administrative Fee. The Township, by
resolution duly adopted, shall establish the amount of an annual fee for
the inspections described herein and administrative costs associated
therewith. The resolution of the Township shall establish the date upon
which such annual fee shall be paid.
O. Recoverable Costs. Any costs incurred by the Township, for inspections,
repairs, and/or replacement of the alternate sewage system or its
component parts or in the removal of effluents in accordance with the
terms of this Part, shall be recoverable by the Township from the
property owner. In the event the property owner (or their heirs or
assigns) fails to pay the Township for such costs or expense, then the
Township shall have the right to:
(1) Sue the said property owner in assumpsit for reimbursement of its
costs; and/or
(2) To cause a municipal lien to be placed on the property in the
amount of said expense or both.
P. Land Development. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to
waive, affect or alter any requirements of the Zoning, Land
Development and Subdivision or other Ordinances of the Township and
nothing contained herein empowers any Township officer or employee
to waive any requirements of such ordinances.
Q. Occupancy Permit. Prior to the operation of an alternate sewage
system, and prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any
residence to be served by an alternate sewage system, property owner
shall provide two sets of as-built plans sealed by an engineer along with
a copy of the Operation and Maintenance Manual. The as-built set of
plans and Manual shall also be sent to Logan Township. A letter from
property owner's consultant shall also accompany plans indicating the
system is built according to its design.
R. Recording Of Agreement. The operation and maintenance agreement or
a memorandum thereof shall be recorded in the Office for the
§ 204 LOGAN CODE § 204
1:326
§ 205. Adequate Provision. [Ord. 08-23-07B]
The Board of Supervisors of the Township finds and determines that the
sewage needs of the Township are adequately met by the public sanitary
sewer collection and treatment systems. The Board further finds and
determines as to those areas of the Township that are not serviced by
public sewer adequate provision is made for the sewage needs of those
areas by the sewage facilities plan and the means of on-site sewage disposal
provided for herein. It is not the policy of the Township to permit alternate
sewage systems to meet sewage needs within the Township. In the event
the Department approves a private request for a type of sewage disposal
system not addressed by this Part or otherwise approves such a system
to be operated or established within the Township, a property owner who
obtains approval for the installation and operation of such a system from the
Department shall, prior to installation of the same, enter into an operation
and maintenance agreement in a form approved by the Township and
consistent with the requirements of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code
including, but not limited to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code § 71.63,
§ 71.64.
§ 206. Permits, Fees and Enforcement. [Ord. 08-23-07B]
Recording of Deeds in and for the County of Blair and that this
agreement shall be binding upon property owner, his, her or their heirs,
administrators, executors, successors, and assigns.
A. Use and Occupancy Permit Required. Upon sale or rent of any dwelling,
which is served by an alternate sewage system, the owner must provide
documentation of compliance with this Part as a prerequisite to the
issuance of a use and occupancy permit.
B. Notice to Comply/Notice of Non-Compliance. The Board of Supervisors
of the Township, or any officer of the Township designated thereby for
this purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal service or
by United States mail, to the person who owns a property on which an
on-lot sewage system is located, requiring such owner to pump, inspect
or repair the on-lot sewage system and provide the Township with a
receipt and other specified information documenting the date on which
the on-lot sewage system was pumped, inspected or repaired.
C. Fees. Cost for the municipal administration of the management
program, including maintaining on-lot sewage system information and
monitoring compliance, shall be assessed as stated in § 204M to
property owners included in the program in an amount established by
Township resolution from time to time. It shall be each individual
property owner's responsibility to contract with a licensed sewage
hauler and certified on-lot sewage system inspector for the pumping
and inspection of the on-lot sewage system.
D. Enforcement Remedies. Any person, partnership or corporation who or
which has violated the provisions of this Part shall, upon being found
§ 204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 206
1:327
liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred
by the Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or
be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of
a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District
Justice determining that there has been a violation further determines
that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating this Part to have believed that there was no such
violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one
such violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination
of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
E. Jurisdiction. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under this Part. However, nothing contained
herein shall be construed or interpreted to prevent the Township from
bringing any other action, including an injunction action to enforce the
provisions hereof.
§ 206 LOGAN CODE § 206
1:328
Part 3
APPROVAL BY BLAIR COUNTY SANITARY ADMINISTRATIVE
COMMITTEE
§ 301. Application for Approval. [Ord. 9-21-95]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to
connect and/or make repair to any existing on-lot sewage disposal system
(as defined hereinafter) within the limits of Logan Township unless said
person shall first file an application and receive approval thereof as
hereinafter provided. If after obtaining approval, it shall also be unlawful
for any person to maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system which is
malfunctioning. On-lot sewage disposal system shall include any mechanism
used for the transmission and/or treatment of sanitary sewage other than
the public sanitary sewerage system as defined in Part 1 of this Chapter 18
and the holding tanks permitted in Part 2 of this Chapter 18.
§ 302. Application Form. [Ord. 9-21-95]
Applications for permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the applicant
and shall be on a form adopted by the "Blair County Sanitary Administrative
Committee" (hereinafter "Committee").
§ 303. Application Submission. [Ord. 9-21-95]
All applications shall be made to the Committee through the Certified
Sewage Enforcement Officer (hereinafter "Enforcement Officer") of the
Committee.
§ 304. Approval of Applications. [Ord. 9-21-95]
The said Enforcement Officer shall approve the application only when dye
or other tests indicate that there is no surface discharge of sewage and
the results of said test satisfy such other regulations of the Committee. The
term "sewage" shall be defined as set forth in the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act.
§ 305. Application Fee. [Ord. 9-21-95]
The fee charged for the application required herein shall be established
by the Committee and shall be paid by the applicant to the Committee at
the time of filing of the application. The fee shall be used to defer in part
the cost of processing the application and conducting the tests required for
granting of the approval, and shall not be refunded to the applicant in the
event that approval is not granted.
§ 306. Malfunction After Approval. [Ord. 9-21-95]
In the event of a malfunctioning sewage disposal system after approval
has been granted to connect on thereto, the person, firm, association or
corporation who remains connected onto said sewage disposal system must
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 306
1:329
repair said system so that it will meet all requirements and standards
provided by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Resources.
§ 307. Enforcement and Penalties. [Ord. 9-21-95]
Any person, firm, association or corporation, violating any of the provisions
of this Part, shall upon conviction thereof before any District Magistrate in
a proceeding commenced by warrant or summons, be fined not less than
$100 and not more than $300 and costs for each and every offense. Upon
judgment against any person by summary conviction, or by proceedings by
summons on default of the payment of the fine and costs, the Defendant
may be sentenced and committed to jail for a period not exceeding 30
days. Each and every day that any party remains connected to an existing
sewage disposal system without obtaining approval for connecting onto
said sewage disposal system or maintains a malfunctioning system, all as
hereinbefore provided, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and
shall be subject to separate and distinct penalties hereunder.
§ 306 LOGAN CODE § 307
1:330
Part 4
LOGAN TOWNSHIP INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT/
HOLLIDAYSBURG SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM
ARTICLE A.
Purpose and Policy.
§ 401. Purpose. [Ord. 09-25-14]
This Part 4 sets forth the following uniform requirements for users of the
sewer system and enables the Township to regulate the use of the sewer
system and to comply with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and
other applicable state and national laws and regulations:
§ 402. Objectives. [Ord. 09-25-14]
The objectives of this Part 4 are:
A. Requirements regulating the introduction of wastewater into the sewer
system by all users.
B. Establishing an industrial pretreatment program to monitor and control
the discharge of industrial wastes.
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewer system that will
cause interference, increase the difficulty or costs of operation of the
sewage collection system or the sewage treatment plant, or reduce the
efficiency or effectiveness of the sewage collection system or sewage
treatment plant;
2. To prevent pass-through of pollutants, inadequately treated, to the
environment;
3. To protect workers and the general public from exposure to toxic or
other dangerous substances;
4. To protect the sewer system from damage;
5. To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or sludge;
6. To provide for the equitable distribution of the cost of the operation,
administration and enforcement of the industrial pretreatment
program;
7. To enable the Township, the Borough of Hollidaysburg and the
Authority to comply with all applicable state and national laws, rules
and regulations, including NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and
disposal requirements, air quality standards, and water quality
standards; and
8. To comply with the requirements of an agreement between the
Township and the Borough of Hollidaysburg in which the Township
covenants to adopt and enforce an ordinance establishing an industrial
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:331
§ 403. Reservation of Rights. [Ord. 09-25-14]
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, nothing in Part 4 or
elsewhere in the Township's or the Borough's pretreatment program shall
be deemed to be a legally binding commitment under the Clean Water
Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., the Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 et
seq., and applicable regulations (e.g., 40 CFR Part 403, Title 25 Pa. Code)
for the Township or Borough to undertake pretreatment implementation or
enforcement activities beyond the minimum otherwise required by these
laws and regulations. Nevertheless, the Township maintains discretionary
authority to undertake pretreatment activities beyond the minimum
required.
§ 404. Applicability. [Ord. 09-25-14]
This Part 4 is applicable to users of that portion of the sewer system
as defined herein; specifically, those portions of the collection system
connected to and transporting wastewater to the Hollidaysburg regional
wastewater treatment facility. Users of those portions of the sewer system
that are connected to the Altoona Water Authority's sanitary sewerage
system shall comply with Article IV of the Altoona Water Authority's
Wastewater System Regulations (as amended) entitled "Industrial
Wastewater," which said regulations are incorporated herein by reference.
pretreatment program and designating the Borough as an agent of
the Township for the purposes of administering the provisions of the
ordinance.
§ 402 LOGAN CODE § 404
1:332
ARTICLE B.
Definitions.
§ 405. Definitions. [Ord. 09-25-14]
The following words, terms and phrases will hereinafter have the meanings
set forth in this section, unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning. Reference to gender shall be construed to include both the
masculine and feminine.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator of Region III of the
EPA.
AUTHORITY — The Hollidaysburg Sewer Authority, a municipal authority
created and existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE (OF INDUSTRIAL USER) — An
authorized representative of an industrial user may be:
If the industrial user is a corporation:
A principal executive officer of at least the level of president,
secretary, treasurer, or vice president in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar policyor
decisionmaking functions for the corporation; or
(1)
A manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating
facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility,
including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major
capital investment recommendations, and to initiate and direct
other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental
compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure
that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to
gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism
requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures;
(2)
A.
If the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, a general
partner or proprietor, respectively;
B.
If the industrial user is a governmental entity, charitable organization
or other such unincorporated entity, a principal executive officer or
director having responsibility for the overall operation of the
discharging facility or a ranking elected official; or
C.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above in
Subsection A, B or C if such representative, by name or position, is:
D.
§ 405 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 405
1:333
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and
(b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure, five days at 20° C. (64° F.), expressed in terms of weight and
concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/L)].
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hollidaysburg, Blair County, Pennsylvania,
a municipal corporation existing under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, the Borough Council thereof, its employees, agents and
officials. The term "Borough" is used as synonymous with the term "POTW,"
"publically owned treatment works," or "control authority."
BUILDING SEWER — A sanitary sewer conveying wastewater from the
premises of a user to the sewer system.
BYPASS — The diversion of wastewater from any portion of an industrial
user's pretreatment facility.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to
categorical standards.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards.
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A registered professional engineer under
the laws of the state.
CHAIN OF CUSTODY — A record of sample collection indicating the place,
date and time of collection and the person collecting the sample. It also
includes a record of each person involved in possession of the sample,
including the laboratory person who takes final possession of the sample for
the purpose of analysis.
CLEAN STREAMS LAW — The Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, as amended,
35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to 691.702.
COLOR — The color of light transmitted through a waste after removal of
all suspended matter, including pseudocolloidal particles, and measured in
platinum-cobalt units.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer constructed to convey both sanitary sewage
and stormwater.
Identified in writing submitted to the pretreatment coordinator;
and
(1)
Responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which
the discharge originates or has overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company.
(2)
§ 405 LOGAN CODE § 405
1:334
COMBINED WASTE FORMULA — A procedure for calculating discharge
concentrations of constituents of industrial waste, as defined in 40 CFR
403.6(e).
COMPLIANCE — Adherence to conditions or requirements of this Part 4
or the industrial pretreatment program, any written directions or schedule
issued by the Township or Borough, or any wastewater discharge permit or
other permit issued under the provisions of this Part 4.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample composed of individual subsamples
taken at regular intervals over a specified period of time. Subsamples
may be proportioned by time interval or size according to flow (flowproportioned
composite sample), or be of equal size and taken at equal
time intervals (equal-time composite sample). A composite grab sample is
composed of individual grab samples collected and preserved individually
and combined for analysis only at the time of analysis.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The highest value obtained for samples collected in
any calendar day or equivalent consecutive twenty-four-hour period. When
used in a limit, the daily maximum is the highest value allowed in any
composite sample, or the maximum value allowed as an average of one or
more grab samples taken during a calendar day or equivalent consecutive
twenty-four-hour period. The daily maximum may also be expressed as the
maximum mass allowed to be discharged during any one calendar day or
equivalent consecutive twenty-four-hour period.
DISCHARGE — The conveyance of any water or wastewater into the sewer
system, including the delivery of water or wastewater by truck.
DOMESTIC WASTES — Normal household wastes from kitchens, water
closets, lavatories and laundries, or any waste from a similar source and
possessing the same characteristics.
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN — A plan developed pursuant to 40 CFR
403.8(f)(5) providing for the enforcement of the industrial pretreatment
program.
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency, or, where
appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed
categorical standards, which categorical standards will be applicable to
such source if the categorical standard is thereafter promulgated in
accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
GARBAGE — Solid or semisolid wastes resulting from preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food and from handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and within a
period of 15 minutes or less.
§ 405 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 405
1:335
GROUNDWATER — Water which is contained in or passing through the
ground.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Substances that are classified as listed or
characteristic hazardous waste under the provisions of 40 CFR Part 261.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — The liquid and/or solid material from a septic
tank, cesspool or similar domestic waste treatment or containment system,
or waste from holding tanks such as those found in vessels, chemical toilets,
campers, or house trailers.
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM — The sum of the provisions of
this Part 4, amendments thereto, and any activities authorized or allowed
by this Part 4 as regards the regulation and control of industrial users to the
extent required by the federal minimum pretreatment regulations set forth
in 40 CFR Part 403.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person who discharges industrial waste into the
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance, or form
of energy, which is produced as a result, whether directly or indirectly, of
any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or activity, or in
the course of developing, recovering or processing of natural resources,
and which is discharged into the sewer system; but not noncontact cooling
water or sanitary sewage. Any wastewater which contains industrial waste
and which is discharged from an industrial, manufacturing, trade or
business premises is considered industrial waste for the purposes of this
Part 4.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — Any substance which is discharged and which
consists of or is contaminated by pathogens or other etiologic agents and
which has not been sterilized, neutralized, or otherwise rendered harmless.
Infectious waste includes, but is not limited to: contaminated blood, blood
products or other bodily fluids (excepting excreta discharged by normal
bodily functions); wastes, including excreta, from patient isolation areas;
laboratory samples or test materials; animal wastes and bedding; body
parts; pathology and autopsy wastes; and glassware, hypodermic needles,
surgical instruments and other sharps.
INTERFERENCE — The condition in which a discharge, alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources:
Inhibits or disrupts the processes or operations of the sewage
treatment plant or the sewage collection system or the processing, use
or disposal of sludge; or
A.
Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Authority's NPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or
permits issued thereunder (or more-stringent state or local
regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title II, more commonly referred to as
B.
§ 405 LOGAN CODE § 405
1:336
LOCAL LIMITS — Numerical limitations on the concentration, mass or
other characteristics of wastes or pollutants discharged, or likely to be
discharged, by industrial users, and which are developed by the Township
or the Borough.
MANHOLE — A structure allowing access from the surface of the ground to
a sewer.
Mg/L — Milligrams per liter; a measure of concentration of water-borne
substances.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The arithmetic mean of all daily determinations of
concentration made during a calendar month.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance
with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), which applies to
a specific category of industrial users. National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards are enumerated in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 et
seq.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility, or other source from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed categorical standards under
Section 307 (c) of the Act, which will be applicable to such source if such
categorical standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section. Determination of the applicability of new source standards shall be
made as provided in the Act and 40 CFR 403.3.
NONCOMPLIANCE — Not in compliance.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — The water from any use such as airconditioning,
machine cooling or refrigeration, which does not come into
contact with any raw material, product, by-product or waste, and to which
the only pollutant added is heat.
NONSIGNIFICANT CATERGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER (NSCIU) — The
Borough may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under Section 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, is an NSCIU rather than a SIU on a finding that the IU
never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical
wastewater (excluding sanitary, no-contact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and
the following conditions are met:
the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act" (RCRA), and including
state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA], the Clean Air Act, the
Toxics Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research
and Sanctuaries Act; or which results in or increases the severity of
a violation of other state or national environmental statutes, rules or
regulations.
The IU, prior to the Borough's findings, has consistently complied with
all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements or
A.
§ 405 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 405
1:337
NORMAL PRODUCTION DAY — For the purposes of sampling wastewater,
a normal production day is that period of time during a calendar day
during which wastewater is discharged and production, cleanup, and other
activities that normally produce wastewater or industrial waste are
occurring. If a sample is specified to be collected during a normal
production day, it should not include aliquots taken during low wastewater
flow periods that are not representative of normal activities or during times
when wastewater is not being discharged.
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1342).
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care, control or management of a
pretreatment facility for industrial wastes or of a truck or trucks used in the
removal, transport or disposal of wastewater or industrial wastes.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of an improved property or facility.
PASS-THROUGH — Discharge of pollutants which exit the POTW to the
waters of the state and, either alone or in conjunction with other discharges,
cause a violation of the Authority's NPDES permit or an increase in the
magnitude or duration of any such violation; or the concentration of
pollutants in the sludge so that the end use of the sludge causes or
contributes to pollution, harm to the environment, or a violation of any state
or national sludge disposal regulation, guideline or standard.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular
shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any substance, including but not limited to dredged spoil,
solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, medical
wastes, backwash from water filtration, and industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste; or having certain characteristics such as biochemical
oxygen demand, color, pH or toxicity which, when discharged into the
environment, cause, contribute to, or increase pollution.
has no process discharge of categorical waste into the Borough's sewer
system.
The IU must submit annually a certification statement required in 40
CFR 403.12(q), together with any additional information necessary to
support the certification statement.
B.
C. The IU never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.
§ 405 LOGAN CODE § 405
1:338
POLLUTANT NOT PRESENT — The Township may authorize an industrial
user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a
pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial
user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that
the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge,
or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any
increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user.
POLLUTION — The contamination of any waters of the state such as will
create or is likely to create a nuisance or to render such waters harmful,
detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic,
municipal, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other
legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other
aquatic life; or contamination of the air, soil, or of the environment so as to
produce or is likely to produce similar deleterious effects.
POTW — A publicly owned treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292). The term includes the sewage collection system and
the sewage treatment plant.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a sewer system. The reduction or alteration
can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or by means
of other process changes, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR — The person designated to administer
the provisions of the industrial pretreatment program. The pretreatment
coordinator appointed by the Borough of Hollidaysburg shall be
automatically assigned as the pretreatment coordinator of the Township.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement, other than a categorical standard, imposed on an industrial
user by Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, the state or the industrial
pretreatment program.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — A National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, prohibitive discharge standard or a local limit created to
implement a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or prohibitive
discharge standard.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE — Any discharge which is prohibited under
Section 406(3) of this Part 4.
PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under
Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) including prohibitive
discharge limits under 40 CFR § 403.5. Prohibitive discharge Standards are
included in the list of prohibited discharges in § 406, Subsection 3, of this
Part 4.
QUALIFIED ANALYST — Any person who has demonstrated competency in
the analysis of wastewater by submission of his/her generally recognized
§ 405 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 405
1:339
documentation of competency to the Township or who is normally employed
in the capacity of an analyst by a professional analytical laboratory.
REFRIGERATION — Maintenance of temperature for storage, preservation
of food, or as a process of manufacturing.
RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL — The Manager of the Borough of Hollidaysburg,
appointed as an agent of the Township for the purposes of administering
and enforcing the industrial pretreatment program and the provisions of
this Part 4, or his duly authorized representative.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried domestic wastes from any
improved property, but excluding: effluent from septic tanks or cesspools;
rain, snow or stormwater; groundwater; or other collected water from roofs,
drains or basements.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer designed and constructed primarily for
carrying sanitary sewage or industrial wastes, but not storm-, surface or
groundwaters.
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM — All facilities of the Township, the
Borough and Authority, or any municipality party to a service agreement
with the Borough, as of any particular time, used or usable for collecting,
transporting, pumping and disposing of wastewater, which facilities are
connected to and served by the sewage treatment plant. The sewage
collection system includes sanitary sewers and combined sewers but not
storm sewers.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the sewer system owned
by the Authority and operated by the Borough, which is designed to provide
treatment of wastewater and discharge of treated effluent to the
environment.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for conveying wastewater or stormwater.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sewage collection system, sewage treatment plant,
and any sewers that convey wastewater to the sewage treatment plant. For
the purposes of this Part 4, "sewer system" shall also include any sewers
that convey wastewater to the sewage treatment plant from persons who
are users of the sewer system.
SHALL — Denotes that the referenced action or requirement is mandatory;
MAY is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Except as provided by 40 CFR
403.8(f)(6), an industrial user who:
Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more of industrial waste
(excluding any constituent sanitary sewage, noncontact cooling water
or boiler blowdown wastewater) per average workday;
A.
Discharges industrial waste which makes up 5% or more of the average
dry-weather organic capacity of the sewage treatment plant;
B.
C. Is regulated by categorical standards; or
§ 405 LOGAN CODE § 405
1:340
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — A noncompliance which meets or
exceeds standards of significant noncompliance determined by the
Township and contained in § 409, Subsection 11, of this Part 4.
SIGNIFICANT VIOLATOR — Any industrial user in significant
noncompliance.
SLUG or SLUG LOAD — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch
discharge, violating the specific prohibitions in 40 CFR 403.5(b).
SPCC PLAN — A spill prevention, control and countermeasure plan
prepared by an industrial user to minimize the likelihood and intensity of a
slug load or spill, or any changes affecting the potential for slug discharges
in volume or characteristics of discharges, and to expedite control and
cleanup activities should a slug load or spill occur.
SPILL — Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but
not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, or
the control or cleanup activities associated with such an occurrence; an
accidental spill may result from the spilling, overflowing, rupture, or
leakage of any storage, process or transfer container.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORM SEWER — A sewer designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of carrying stormwater, but not sanitary sewage or industrial
wastes. Storm sewers are not part of the sewage collection system.
STORMWATER — Any flow of water occurring during or following any form
of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT — The superintendent of the sewage treatment plant
or his duly authorized representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOTAL SOLIDS — The sum of the dissolved and undissolved solid
constituents of water or wastewater.
TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS — The sum of all quantifiable values of various
organic pollutants as determined by the Township or, for certain categorical
industrial users, as defined in the applicable categorical standard.
Is determined by the Township or the Borough to have the reasonable
potential of adversely affecting the operation of the POTW, causing
interference or pass-through, or of violating any pretreatment
requirement.
D.
§ 405 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 405
1:341
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Logan, Blair County, Pennsylvania, a
municipal corporation existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or its duly authorized agent.
TOXIC ORGANIC MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan submitted in lieu of
testing for total toxic organics in which an industrial user specifies methods
of control to assure that total toxic organics do not routinely enter the sewer
system.
TOXIC POLLUTANTS — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provisions of Section 307(a) of the Act or
identified in sludge regulations under Section 405(d) of the Act, which is
applicable to the sewage treatment plant sludge.
UNAUTHORIZED DISCHARGE — Discharge of an unauthorized waste or
a discharge which otherwise is not in compliance with the requirements
of the industrial pretreatment program, this Part 4, or other rules or
regulations of the Township.
UNAUTHORIZED WASTE — Any substance which is discharged into the
sewage collection system which is not in compliance with the provisions of
the industrial pretreatment program or which is discharged by a person in
violation of any of the provisions of this Part 4.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the sewer system.
WASTEWATER — Industrial wastes or domestic wastes from dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with
any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present,
whether treated or untreated, which enters the sewer system.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — As set forth in § 408 of this Part 4.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT (GENERAL) — As set forth in § 408 of
this Part 4, with the following conditions:
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.
A. Involves the same or similar types of operations;
B. Discharges the same types of wastes;
C. Requires the same effluent limitations;
D. Requires the same or similar monitoring; and
In the opinion of the Township and/or the Borough, is more
appropriately controlled under a general wastewater discharge permit
than under an individual wastewater discharge permit.
E.
§ 405 LOGAN CODE § 405
1:342
ARTICLE C.
Regulation of Discharges to the Sewer System.
§ 406. Regulated Discharges. [Ord. 09-25-14]
1. Discharge of stormwaters. No person shall discharge or cause or permit
to be discharged any surface water, groundwater, roof water,
subsurface drainage, building foundation drainage or stormwater from
pavements and areaways into any sanitary sewer. Discharges of
stormwater into combined sewers is allowed to the extent provided by
state, Township and Borough statute and regulation.
2. Storm sewers. No person shall introduce or cause or permit to be
introduced any wastewater, sanitary sewage, or industrial waste into
any storm sewer.
3. Prohibited discharges. No user shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which
will interfere with the operation or performance of the sewer system.
These general prohibitions apply to all users, whether or not the users
are subject to any other pretreatment requirements. No person may
discharge any of the following substances to the sewer system:
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quantity, are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction
with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the sewer system or to the operation of the sewer
system. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion
hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system (or at any
point in the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over
10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. At no time shall
the closed-cup flashpoint of the discharged wastewater be less than
140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, the following
substances in concentrations which cause exceedance of the above
standard: gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, ethers, alcohols,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, and carbides.
B. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
sewer system, such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with
particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails,
whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar,
asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
C. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or higher than 10.0, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
§ 406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 406
1:343
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of
the sewer system.
D. Any wastewater containing pollutants in sufficient quantity, either
singly or by interaction with other constituents of the wastewater,
to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, or to exceed
the limitation set forth in an applicable categorical standard.
E. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other substances present in the sewer
system, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life
or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewer system for
maintenance and repair.
F. Any substance which results in the formation or release of toxic
gases, vapors or fumes in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
G. Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or passthrough.
H. Any substance which may cause the sewage treatment plant's
effluent or any other product of the sewage treatment plant, such
as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and
reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall
a substance discharged to the sewer system cause the sewage
treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal
criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act, Solid Waste Disposal
Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state
criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
I. Any substance which will cause the Authority to violate its NPDES
and/or state water quality management permit or applicable
receiving water quality standards.
J. Any wastewater with objectionable color which will pass through
the treatment plant or which will cause or contribute to pollution,
such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions.
K. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the sewage treatment plant resulting in interference, but
in no case wastewater with a temperature at the discharge into the
sewer system which exceeds 40° C. (104° F.) or is less than 0° C.
(32° F.).
L. Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will
§ 406 LOGAN CODE § 406
1:344
cause interference to the sewage treatment plant or interfere with
the operation of the sewer system.
M. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such halflife or concentration as may exceed limits established by
the Township or Borough or applicable state or national standards,
cause interference, or otherwise adversely impact the POTW or
cause or contribute to pollution.
N. Any trucked or hauled wastewater.
O. Any wastewater which is incompatible with treatment processes in
use at the sewage treatment plant so as to cause interference or
pass-through.
P. Any wastewater containing any compounds or salts of aldrin,
dieldrin, endrin, lindane, methoxychlor, toxapfiene,
dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, trichlorophenoxyproprionic acid, or
other persistent herbicides, pesticides or rodenticides.
Q. Any infectious waste.
4. Unauthorized discharges. Except as otherwise provided in Section 417
of this Part 4, any discharge that is prohibited under Subsection 3 of
this section shall be considered an unauthorized discharge, and the
Township may take whatever steps are necessary to halt such a
discharge, as set forth in Section 409 of this Part 4 or as otherwise
provided by law.
5. Categorical Standards. If the categorical standards for a particular
industrial user are more stringent than local limits or other
requirements imposed under this Part 4, then the categorical standards
shall apply. The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards as set
forth in 40 CFR Parts 405 et seq. are hereby incorporated into the
industrial pretreatment program as program requirements for those
industrial users subject to such categorical standards.
6. State Requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than national
requirements and limitations or those established under this Part 4.
7. Local limits. The Township and/or the Borough may establish, and
review from time to time, local limits regulating the discharge of
specific pollutants by industrial users. Local limits developed to prevent
pass through or interference, or to implement prohibitive discharge
standards, shall be approved by the approval authority.
A. Local limits may be established for any substance which is
discharged, or is likely to be discharged, to the sewer system.
B. Local limits may limit concentration, mass, or a combination of the
two.
§ 406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 406
1:345
C. The procedure for the calculation of local limits may be as
recommended by the approval authority or otherwise considered
appropriate by the Borough.
D. Local limits shall be calculated for pollutants, as deemed necessary,
to prevent interference and pass through. In addition, local limits
may be calculated to prevent the discharge of toxic materials in
toxic amounts; threats to worker health and safety; and physical,
chemical or biological damage to the sewer system; or such other
factors as deemed appropriate by the Township.
E. Local limits are applicable to all significant industrial users and
may be included in wastewater discharge permits. Local limits may
be imposed on discharges from other users as deemed appropriate
by the Township.
F. Discharging any pollutant in excess of a local limit established for
that pollutant shall constitute an unauthorized discharge.
G. The Hollidaysburg Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant
headworks, local limits for industrial discharges, are hereby
established as follows: [Amended by Ord. No. 11-08-18B]
Pollutant
Local Limit Monthly Average
Mass
(lbs/day)
Arsenic 0.55
Cadmium 0.07
Chromium 0.32
Copper 1.19
Cyanide 1.87
Lead 0.41
Mercury 0.012
Molybdenum Monitor only
Nickel Monitor only
Selenium Monitor only
Silver 0.93
Zinc 3.02
8. Prohibition on Dilution. Except where expressly authorized to do so by
an applicable categorical standard or pretreatment requirement, no
industrial user shall, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve
compliance with the limitations contained in applicable categorical
§ 406 LOGAN CODE § 406
1:346
standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation, including local
limits, developed by the Township, Borough or state.
8.1. Best Management Practices. Best management practices (BMPs) will
be required to be submitted by industrial users (IUs), in addition to
numeric values established by local limit, that address all of the
components outlined in the official definition of "BMP" as mentioned
above. The plan will include any documentation pertaining to existing
spill and slug control plans for IUs. BMP requirements and
amendments will be established in SIU control documents (permits), as
applicable. These control documents may be industrial waste permits or
general control mechanisms. Certain IUs, as deemed necessary by the
Borough, shall be required to follow BMPs instead of, or in addition to,
numeric limits where calculations of numeric limits are not feasible.
These requirements may be all or some of the following:
A. Specific notice to IUs of requirements and enforceability shall be
included in control documents.
B. Installation of treatment and equipment shall be outlined and
include criteria for specifications that the equipment must satisfy.
C. Requirements for or prohibitions on certain practices, activities, or
discharges shall be incorporated in control documents as deemed
protective.
D. Requirements for operation and maintenance (O&M) of treatment
units shall be incorporated in control documents, as deemed
appropriate, to ensure that treatment systems continue to perform
as designed and installed.
E. Time frames associated with key activities shall be provided when
required equipment must be installed fully operational and will be
included in control documents.
F. Specific procedures for compliance certification, reporting and
records retention will be included in control documents.
G. Provision for reopening or revoking the BMP conditions will be
included in control documents if the Borough determines that it is
easier to establish compliance with numeric values or when the
user has failed to achieve compliance.
9. Slug loads and spills. Each industrial user shall provide protection from
spills or accidental discharges that result in unauthorized discharges or
slug load discharges. Facilities to prevent spills and slug loads shall be
provided and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's own sole
cost and expense.
A. Notification. In the case of a spill or slug load or any changes in
conditions affecting the potential for slug discharges or any other
unauthorized discharge, it is the responsibility of all industrial
§ 406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 406
1:347
users to immediately telephone and notify the Borough of the
incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, corrective actions being taken
or planned, and expected duration.
B. Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of a slug, spill or other
unauthorized discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees
who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of
the emergency notification procedure.
C. Written Notice. Within five days following a spill, slug load, or other
unauthorized discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the
Township a detailed written report describing the cause of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewer
system, fishkills, or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this Part 4 or
applicable law. This notice requirement may be waived by the
Township for an industrial user which is not required to submit a
plan under Subsection 9D below.
D. SPCC Plans.
(1) All significant industrial users existing at the time of
enactment of this Part 4 shall complete and submit for approval
a spill prevention control and countermeasure (SPCC) plan, or
provide acceptable evidence that such a plan is not necessary
for their facility, within one year of an industry being identified
as significant in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi).
(2) No significant industrial user who commences discharge to the
sewer system after the effective date of this Part 4 shall be
permitted to introduce pollutants into the sewer system until it
has completed and submitted for approval an SPCC plan or
provided acceptable evidence that such a plan is not necessary
for its facility. The Township, at its discretion, may require an
SPCC plan for any other industrial user, whether or not it
discharges process wastewater into the sewer system.
(3) SPCC plans for significant industrial users shall, at a minimum,
contain the elements specified in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii)(B)(6)
and 403.8(f)(2)(vi). SPCC plans shall be submitted to the
Township for review by the Township to determine if a plan is
needed before approval or implementation of the plan or
construction of any required facilities. Review and approval of
such plans, facilities and operating procedures by the
§ 406 LOGAN CODE § 406
1:348
Township and/or Borough shall not relieve the industrial user
from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to
meet the requirements of the industrial pretreatment program,
nor shall such review and approval be deemed to constitute
any assurance or warrant on the part of the Township as to
the effectiveness or safety of the SPCC plan. An industrial user
will be inspected and reevaluated at least annually for the
need and effectiveness of its current SPCC plan. The Township
reserves the right to review and require revision to the current
SPCC plan, and facility, as deemed necessary to fulfill the
requirements specified above.
(4) At any time an IU has changes that have occurred, or are
planned for the future, at its facility, affecting the potential for
a slug discharge, the IU must notify the Township immediately
upon becoming aware of any such changes in accordance with
40 CFR 403.9(f)(2)(vi). A reevaluation will be conducted to
determine if an SPCC plan must be completed and approved or
updated. If an IU has been issued an industrial waste permit,
requirements for documentation or notification regarding slug/
spill control will be included in the permit.
10. Garbage Grinders. The discharge of garbage to the sewer system is
expressly prohibited unless said garbage is properly shredded to
comply with the provisions of this Part.
11. Trucked and Hauled Wastes. Discharge of trucked or hauled wastes into
the sewage collection system within the Township is prohibited.
12. Grease and Sand Traps. Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall
be provided by a user when the Township determines that such devices
are necessary for the proper handling of wastewaters containing
greases, oils or settleable solids. Interceptors and traps shall be
installed, operated, maintained and cleaned properly, so that they will
consistently remove the grease, oil or settleable solids. Interceptors
and traps shall be properly designed to accommodate the maximum
flow rate expected to occur and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
13. Notification Requirements - Hazardous Wastes and Hazardous
Substances.
A. All industrial users shall notify the Township, the Borough, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Division Director, and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, Bureau of
Waste Management, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification shall include the
name of the hazardous waste, as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the
EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge
(continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more
§ 406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 406
1:349
§ 407. Fees. [Ord. 09-25-14]
than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month, the
notification shall also include the following information, to the
extent that it is known and readily available to the industrial user:
(1) An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the
waste;
(2) An estimation of the mass and concentration in the wastewater
of all such constituents discharged in the most recent month;
and
(3) An estimate of the mass and concentration of such constituents
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
B. Industrial users that commence discharge of a hazardous waste
after the effective date of this Part 4 shall submit the report within
180 days of first discharge of the hazardous waste, except as
provided in Subsection 13D of this section. If the new discharge
constitutes a change in the character of the industrial waste, the
industrial user shall also comply with the requirements of § 408,
Subsection 20, of this Part 4. In the case of any new regulations
under 40 CFR Part 261 identifying additional wastes as
characteristic or listed hazardous waste, the industrial user
discharging such substances shall submit the report within 90 days
of the effective date of the new regulations.
C. The required report need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. Industrial users regulated under
categorical standards which have already reported such
substances in baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports or periodic compliance reports do not have to report this
information again.
D. Industrial users that discharge less than 15 kilograms of hazardous
wastes in a calendar month do not have to comply with these
reporting requirements. This exemption does not apply to acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
E. Each notification required by this section shall include a statement
certifying that the industrial user has a program in place to reduce
the volume and/or toxicity of the discharged wastes to the extent
that it is economically practical. This statement shall be signed by
the authorized representative of the industrial user.
1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of
costs from industrial users of the sewer system for the implementation
of the industrial pretreatment program established herein. When the
Borough implements, administers or enforces the industrial
pretreatment program, the Borough may establish and assess such fees
for users within the Township.
§ 406 LOGAN CODE § 407
1:350
§ 408. Permits and Reports for Industrial Waste Discharged into the
Sewer System. [Ord. 09-25-14]
2. Fees that may be Charged.
A. The Township or Borough may assess charges and fees, included in
the current applicable Schedule of Fee and Charges Resolution,
which may include:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the industrial pretreatment program;
(2) Fees for monitoring, sampling, inspections and surveillance
procedures;
(3) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures (SPCC
plans) and construction;
(4) Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications and
renewals;
(5) Fees for filing appeals;
(6) Other fees as the Township or Borough may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein.
B. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Part 4 and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the Township.
1. Requirement for Wastewater Discharge Permits.
A. Discharge of any industrial waste to the sewer system without a
wastewater discharge permit, except as authorized by the
Township in accordance with the provisions of this Part 4, is an
unauthorized discharge and subject to the penalties provided
herein.
B. The Township reserves the right, at its sole discretion, to deny the
issuance of a wastewater discharge permit or to issue such a
permit conditionally. Such discretion may also be exercised by the
Township and its agent when administering the industrial
pretreatment program as provided in §§ 412 through 417 of this
Part 4.
2. Significant Industrial Users.
A. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to
discharge to the sewer system shall obtain a wastewater discharge
permit before connecting to or Discharging to the sewer system.
B. All significant industrial users that are connected to or discharging
to the sewer system at the time of enactment of this Part 4 shall
apply for and obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit,
§ 407 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 408
1:351
identified as significant under 40 CFR Section 403(V), within 90
days of the effective date of this Part 4 except as follows:
(1) At the discretion of the Township, this control may include use
of general wastewater discharge permits.
(2) The user must file a written request for coverage that identifies
its contact information, production processes (if applicable),
the types of wastes generated, the location for monitoring all
wastes covered by the general wastewater discharge permit,
and any other information the Township and/or Borough deems
appropriate.
(3) In accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) and 403.15, an industry is
not eligible to be issued a general wastewater discharge
permit if any of the following apply:
(a) If the facility is subject to production-based categorical
pretreatment standards.
(b) If the categorical pretreatment standards are expressed as
mass of pollutant discharged per day.
(c) If the industrial user has limits that are based on the
combined waste stream formula or net/gross calculations.
2.1. No Pollutant Present.
A. The authorization of a "no pollutant present" waiver is on a case-bycase
basis, is in the sole discretion of the Borough, and is subject to
the following conditions:
(1) The pollutant shall be present solely due to sanitary
wastewater discharged from the facility, provided that the
sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable
categorical standard and otherwise includes no process
wastewater.
(2) The waiver is valid only for the duration of the wastewater
discharge permit.
(3) The industrial user must submit a new request for the waiver
before the waiver can be granted for any subsequent
wastewater discharge permits. This waiver must be signed by
an authorized representative of the facility and include the
certification statement included in the facility's permit
renewal.
(4) The industrial user must provide data from at least one
sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any
treatment present at the facility that is representative of all
wastewater from all processes.
§ 408 LOGAN CODE § 408
1:352
(5) Nondetectible sample results may only be used as a
demonstration that a pollutant is not present if a certified
laboratory performed the analysis and if EPA approved
methods from 40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum
detection level for that pollutant were used in the analysis.
(6) A grant for the monitoring of a pollutant shall be incorporated
into the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit.
(7) An industrial user shall certify on each sampling or compliance
report that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its
waste stream due to activities of the industrial user. This
certification of "no pollutant present" shall be provided with
the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit.
(8) In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present based on changes that occur in the IU's
operations, the IU must immediately comply with monitoring
requirements outlined in the current wastewater discharge
permit or more-frequent monitoring as determined by the
Township and/or the Borough.
(9) If an industrial user makes changes to processes, flow,
wastewater concentration, wastewater characteristics, or
other changes which result in the industrial user meeting the
definition of "significant industrial user," the industrial user
shall immediately upon becoming aware that such a change
has occurred, or 90 days prior to such a change if it is planned
by the industrial user, notify the Township and the Borough,
and the industrial user will be considered an SIU, and the "no
pollutant present" waiver will no longer be in effect. At that
time, the IU will be required to comply with the monitoring
requirements outlined in the IU's current wastewater
discharge permit.
B. The Township and/or the Borough may reduce the required
sampling events to one per year, unless required more frequently in
the pretreatment standard, if the IU meets all of the following
conditions:
(1) The IU's categorical wastewater follow does not exceed 0.01%
of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant
regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard
for which approved local limits were developed by the POTW in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.5(c) of the general pretreatment
requirements. In addition, this flow cannot exceed 0.01% of the
dry-weather hydraulic or organic treatment capacity of the
POTW; provided, however, that if the IU is considered an SIU
as defined in Subsection 3B of this § 408, than reduced
sampling shall not apply.
§ 408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 408
1:353
(2) The IU has not been in significant noncompliance, as defined in
§ 409, Subsection 11, of this Part, for the past two years.
(3) The IU does not have daily flow rates, production levels, or
pollutant levels that vary so significantly that decreasing the
reporting and sampling requirements will result in data that is
not representative of wastewater flows or conditions.
(4) The Borough must retain documentation to support the
determination that a specific industrial user qualifies for
reduced reporting requirements under subsection 2.1 of § 408
of this Part.
3. Other industrial users.
A. Except as otherwise required by the Township or Borough on a
case-by-case basis, industrial users which are nonsignificant
industrial users do not require a wastewater discharge permit but
are required to comply with all other provisions of this Part 4.
B. If an industrial user makes changes to processes, flow, wastewater
concentration, wastewater characteristics, or other changes which
result in the industrial user meeting the definition of "significant
industrial user," the industrial user shall immediately upon
becoming aware that such a change has occurred, or 90 days prior
to such a change if it is planned by the industrial user, notify the
Township and apply for a wastewater discharge permit.
C. The Township, at its discretion, may modify the time frame for
submission of a permit application and may require any
nonsignificant industrial users to apply for and obtain a wastewater
discharge permit, as the Township deems appropriate.
4. Signatory Requirements. When an application for a wastewater
discharge permit, any required report, an appeal, or any other
document as required by this Part 4 or pretreatment requirements is
submitted by an industrial user, such document shall be submitted to
the Township and/or Borough prior to or together with any report being
submitted and signed by an authorized representative of the industrial
user, as defined in this Part 4. If an authorization under Subsection D of
the definition of "authorized representation" is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for the
environmental matters for the company, then:
A. A new authorization satisfying the requirements of Subsection D of
the definition of "authorized representative" must be submitted to
the Township prior to or together with any documents to be signed
by an authorized representative; or
§ 408 LOGAN CODE § 408
1:354
B. The authorized representative, as defined in Subsection A, B or C of
the definition of "authorized representative," must sign any such
documents.
5. Permit Applications.
A. Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit
shall complete and file with the Township an application in the form
prescribed by the Township and accompanied by the prescribed
fee. A new facility planning to discharge to the sewer system shall
make such submission prior (e.g., 90 days in advance) to the date it
intends to connect to or discharge to the sewer system so as to
provide ample time for the permitting process. In support of the
application, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(1) Name, address, and location (if different from the address).
(2) SIC number or numbers according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as
amended.
(3) Wastewater constituents and characteristics as required by the
Township, as determined by a qualified analyst.
(a) Sampling and analyses shall be based upon data obtained
through appropriate sampling and analysis performed
during the period covered by the report which data are
representative of conditions occurring during the
reporting period and performed in accordance with
procedures established by appropriate EPA guidance
pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40
CFR Part 136, as amended.
(b) Sample results shall be accompanied by a signed
statement of the authorized representative that the
samples analyzed are representative of normal discharge
during the routine operation of the discharging facility.
(c) In lieu of analytical results when a new facility is planned
and wastewater is not available for analysis, the applicant
may provide:
[1] The results of analyses of wastewater discharged from
facilities utilizing processes similar to the one
planned; or
[2] An estimate provided by a qualified professional
regarding the probable constituents of the
wastewater, including a description of the basis for
making the estimate.
§ 408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 408
1:355
(4) Each product by type, amount, process or processes and rate
of production, or, for new facilities, a reasonable estimate
thereof.
(5) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day), or, for new facilities, a reasonable estimate
thereof.
(6) Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment
system.
(7) Time and duration of wastewater or industrial waste
contribution.
(8) Average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any.
(9) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all floor drains, building sewers, sewer
connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and
elevation.
(10) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be
discharged.
(11) The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any Township, Borough, state,
or national pretreatment requirement (including local limits),
prohibitive discharge standard or categorical standards, and a
statement regarding whether or not the categorical standard,
prohibitive discharge standard or pretreatment requirements
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, how the
industrial user proposes to meet the applicable standards or
other pretreatment requirements, including whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the
applicable standard or requirement. If the applicant is a
categorical industrial user, this statement shall be signed by a
certified professional.
(12) If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to
meet categorical standards, prohibitive discharge standards,
or other pretreatment requirements (including local limits),
the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide
such additional pretreatment shall be developed and
submitted. The completion date of this schedule for any
categorical standard shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable categorical standard. The
following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
§ 408 LOGAN CODE § 408
1:356
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to
meet the applicable categorical standards or other
pretreatment requirements (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction, etc.).
(b) For compliance with a categorical standard, no increment
referred to in Subsection A(12)(a) shall exceed nine
months.
(c) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule
pertaining to compliance with a categorical standard and
the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall
submit a progress report to the Township, including, as a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment
of progress to be met on such date, and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress,
the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the
industrial user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine months
elapse between such progress reports to the Borough/
Township.
(13) Any other information as may be deemed by the Township or
Borough to be necessary to evaluate the application.
(14) The application shall be signed and attested to by an
authorized representative of the industrial user.
(15) The application for a general wastewater discharge permit
shall contain the information set forth in § 408, Subsection 2B.
(16) The application for a "no pollutant present" waiver shall
contain the information set forth in § 408, Subsection 2.1.
(17) In the cases where the standard requires compliance with a
best management practice or pollution prevention alternative,
the IU shall submit documentation as required by the Township
and/or Borough or the applicable standard to determine
compliance with the standard.
(18) Slug/spill control requirements for an SPCC plan, or any
conditions of the approved SPCC plan, will be conditions for
compliance and will be referenced in the IU wastewater
discharge permits as referenced in § 406, Subsection 9.
B. The Township/Borough will evaluate the data furnished by the
industrial user and may require additional information, which
§ 408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 408
1:357
information shall be submitted within a reasonable time by the
industrial user. After evaluation of the information furnished, the
Township may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to
terms and conditions provided herein.
6. Confidentiality of Applications.
A. All information required by the Township in the permit application
shall be provided by the industrial user to the best of its ability.
B. If information regarding raw materials, processes, production rates
or other manufacturing information is regarded as confidential by
the industrial user, such information shall be marked "confidential"
on the application form.
C. Confidentiality shall not apply to information regarding the flow of
or the constituents in the industrial wastewater discharge.
D. Information accepted by the Township as confidential shall be
handled as detailed in Subsection 21 of this section.
7. Wastewater Discharge Permit Conditions.
A. Wastewater discharge permits are hereby expressly subject to all
provisions of this Part 4 and all other applicable regulations, user
charges and fees established by the Township. Permits shall
contain the conditions specified in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii)(B)(6) and
40 CFR 403.12(b)(g)(e)(h). Permits may contain, but are not limited
to, the following:
(1) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater or industrial
waste constituents and characteristics, including local limits
and/or categorical standards, as applicable;
(2) List of prohibited discharges, as presented in § 406 of this Part
4;
(3) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports, including the information to be contained therein and
the signatory requirements of these reports;
(4) Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include the
specific substances to be analyzed, sampling locations,
frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests,
toxicity testing, procedures for sampling and reporting
schedules;
(5) Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to
industrial waste and wastewater discharges and
characteristics as specified by the Township, and affording the
Township access thereto;
§ 408 LOGAN CODE § 408
1:358
(5.1) Applicable best management practices will be included in an
IU's wastewater discharge permit, as required by 40 CFR
403.8(f)(1)(iii)(B)(3) and outlined in § 406, Subsection 8.1;
(6) Requirements for notification to the Township of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial
change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being discharged into the sewer system;
(7) Requirements for notification of slug loads as per § 406,
Subsection 9;
(8) Statement of duration of the wastewater discharge permit, as
provided in § 408, Subsection 9;
(9) Notification of the rules regarding transferability, as stated in
§ 408, Subsection 8;
(10) Notification of penalties provided for noncompliance as
contained in §§ 409 and 410 of this Part 4;
(11) Requirements pertaining to modification, suspension, and
termination of the wastewater discharge permit, and
notification of appeal rights;
(12) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(13) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities;
(14) Requirements for installation and maintenance of
pretreatment facilities;
(15) Requirements for developing and implementing special plans
or practices such as toxic organic management plans, toxic
reduction evaluations, special management or housekeeping
practices, or other such procedures;
(16) Compliance schedules;
(17) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to the sewer system;
(17.1) The industrial user must notify the Township and/or the
Borough immediately of any changes at its facility causing it to
no longer meet conditions outlined in § 408, Subsection 2.1, of
this Part regarding "no pollutant present." Upon notification,
the IU must immediately comply with reporting requirements
set forth in the current wastewater discharge permit; and
(18) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township to
ensure compliance with this Part 4 or any other applicable
§ 408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 408
1:359
ordinance and applicable federal, state and local pretreatment
requirements.
B. A wastewater discharge permit, or general control mechanism, in
addition to implementing requirements as mandated by federal
pretreatment regulations, may be a means for the Township to
implement other requirements in accordance with federal, state
and local law. Implementation and enforcement of such provisions
shall be at the discretion of the Township or the Borough acting as
the Township's agent as provided in § 412.
8. Transferability of Permits. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to
a specific industrial user for a specific operation. A wastewater
discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new
person, new industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed
operation without the approval of the Township. If such a transfer is
approved by the Township, the existing owner or operator shall provide
a copy of the wastewater discharge permit to the new owner or
operator. Any succeeding industrial user shall also comply with the
terms and conditions of the existing wastewater discharge permit. The
Township may, at its discretion, deny the transfer of a wastewater
discharge permit and require application for a new wastewater
discharge permit under the provisions of this section.
9. Duration and Modification of Wastewater Discharge Permits.
A. Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years. A wastewater discharge permit
may be issued for a period of less than five years or may be dated to
expire on a specific date. Except as otherwise approved by the
Township, the industrial user shall apply for reissuance of the
wastewater discharge permit a minimum of 90 days prior to the
expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge
permit.
B. The terms and conditions of the wastewater discharge permit may
be subject to modification by the Township during the term of the
wastewater discharge permit as limitations or requirements as
identified in § 406 are modified or other just cause exists, including
but not limited to the following:
(1) Violation by the permittee of any term or condition of the
wastewater discharge permit and/or any requirement set forth
in an applicable pretreatment law, ordinance, regulation or
rule by the permittee;
(2) A wastewater discharge permit was obtained by
misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts
in either a permit application, application for renewal, or any
report, including the falsification of self-monitoring reports or
the tampering with monitoring equipment;
§ 408 LOGAN CODE § 408
1:360
(3) Promulgation of more-stringent standards under federal, state
or local law, including the adoption of new or revised
pretreatment ordinances by the Township;
(4) Changes in the processes used by the permittee or changes in
the volume or character of the industrial waste;
(5) Changes in the design or capability of the POTW, NPDES
permit requirements or sludge disposal requirements;
(6) A change in any condition that requires a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the discharge;
(7) Failure to allow timely access to the industrial user's facility or
records; and
(8) Failure to timely pay fines, fees or applicable sewer charges.
10. Continuation of Expired Permits.
A. If the industrial user has applied for renewal as provided for in
Subsection 9 of this § 408, and the wastewater discharge permit is
not renewed on or before the expiration date through no fault of the
industrial user, then the existing wastewater discharge permit shall
remain in effect pending a decision on the application for a reissued
permit by the Township.
B. If the wastewater discharge permit is not renewed because of a
failure of the industrial user to apply for renewal in a timely fashion
or through an act or omission of the industrial user, then discharge
of industrial waste by the industrial user without a wastewater
discharge permit is an unauthorized discharge and may be subject
to the enforcement actions provided for herein.
11. Appeal of Wastewater Discharge Permits.
A. Any industrial user that is issued or reissued a wastewater
discharge permit may appeal the permit conditions, in whole or in
part. If a wastewater discharge permit is modified during its
effective term, the industrial user may appeal only the conditions
which have been changed. Appeal procedures applicable to these
permit actions, as well as suspension or revocation of a wastewater
discharge permit, shall be as set forth in § 409, Subsection 7, of this
Part 4.
B. During the process of appeal, the wastewater discharge permit
shall remain in effect and shall be subject to potential enforcement
unless, upon the request of the permittee, the Township or Borough
grants a stay of permit condition(s). Pursuant to § 409, Subsection
7, conditions imposed by federal or state regulations (e.g.,
categorical standards) shall not be appealed or stayed. Conditions
which, in the opinion of the Township, would constitute a hazard or
§ 408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 408
1:361
pose a potential threat of pollution if stayed shall not be stayed
during an appeal.
C. The denial of issuance of a wastewater discharge permit may be
appealed under the procedures set forth in Subsection 7, of this
Part 4.
12. Baseline Monitoring Reports.
A. Where an industrial user, subject to a newly promulgated
categorical standard (i.e., an existing source), has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as
required by § 408, Subsection 5, of this Part 4, the industrial user
shall, within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable
categorical standard:
(1) Apply for a wastewater discharge permit;
(2) Provide the baseline monitoring information required by 40
CFR 403.12(b) (this information may be incorporated into the
application for a wastewater discharge permit); and
(3) Provide a compliance schedule for meeting the pretreatment
standards as required by 40 CFR 403.12(c) if such a schedule
is required. The requirements of such a compliance schedule
are described in § 408, Subsection 5A(12) of this Part 4.
B. An industrial user with an existing wastewater discharge permit
shall submit to the Township within 180 days after the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard the information
required by 40 CFR 403.12(b).
C. A new source or industrial user that becomes a categorical
industrial user through a change in facilities or processes shall
submit a report containing the information required by 40 CFR
403.12(b) at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge
from the regulated process or facility. This information may be
incorporated into the application for a wastewater discharge
permit submitted in such time frame.
D. Baseline monitoring reports and all required industrial user reports
shall be signed and certified by an authorized representative in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(1) and 403.6(a)(2)(ii).
13. Categorical Compliance Report. Within 90 days following the date for
final compliance with applicable categorical standards or, in the case of
a new source, following commencement of the discharge of industrial
waste from processes regulated by categorical standards into the sewer
system, any industrial user subject to categorical standards shall
submit to the Township a report in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(d),
including information indicating the nature and concentration of all
pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are
§ 408 LOGAN CODE § 408
1:362
limited by categorical standards and the average and maximum daily
flow for those process units in the industrial user's facility which are
limited by such categorical standards. The report shall certify that the
information contained therein concerning wastewater constituents and
flows is representative of discharges during normal work cycles. The
report shall also state whether the applicable categorical standards are
being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation
and management practices and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring
the industrial user into compliance with the applicable categorical
standards, and including a schedule for completion of the required
actions in the form described in § 408, Subsection 5A(12), of this Part
4. Such a schedule shall not have a compliance date later than that
established for the applicable categorical standard. This statement
shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.120 and 403.6(a)(2)(ii) and certified to by
a certified professional.
14. Periodic Compliance Reports.
A. All industrial users (categorical and significant noncategorical)
shall report to the Township at least twice a year, the date of the
report to be as determined by the Township and contained in the
wastewater discharge permit. Reports may be required more
frequently as deemed necessary by the Township.
B. The reports required under this section shall contain the
information required by 40 CFR 403.12(b) and/or (d) and/or (e)
and/or (g) and/or 403.12(h), as applicable, including, at a minimum,
data that is representative of conditions during the reporting
period, the measured concentrations of all pollutants regulated by
categorical standards or otherwise regulated by the wastewater
discharge permit, a record of any measured daily flows, and a
statement of accuracy and completeness signed and certified by
the authorized representative of the industrial user in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.12(1) and 403.6(a)(2)(ii). Reports shall also
contain any other information as required by the Township.
C. For significant industrial users subject to categorical standards, if
discharge limits are based on mass units per production unit, then
production information regarding the regulated processes during
the reporting period shall be included in the report, along with flow
and concentration values, so that a determination of compliance or
noncompliance with categorical standards can be made.
D. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance
with a best management practice (or pollution prevention
alternative), the IU shall submit documentation required by the
Township or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the
compliance status of the IU.
§ 408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 408
1:363
E. For significant industrial users subject to categorical standards, the
report shall contain certification of compliance with those
standards, signed by a certified professional.
F. Nonsignificant categorical industrial users, determined by the
Township pursuant to 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2), shall annually submit a
certification statement. This statement is to be signed in
accordance with the signatory requirements in 40 CFR 403.12(1)
and shall be included in the IU's wastewater discharge permit. This
certification must accompany an alternative report required by the
Township.
15. Reporting and Resampling of Discharge Limit Violations.
A. If, upon receipt of valid sampling and testing results, an industrial
user becomes aware that a violation of discharge limits has
occurred, the industrial user shall, within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the violation, notify the Township of this fact. Except as
otherwise approved by the Township and provided by 40 CFR
403.12(g)(2)(i) and (ii), the industrial user shall also resample and
analyze its discharge(s) for each parameter found to be in violation
and report the results of the resampling and analysis to the
Township within 30 days of becoming aware of the violation.
B. If the Township and/or Borough has performed the initial sampling,
the industrial user may be required, if notified by the Township
and/or Borough, to resample and follow the procedures set forth in
Subsection 14A of this § 408; otherwise the repeat sampling shall
be performed by the Township as required by 40 CFR 403.12(g)(2).
C. Each significant industrial user shall have a duty, on receipt of
validly obtained sampling and analysis results, of inspecting the
results and determining if any wastewater discharge permit
condition has been violated. Failure to examine and compare
testing results with wastewater discharge permit conditions shall
not be a valid defense for failure to comply with these reporting
conditions.
16. Sampling and Analysis.
A. Each industrial user, including SIUs and NSCIUs, shall perform
waste stream sampling and analyses, including frequency and
sample type, in accordance with its wastewater discharge permit or
as otherwise required by the Township.
B. All sampling and analysis performed by the industrial user,
including SIUs and NSCIUs, in compliance with wastewater
discharge permit conditions, to prepare the reports required in
Subsections 12, 13, 14 and 15 of this section, or as otherwise
required by the Township or Borough, shall be based on data
obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis during the
reporting period. Sampling procedures and techniques are
§ 408 LOGAN CODE § 408
1:364
specified in 40 CFR Part 136, 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3) and (4), or
appropriate EPA guidance, including appropriate preservation
techniques. Unless otherwise required, all sampling should be
performed during a normal production day and should reflect the
usual and typical wastewater discharge of the user.
C. The industrial user, including SIUs and NSCIUs, may monitor more
frequently than otherwise required by the Township. If the
industrial user monitors any pollutant, subject to an effluent
limitation at the location designated for compliance monitoring,
more frequently than otherwise required by the Township, using
the procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136 or as otherwise
required, the results of such monitoring shall be included in the
calculation and reporting of the data submitted to the Township.
D. Where the Township performs the sampling or collects the required
information herein, the Township may waive the corresponding
reporting requirement as provided in 40 CFR 403.12(g) and
403.12(h).
E. The industrial user shall ensure that all monitoring and analytical
equipment it uses to monitor or otherwise analyze the pollutants
discharged to the sewer system are periodically calibrated and
maintained at intervals which ensure the accuracy of
measurements.
F. If sampling results indicate that the industrial user has exceeded
an effluent limitation, the Township, as an enforcement response to
such violation, may require the industrial user to undertake
increased sampling. Upon notification from the Township, or as the
condition of a compliance schedule, the industrial user shall
undertake such additional monitoring as directed. In the event a
violation has occurred, and no IU self-monitoring is required, the
Township will resample if necessary.
17. Monitoring Facilities.
A. The Township may require an industrial user to provide and
operate, at the industrial user's own expense, monitoring facilities
to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the
wastewater or industrial waste discharge. The monitoring facility
should normally be situated on the industrial user's premises, but
the Township may, when such a location would be impractical or
cause undue hardship on the industrial user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so
that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
B. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at
the expense of the industrial user.
§ 408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 408
1:365
C. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling
and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
Township's requirements and all applicable local construction
standards and specifications.
D. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written
notification by the Township, unless the industrial user can show to
the Township's satisfaction that a longer time period is necessary.
18. Inspections. The Township and its duly authorized representatives,
including contractors, may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether the purpose of this Part 4 is being met and all requirements are
being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Township or its
representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
and copying or in the performance of any of their duties. Areas which
are subject to inspection include, but are not limited to, areas which
could result in wastewater discharge to the sewer, such as
manufacturing areas and chemical storage areas; pretreatment
facilities; spill prevention and control facilities; hazardous waste
generation areas; industrial self-monitoring facilities; and areas where
relevant documentation is kept or stored. The Township, the Borough
and the approval authority, and their agents, shall have the right to set
up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering
operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry onto its
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security
guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel
from the Township, Borough and approval authority will be permitted to
enter, without delay, for the purpose of performing their specific
responsibilities. It shall not be inferred, however, that the Township is
authorized to enter upon property of any industrial user under this
section for any purpose in the event such entry is not otherwise
allowable under Pennsylvania law.
19. Pretreatment Facilities. Industrial users shall provide necessary
wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with this Part 4 and
shall achieve compliance with all applicable categorical standards
within the time limitations as specified by the applicable categorical
standards, and for other pretreatment requirements, shall achieve
compliance as specified by the state or Township, whichever is more
stringent. Any facilities required for pretreatment shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the Township for review and shall be acceptable to
the Township before construction of the facility. The review of such
plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial
user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to
§ 408 LOGAN CODE § 408
1:366
produce a discharge which complies with the provisions of this Part
4. Any subsequent substantial changes in the pretreatment facilities
or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to
the Township prior to the industrial user's initiation of the changes.
The review and acceptance of plans and procedures by the Township
shall not be considered as an approval regarding their efficacy, safety
or reliability; such considerations are solely the responsibility of the
industrial user.
20. Change in Operations.
A. Any industrial user contemplating or planning a substantial change
in the manufacturing process, raw materials, auxiliary processes,
pretreatment processes or other changes which may result in
substantial changes to wastewater character, composition, volume
or rate of flow shall notify the Township, in accordance with 40 CFR
403.12(j), in writing, at least 30 days prior to making such a change
or, if the change is not planned 30 days or more in advance,
immediately upon the decision to make such a change. If a change
in wastewater characteristics occurs without the knowledge of the
industrial user, the industrial user shall report the change
immediately upon becoming aware of it. The report shall include all
information necessary to determine the effect on the wastewater of
the change. The Township may require the industrial user to
undertake a compatibility study to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Township that the wastewater to be discharged is compatible
with the sewer system, will not affect any requirements imposed
upon the Township or Borough (including NPDES and sludge
disposal requirements) and will not otherwise adversely affect the
POTW.
B. The Township may, on receipt of such a report:
(1) Continue an existing wastewater discharge permit in effect;
(2) Require application for a new wastewater discharge permit;
(3) Modify an existing wastewater discharge permit to reflect the
changed nature of the waste;
(4) Rescind and reissue an existing wastewater discharge permit
in order to make substantial changes in wastewater discharge
permit conditions;
(5) Revoke an existing wastewater discharge permit or require the
industrial user to cease or prevent the discharge; or
(6) Take such other action as it deems appropriate.
21. Confidentiality.
A. Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, wastewater discharge permit applications and
§ 408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 408
1:367
monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the
public or any governmental agency without restriction unless the
industrial user specifically requests at the time of submission and
is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township that the
release of such information, processes or methods of production
is entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics shall not be
recognized as confidential information.
B. When requested by the person furnishing a report, and supported
by evidence acceptable to the Township as to need for protection as
confidential material, the portion of a report which might disclose
trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public but shall be made available to the
Township and, upon request, to governmental agencies for uses
related to this Part 4, the Authority's NPDES permit, any state
permit and/or the industrial pretreatment program; in addition,
such portions of a report shall be available for use by the EPA, the
state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
C. When information accepted by the Township as confidential is
transmitted to any government agency, a notification to the
industrial user may be provided listing the confidential information
transmitted and the governmental entity requesting it. The person
seeking confidentiality protection of the information shall bear the
burden of demonstrating to the other governmental agency that
such information is entitled to confidential protection.
22. Records.
A. All industrial users shall keep and maintain records of monitoring,
activities and results, wastewater discharge permits, waivers,
reports, and records of BMP compliance to the Township and the
Borough, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(o)(1) and (2), for a
minimum of three years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance
with this Part or where the industrial user has been notified of a
longer retention period by the Township or Borough.
B. The industrial user shall furnish the Township, within a reasonable
time, any information which the Township may request to
determine whether cause exists for modifying, reissuing,
suspending or revoking a wastewater discharge permit or to
determine industrial user compliance. The industrial user shall also
furnish to the Township, upon request, copies of records required
to be kept. Where the industrial user becomes aware that it failed
to submit any relevant facts in an application for a wastewater
discharge permit, or submitted incorrect information in an
application for a wastewater discharge permit, report to the
Township or in any other correspondence pertaining to its
§ 408 LOGAN CODE § 408
1:368
§ 409. Enforcement. [Ord. 09-25-14]
industrial wastewater discharge, it shall promptly submit such
facts or information.
1. Right to Refuse.
A. The Township reserves the right to refuse to accept wastewater, or
combinations of wastewater, which are discharged in violation of
the terms or conditions of the industrial pretreatment program or
any permit or written directions issued by the Township pursuant
to the conditions of the industrial pretreatment program. The
Township may take such steps as it deems necessary, as outlined in
this Part 4, to compel discontinuance of use of the sewer system or
to require pretreatment of industrial wastes in order to comply
with the provisions of this Part 4. The Township may exercise its
right of refusal by denial of issuance of a wastewater discharge
permit; in such a case, the discharge of industrial waste by the
industrial user in question is prohibited.
B. Discharge of any industrial waste to the sewer system by a
significant industrial user, or by any other user required to have a
permit under § 408, Subsection 3, without a wastewater discharge
permit is an unauthorized discharge, as provided in § 408,
Subsection 1, and may be subject to the penalties provided herein.
2. Show-Cause Hearing.
A. The Township may direct any industrial user who causes or allows
an unauthorized discharge to enter the sewer system, or who
violates any condition or requirement of the industrial
pretreatment program or its wastewater discharge permit, to show
cause before the Township why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. A written notice may be served on the
industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held
by the Township regarding the violation, the reasons why the action
is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the
industrial user to show cause before the Township why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
hearing may be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing.
Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation if the
industrial user is a corporation.
B. The Township may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence, or may designate any of its members or any
representative, including the pretreatment coordinator or other
Borough official, to:
(1) Issue in the name of the Township notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
§ 408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 409
1:369
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings;
(2) Take the evidence; and
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Township for action thereon.
C. At any hearing held pursuant to this Part 4, testimony taken may be
under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any
party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor.
D. After the Township has reviewed the evidence, it may, in writing,
direct the industrial user to take certain actions to correct the
unauthorized discharge or to achieve compliance.
(1) The actions which may be directed include, but are not limited
to:
(a) Installation of pretreatment facilities or equipment;
(b) Modification or additions to existing pretreatment
facilities or equipment;
(c) Initiation of management practices which are required to
alter the nature of the industrial waste being discharged;
(d) Development or implementation of SPCC plans or other
measures;
(e) Other measures found to be necessary to correct the
unauthorized discharge or other noncompliance.
(2) The direction may be in the form of a schedule for compliance,
setting dates by which certain actions shall be taken.
E. Failure of an industrial user to comply with written directions
issued pursuant to a hearing constitutes a violation of this Part 4.
F. As provided in § 412 of this Part 4, show-cause hearings may be
scheduled, held and adjudicated by the Borough, acting in the
name of the Township, and such actions as the Borough may take in
the conduct and conclusions of such a hearing shall constitute final
administrative action.
3. Revocation of Permit.
A. Any industrial user who violates the following conditions of this
Part 4, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to
having its wastewater discharge permit revoked:
§ 409 LOGAN CODE § 409
1:370
(1) Failure of an industrial user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of its discharge in any
application for a wastewater discharge permit or in any reports
required by Subsection 12, 13, 14 or 15 of § 408;
(2) Failure of the industrial user to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics as
required in § 408, Subsection 20;
(3) Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user's premises
for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
(4) Violation of conditions of the wastewater discharge permit.
B. Any industrial user notified of a revocation of its wastewater
discharge permit may be required to immediately stop or eliminate
the discharge (even if an appeal of the revocation notice is
pending). In the event of a failure of the industrial user to comply
voluntarily with the notice of revocation, the discharge shall be
considered an unauthorized discharge, and the Township may take
such steps as deemed necessary, which may include immediate
severance of the connection between the building sewer and the
sewage collection system, or discontinuance of water service, to
prevent or minimize damage to the sewer system or endangerment
to the environment or any property or person.
4. Suspension of Permit.
A. The Township may suspend the wastewater discharge permit when
such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Township, in
order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or
may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons or to the environment, causes or may
cause interference or pass through, or causes or may cause the
Township, Borough or Authority to violate any condition of an
NPDES permit or any other federal or state law, rule, regulation or
permit condition.
B. Any industrial user notified of a suspension of its wastewater
discharge permit may be required to immediately stop or eliminate
the discharge (even if an appeal of the suspension notice is
pending). In the event of a failure of the industrial user to comply
voluntarily with the notice of suspension, the discharge shall be
considered an unauthorized discharge, and the Township may take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of
the connection between the building sewer and the sewage
collection system, or discontinuance of water service, to prevent or
minimize damage to the sewer system or endangerment to the
environment or any property or person.
C. If a wastewater discharge permit has been suspended as a result of
an unauthorized discharge, which discharge resulted in or
§ 409 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 409
1:371
contributed to damages to the sewer system or to any person or
property, the wastewater discharge permit shall not be reinstated
until such time as all such claims have been satisfied.
D. The Township may reinstate the wastewater discharge permit upon
submission of proof by the industrial user of the elimination of the
unauthorized discharge or correction of the noncompliance for
which the suspension was imposed.
5. Notice of Violation. Whenever the Township finds that any industrial
user has violated or is violating this Part 4, its wastewater discharge
permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein,
the Township may serve upon such industrial user a written notice
stating the nature of the violation and requiring a response within a
specified time. Responses required of industrial users may include, but
are not restricted to, actions, plans, compliance schedules, or written
explanations.
6. Administrative Orders. The Township may issue written directions as
described in Subsection 2D, of this section without a show-cause
hearing if the Township determines that such directions are necessary
to correct conditions or remedy continuing violations of this Part 4 or
any wastewater discharge permit or other requirements of the
industrial pretreatment program or the Township, Borough, federal or
state regulations. Failure of an industrial user to comply with written
directions requiring compliance with provisions under this Part 4,
National Categorical pretreatment Standards, or a duly authorized
wastewater discharge permit constitutes a violation of this Part 4.
7. Right of Appeal.
A. An industrial user may appeal the enforcement actions enumerated
above in Subsections 3 and 4 of this section, the denial of a
wastewater discharge permit, or conditions contained in a
wastewater discharge permit. An appeal is subject to the following
requirements:
(1) The appeal must be made in writing to the Township, or to the
Borough if the actions being appealed were taken by the
Borough acting as agent as provided under the provisions of
§ 412 of this Part 4.
(2) The appeal must be made within 30 calendar days from the
date of receipt of the wastewater discharge permit or notice of
denial, suspension, modification or revocation of a wastewater
discharge permit being appealed by the industrial user.
(3) The appeal must state the specific provision(s) of a wastewater
discharge permit or the specific directions or actions of the
Township or Borough which are being contested.
§ 409 LOGAN CODE § 409
1:372
(4) The appeal must state the reasons for the appeal of each
provision.
(5) The appeal may suggest alternate or revised provisions to
replace those appealed.
(6) An appeal of a wastewater discharge permit may include a
request to stay specific permit conditions pending the outcome
of the appeal. Any such request shall include all factual and
legal justification for such a request. Filing of a request shall
not stay any condition of a wastewater discharge permit. Such
a stay must be approved by the Township as provided
Subsection 7E below.
B. Provisions mandated by federal or state regulations (e.g.,
compliance with categorical standards) shall not be appealed.
Conditions which, in the opinion of the Township or Borough, would
constitute a hazard or pose a potential threat of pollution if stayed
shall not be stayed during an appeal.
C. An appeal shall be made to the Township or the Borough as
provided above and shall be reviewed by any designated
representative(s) of the Township or Borough as appropriate,
provided:
(1) The representative shall not be the pretreatment coordinator;
and
(2) The representative shall not be the responsible official.
D. The representative(s) reviewing the appeal shall report in writing
to the Township or Borough, as appropriate, the results of the
review. The report should contain, at a minimum:
(1) A summary of each item appealed, the appellant's reasons for
appeal, and the appellant's proposed remedies, if any.
(2) The finding of merit for each point, and the reason(s) for
finding.
(3) For each point found to be with merit, a proposed remedy, and
a finding that the proposed remedy is allowable under this Part
4 and all applicable federal, state and local rules, regulations
and laws.
E. The Township or Borough, as appropriate, or a board appointed by
the Township or Borough, may, upon its own initiative or in
response to a request by the permittee, review the appeal and the
report and, at one or more regular or special public meetings, take
any additional testimony offered by the appellant, reviewer,
pretreatment program coordinator, or other interested party.
§ 409 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 409
1:373
(1) The municipality conducting the hearing may, within a
reasonable time, decide to:
(a) Grant a stay of wastewater discharge permit conditions
pending a decision on the merits of a permit appeal;
(b) Grant the appeal or portions of the appeal, applying such
remedies as it deems proper; or
(c) Deny the appeal.
(2) The decision by the municipality conducting the hearing
constitutes final administrative action.
F. If the Township, the Borough, or any hearing board appointed by
the Township or Borough shall have as a member any person who
has a financial, legal or other proprietary interest in the industrial
user bringing the appeal, such person shall recuse himself from any
vote which shall determine the decision of the body in regard to the
appeal.
G. Action of the Township or Borough for which review had been
available (e.g., enactment of an ordinance or issuance,
modification, suspension or revocation of a wastewater discharge
permit) shall not be subject to administrative or judicial review in
any civil or criminal proceeding for enforcement.
8. Civil Actions. If any person violates the provisions of the industrial
pretreatment program, including local, national or state pretreatment
requirements, categorical standards, or any wastewater discharge
permit or written directions issued by the Township, the Township may
commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the
Court of Common Pleas of Blair County or any other appropriate forum.
9. Injunctive Relief. If any person causes or permits an unauthorized
discharge to occur; otherwise violates the conditions imposed by this
Part 4 or any wastewater discharge permit or written directions issued
by the Township or the Borough, or any national or state pretreatment
requirement; or discharges wastewater or industrial waste which
otherwise presents or may present an endangerment to the
environment or which threatens to interfere with the operations of the
POTW, the Township may commence an action in the Court of Common
Pleas of Blair County, or any other appropriate forum, for injunctive
relief to stop the discharge or violation or to require compliance with
the applicable condition.
10. Enforcement Response Plan. The Township, responsible official and the
pretreatment coordinator may be guided by the enforcement response
plan when reviewing industrial user reports, inspection results and
other compliance information and when taking enforcement action or
recommending to the Township enforcement action in response to
noncompliance.
§ 409 LOGAN CODE § 409
1:374
11. Significant Violators.
A. The Township shall publish annually, in any local daily newspaper
of general circulation within the Borough of Hollidaysburg that
provides meaningful public notice, a list of significant industrial
users that were found to be in significant noncompliance during the
previous calendar year and any industrial user that caused passthrough,
interference, imminent endangerment, or adversely
affected the pretreatment program. Significant noncompliance
shall be determined using measures of rate, magnitude, and type of
noncompliance, as delineated below:
(1) Chronic violations of numeric local limits [40 CFR
403.8(f)(2)(viii)(A)(B) and (C)], prohibitive discharge
standards, categorical standards and requirements, or other
numerical limitations on discharges of industrial waste. A
chronic violation occurs if the violation occurs in 66% or more
of all measurements taken during a six-month period (by any
magnitude) of a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined in 40
CFR 403.3(1).
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations of numeric local
limits, prohibitive discharge standards, categorical standards
and requirements, or other numerical limitations on
discharges of industrial waste. A TRC violation occurs if 33% or
more of all of the measurements for the same pollutant
parameter in a six-month period equal or exceed the product of
the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, and the applicable TRC. For conventional
pollutants (BOD, total suspended solids and fats, oil and
grease), the TRC equals 1.4; for all other pollutants except pH,
the TRC equals 1.2.
(3) Any other violation of pretreatment local limits, prohibitive
discharge standards, or requirements as defined by 40 CFR
403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard), discharges of industrial waste
which the Township or Borough determines has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, pass-through or
interference, or has endangered the health or safety of
Township, Borough or POTW personnel or the public.
(4) Any discharge that has caused imminent endangerment to
human health, welfare or the environment, or has caused the
Township or Borough to exercise its emergency authority
under Subsection 1, 3 or 4 of this § 409.
(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater
discharge permit or submitted in response to written
§ 409 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 409
1:375
directions of the Township or Borough, for starting
construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance.
(6) Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, any
required reports, including but not limited to baseline
monitoring reports, periodic compliance reports, reports on
compliance with compliance schedules, or reports on a change
in operations.
(7) Failure to accurately report any noncompliance.
(8) Any other violation, noncompliance, which may include a
violation of best management practices, or group of violations
or noncompliances which the Township determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the
industrial pretreatment program.
B. The Township, subject to its discretion, may, as an enforcement
response, publish notification of industrial user noncompliance on a
more-frequent basis than annually or if the level of industrial user
noncompliance does not meet the significant noncompliance
standard.
12. Responsible Officials. Except as may be otherwise provided herein, the
responsible official, or other such official as duly appointed by the
Borough, shall administer and enforce the provisions of this Part 4. The
responsible official, or other duly appointed responsible official, may
delegate any or all powers granted by this Part 4 to the pretreatment
coordinator or to others as he deems appropriate. In the case that the
Township sees fit to unilaterally administer or enforce the provisions of
this Part 4, the Manager of the Township, or his/her duly appointed
agent, shall be responsible for such actions.
§ 409 LOGAN CODE § 409
1:376
ARTICLE D.
Penalties.
§ 410. Penalties. [Ord. 09-25-14]
1. Any person who violates any provisions of this Part 4, or the rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be subject to a civil
monetary penalty pursuant to applicable law. Each day on which a
violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the
Borough and the Township may recover reasonable attorneys' fees,
court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by
appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this
Part 4 or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder.
Except for a violation which has been subject to a civil or criminal
penalty by the Township, nothing shall be deemed to preclude the
Township from commencing an action for a penalty of $25,000 per day
for each violation pursuant to 35 Pa. C.S.A. § 752.1 et seq, (also known
as the "Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law"), subject to the
appeal procedures as specified in 2 Pa. C.S.A.
2. In addition to any applicable civil or criminal penalty, the user is liable
for:
A. All damage which its discharge causes to the sewer system or
POTW if that damage is caused, in whole or in part, by the
industrial user's noncompliance with its wastewater discharge
permit or any applicable law, ordinance, regulation, rule or
pretreatment requirement; and
B. Any penalty imposed upon the Township or Borough (whether by
judicial or administrative order or the settlement of a judicial or
administrative penalty action) where the violation of the Township
was caused or increased by the industrial user, either alone or in
conjunction with discharge(s) from other source(s).
§ 410 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 410
1:377

ARTICLE E.
Remedies Not Exclusive.
§ 411. Remedies Not Exclusive. [Ord. 09-25-14]
The enumeration of remedies in §§ 409 and 410 of this Part 4 does not
restrict their application and shall not be deemed to preclude any other
Township remedies, enforcement responses or other causes of action,
including those available under common law. Nothing in this Part 4, the
enforcement response plan or any other provision of the Township's
pretreatment program shall be intended to limit the enforcement discretion
of the Township to enforce pretreatment requirements as otherwise
provided for by law.
§ 411 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 411
1:379

ARTICLE F.
Administration of the Industrial Pretreatment Program.
§ 412. Appointment of Borough as Agent. [Ord. 09-25-14]
The Township appoints the Borough of Hollidaysburg as its agent for the
purposes of administering the industrial pretreatment program. All reports
and applications required by this Part 4 to be submitted to the Township
shall, unless otherwise directed by the Township, be submitted instead to
the Borough. The Borough is hereby authorized to develop all procedures
for inspecting users, reporting, issuing wastewater discharge permits,
reviewing pretreatment facility plans, and otherwise administering all of
the provisions of this Part 4 and the industrial pretreatment program. Local
limits developed by the Borough shall be applied as local limits authorized
by this Part 4 and applied to such industrial users as authorized by this Part
4. All administrative enforcement actions, as set forth in § 409 of this Part
4, may be taken by the Borough, acting as an agent of the Township; this
includes, but is not limited to, issuance of written directions and notices
of violation, the scheduling and hearing of show-cause hearings, and the
suspension or revocation of wastewater discharge permits. On the appeal
of an action by the Borough by an industrial user, the Borough will hear
the appeal and make final administrative decisions, unless the Township
exercises its right under this Part 4 to conduct the hearing of the appeal
and the right to make final decisions. This appointment may be revoked
only upon the amendment of this Part 4 by majority vote of the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Logan, at a duly scheduled and publicly
advertised regular or special public meeting.
§ 413. Authorization of Borough to Act in the Name of the
Township. [Ord. 09-25-14]
All enforcement procedures authorized by § 409 of this Part 4 may be
undertaken, without prior consultation with the Township, by the Borough,
and the Borough shall in such instances be authorized to act for and in
the name of the Township. It is the intent of the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Logan that the industrial pretreatment program be
administered and enforced by the Borough and that all actions taken by the
Borough in administering and enforcing this Part 4 are actions on behalf
of the Township and may be taken in the name of the Township. This
authorization may be revoked only upon the amendment or revocation of
this Part 4 by a majority vote of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Logan at a duly scheduled and publicly advertised regular or special public
meeting.
§ 414. Information to be Shared with Borough. [Ord. 09-25-14]
Information acquired by the Township which pertains to the provisions of
the industrial pretreatment program shall be provided to the Borough in a
timely manner. Such information shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 412 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 414
1:381
§ 415. Actions to be Taken in Support of Borough in Administration
and Enforcement. [Ord. 09-25-14]
The Township may provide such services as may be required or requested in
aid of the administration or enforcement of the provisions of the industrial
pretreatment program. Such aid and assistance may include, but not be
limited to, assistance in obtaining information, recordkeeping, sampling,
inspections or enforcement.
§ 416. Authorization of Borough not Exclusive. [Ord. 09-25-14]
Notwithstanding the above, the Township retains the right to administer
and enforce the industrial pretreatment program in keeping with the
provisions of this Part 4. When so notified by the Township, users shall
provide such information as is required by this Part 4 or its provisions to
the Township. The Township may take such administrative or enforcement
actions as it deems necessary to comply with the provisions of this Part 4.
§ 417. Special Agreements and/or Waiver of Pretreatment
Requirements. [Ord. 09-25-14]
Nothing contained in this Part 4 shall be construed as prohibiting special
agreements between the Township or Borough and a person discharging
industrial wastes or wastewaters to the sewer system, or for the Township
or Borough to otherwise waive requirements hereunder, when conditions
and circumstances making such special agreements or waiver advisable
and/or necessary, in the opinion of the Township or Borough, are present;
provided, however, that:
A. Information regarding new industrial users or changes in use of
existing users.
B. Information pertaining to the quality, quantity, or rate of flow of
discharges.
C. Information regarding violations of this Part 4 or any of its provisions or
of the industrial pretreatment program.
A. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and prohibitive discharge
standards [including the general and specific prohibitions set forth at
40 CFR 403.5(a) and (b)] shall not be waived, unless such waiver is
granted by mechanisms established under the federal pretreatment
regulations (40 CFR 403 et seq); and
B. In no case shall a special agreement or waiver of local limits allow for
an industrial user to discharge any pollutant which, alone or in
combination with other regulated industrial user discharges, would
reasonably be expected to exceed the mass loadings determined by the
Township as acceptable to the sewage treatment plant based upon
considerations of, among other things, interference, pass-through and
sludge contamination. The Township may consider other factors, e.g.,
§ 414 LOGAN CODE § 417
1:382
effect of the discharge on the POTW, future expansion, etc., as it deems
appropriate. In no event shall any special agreement or waiver allow
the sum of the loadings allocated to industrial loadings to exceed the
values set forth in any local limits analysis submitted by the Township
or Borough to the EPA and approved by the EPA as part of the industrial
pretreatment program.
C. The Township may require an industrial user requesting a special
agreement or waiver adjusting effluent limitations to submit supporting
documentation indicating why the industrial user cannot reasonably
expect to meet the effluent limitation contained in its wastewater
discharge permit or other pretreatment requirements, setting forth an
expeditious schedule for achieving compliance with such limitations,
and including such other information as the Township may require. In
granting any special agreement or waiver, the Township may impose
time limitations upon any reduced requirements and provide a
compliance schedule for achieving compliance. In granting any special
agreement or waiver, the Township may impose any other conditions
deemed necessary to implement the purposes of this Part 4.
D. If granting a special agreement or waiver would result in increased
costs to the Township or Borough (e.g., treatment, monitoring, sludge
disposal costs), the Township may condition the special agreement or
waiver upon the agreement of the industrial user to pay those costs and
to provide security adequate in the judgement of the Township to
assure payment of said costs.
§ 417 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 417
1:383

Part 5
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT/ALTOONA SEWAGE COLLECTION
SYSTEM
§ 501. Establishment of Industrial Pretreatment Program in the
Township of Logan. [Ord. 07-15-99; as amended by Ord. 12-09-10]
§ 502. Administration and Implementation of the Pretreatment
Program by the Altoona Authority. [Ord. 07-15-99; as amended by
Ord. 12-09-10]
1. All prohibitions, requirements, regulations and procedures required of
industrial and commercial users of the Township sewer system,
discharging to the Easterly and/or Westerly Wastewater Treatment
Facility, shall be identical to those adopted by the Altoona Water
Authority (hereinafter, at times "AWA") on August 19, 2010, by its
Resolution #10-08-606, and as amended from time to time.
2. The Township shall adopt by ordinance or resolution such policy
amendments as may be necessary to continue implementation of the
Industrial Pretreatment Program and control discharges to the
collection system for commercial and/or industrial users of the
Township sewer system, discharging to the Easterly and/or Westerly
Wastewater Treatment Facility. Such ordinances or resolutions shall be
prepared by the AWA Pretreatment Office and forwarded to the
Township for adoption to maintain the compatibility with the AWA's
original Wastewater System Regulations.
3. The Township Ordinances or Resolutions shall authorize the AWA to
develop specific discharge limitations and local limits and shall
authorize those limitations and local limits to be applicable to
Commercial and Industrial Users located in the Township and
discharging to the Easterly and/or Westerly Wastewater Treatment
Facility.
1. The Township agrees that any authorized representative or agent of the
AWA may enter and inspect any part of the Township Sewer System for
Commercial and/or Industrial Users of the Township Sewer System,
discharging to the Easterly and/or Westerly Wastewater Treatment
Facility, and may take wastewater samples and/or flow measurements.
In addition, any authorized representative or agent of the AWA may
enter and inspect commercial and industrial premises in the Township
that discharges, directly or indirectly, into the Township sewer system,
which discharges to the Easterly and/or Westerly Wastewater
Treatment Facility, and take wastewater samples and/or flow
measurements.
2. The Township hereby appoints and designates the AWA, and its duly
authorized representatives, to be the Township's representatives for
the purpose of implementing, administering and enforcing the
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 502
1:385
provisions of the Township ordinances or resolutions in regard to the
commercial and industrial users of the Township sewer system. The
AWA shall, in order to ensure compliance of commercial and industrial
users with the Township ordinances or resolutions, issue permits,
letters, notices, reports, orders, compliance schedules and other
documents notifying, requiring a response, or requiring compliance
with the Township ordinances or resolutions for commercial and/or
industrial users of the Township sewer system, discharging to the
Easterly and/or Westerly Wastewater Treatment Facility. All such
actions taken by the AWA in the administration, implementation, and
enforcement of the Industrial Pretreatment Program established by
the Township ordinances or resolutions shall be and hereby expressly
are accepted and acknowledged as actions in the name of and as an
agent of the Township.; provided, however, that the authority to enforce
the applicable Township ordinances or resolutions against commercial
and industrial users through the assessment of penalties shall not be
invoked by the AWA except as set forth in § 503 herein.
3. The AWA may seek injunctive relief against any commercial or
industrial user located in the Township and discharging, directly or
indirectly, into the Township sewer system which discharges into the
Easterly and/or Westerly Wastewater Treatment Facility, if such
commercial or industrial user's discharge reasonably appears to
present an imminent danger to the health or welfare of persons, or the
environment; or if this discharge interferes or threatens to interfere
with the operation of the Easterly and/or Westerly Wastewater
Treatment Facility; or if violations of the industrial wastewater
contribution permit conditions as authorized by the Township
ordinances or resolutions or the AWA's Wastewater System Regulations
has occurred or is reasonably expected to occur. The AWA may seek
equitable relief against any commercial or industrial user of the
Township sewer system, which discharges into the Easterly and/or
Westerly Wastewater Treatment Facility if it believes that acts or
omissions by the commercial or industrial user have caused or have the
potential to cause harm to any part of the Township which discharges
into the Easterly and/or Westerly Wastewater Treatment Facility. Any
actions at law or in equity initiated by the AWA against a commercial or
industrial user in the Township, which discharges into the Easterly and/
or Westerly Wastewater Treatment Facility of the Township sewer
system in furtherance of the provisions of the ordinances or resolutions
shall not be contested or intervened by the Township, except in support
of the AWA.
4. The Township, if required by the AWA, shall act in concert with and in
support of the AWA in implementing, administering and enforcing the
provisions of the Township ordinances or resolutions. The Township
agrees that they shall not hinder, delay or obstruct the efforts of the
AWA in implementing the provisions of the applicable ordinances or
resolutions.
§ 502 LOGAN CODE § 502
1:386
§ 503. Enforcement of Pretreatment Ordinances and Resolutions.
[Ord. 07-15-99; as amended by Ord. 12-09-10]
5. The Township shall provide information to the AWA regarding changes
in the list of commercial and industrial users connected to the Township
sewer system, which discharges into the Easterly and/or Westerly
Wastewater Treatment Facility, upon request from the AWA. Such
information shall include new commercial or industrial users,
commercial or industrial users that have been disconnected or have
gone out of business, changes in ownership of existing commercial or
industrial users, or other similar information readily available to the
Township.
1. The Township recognizes its obligation to enforce its Township
ordinances and resolutions, and the Township hereby covenants that it
will enforce its ordinance or resolution. The Township also recognizes
that the AWA, as the author of the Industrial Pretreatment Program, has
knowledge regarding the intent and interpretation of the Wastewater
System Regulations which includes the Industrial Pretreatment
Program and requirements. In addition, the Township, intending to
ensure that all commercial and industrial users, which discharges into
the Easterly and/or Westerly Wastewater Treatment Facility, are treated
equitably, recognizes that guidance from the AWA may be necessary to
achieve such a goal. Therefore, the Township shall coordinate its
enforcement actions by means of the provisions of Subsection 4 of this
§ 503.
2. If the AWA determines that the Township, through action or inaction,
has hindered the proper operation, administration or enforcement of
the Industrial Pretreatment Program in the Altoona City Sewer District
of Logan Township and the portions of the Logan Township Sewer
District served by the AWA, and following notice by the AWA of such
hindrance, the Township fails to remedy the identified condition, the
AWA may invoke its authority to enforce the provisions of the Township
ordinance or resolutions as provided in Subsection 2 of § 502, and
thereafter enforce the Industrial Pretreatment Program in the Altoona
City Sewer District and the portions of the Logan Township Sewer
District served by the AWA, and all the provisions of this Part 5,
including the imposition of various penalties on commercial and
industrial users located within the Township, which discharges into the
Easterly and/or Westerly Wastewater Treatment Facility. Alternatively
or simultaneously, the AWA may develop a remedial plan, containing a
description of the nature of the problem, an enumeration of the
remedial steps to be taken by the Township, and a time schedule for
implementing each step. If the Township fails or refuses to satisfy the
terms of such a plan, the AWA may induce fines and/or institute a showcause
hearing as specified in the AWA Wastewater System Regulations.
3. The enforcement of this Part 5 in respect to persons not otherwise
considered commercial or industrial users is the responsibility of the
§ 502 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 503
1:387
§ 504. Fees and Costs. [Ord. 07-15-99; as amended by Ord.
12-09-10]
Township, and the AWA is not authorized to enforce the Township
ordinances or resolutions in such instances, nor may it invoke its status
as an agent to enforce Township ordinances or resolutions against
persons not otherwise considered commercial or industrial users;
provided, however, that the AWA retains its legal rights to seek
appropriate equitable or judicial relief for grievances against all
persons as provided by law.
4. The AWA shall provide guidance and coordination to the Township so as
to ensure that the provisions of the Industrial Pretreatment Program
are enforced uniformly and equitably. The Township shall consult the
AWA in the enforcement of the Township ordinances or resolutions to
ensure that enforcement actions taken by one are consistent with the
other. The AWA shall make available upon request by the Township, for
examination and copying, all records and documents pertaining to the
enforcement of the Industrial Pretreatment Program in the Altoona City
Sewer District of Logan Township and those portions of the Logan
Township Sewer District served by the AWA. The Township shall advise
the AWA of all actions taken in the enforcement of the Township
ordinances or resolutions, and, upon request from the AWA shall
provide copies of all relevant documents in regard to enforcement of
such ordinances or resolutions.
1. In order to recover costs for sampling, analysis, surcharges, permit
application fees, and fines for enforcing the Industrial Pretreatment
Program, the AWA shall assess and collect fees of commercial and
industrial users located within the Township per the AWA's wastewater
charge system. Such fees are considered separate from the user fees
established by the Township and shall be billed directly to Logan
Township for those commercial and industrial users.
2. The AWA will maintain the wastewater charge system which lists a fee
schedule and provides for fees and surcharges for the acceptance and
treatment of wastewater containing amounts of compatible pollutants
in excess of those normally discharged by commercial and industrial
users to the Easterly and/or Westerly Wastewater Treatment Facilities.
§ 503 LOGAN CODE § 504
1:388
Part 6
SANITARY SEWER CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
§ A ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 504
1:389

§ 601
Specifications.
[Amended by Res. 05-08-14]
§ A. Design Criteria.
§ B. Sewer Size.
§ C. Sewer Pipe and Fittings.
Sewer pipe, fittings and wye connections used for sewers shall conform to
one of the following:
1. All sanitary sewers shall be designed in accordance with the applicable
edition of the Sewerage Manual for the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, Water Quality Management Program, and
these Specifications.
2. Construction of sanitary sewers will not be permitted until the proper
commonwealth permits have been obtained in the name of the
Township or the Authority.
1. Building Sewer. Building sewers shall in no case be less than four
inches in diameter. An adapter, approved by the Logan Township
inspector, connecting the building sewer to the lateral must be used. In
accordance with the recommendation of the Township, the Township, at
its discretion, may require the building sewer of a building having more
than one residential equivalent to be greater than four inches in
diameter.
2. Lateral. The lateral sewer between the sewer main and the building
sewer upon the property must be six inches in diameter, unless
otherwise approved by the Township.
3. Sewers. All sewers, except building sewers and laterals, shall in no case
be less than six inches in diameter. The Township, at its discretion, may
require that sewers be greater than six inches in diameter.
A. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM
D-3034, SDR 35 with integral bell-and-spigot-type joints meeting the
requirements of ASTM D-3212 and elastomeric gaskets meeting the
requirements of ASTM F-477. All trap and vent assemblies on
structures constructed prior to January 1, 2011, shall be constructed
with (Schedule 40 DVW ASTM D-1785-type fittings, utilizing purple
primed, ASTM 656 and solvent cement.
B. Type PS-46 PolyVinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe meeting the
requirements of ASTM F-789 with integral bell-and-spigot-type joints
meeting the requirements of ASTM D-3212 and elastomeric gaskets
meeting the requirements of ASTM F-477.
§ A ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § C
1:391
§ D. Exclusion of Clear Water.
All area drains, including garage floor and basement floor drains,
potentially discharging rain or "clear" water shall not be connected to the
building sewer. As well, downspouts, sump pumps, and any other device
not containing waste material is strictly prohibited from entering the
Township's sanitary sewer system.
§ E. Installation Requirements.
All sewers shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations and Township's Sewer Construction Standard Details. All
sewers shall be installed by competent, skilled pipelayers. Each excavation
for a sewer shall be guarded adequately with barricades and other
protection devices to protect vehicle and pedestrian traffic from damage
and injury. Any roadway, sidewalk and other Township property or public
property disturbed in the installation of a sewer shall be restored to its
original condition or better at the sole cost and expense of the person
installing the sewer.
§ F. Connection to Lateral. [Amended by Ord. 05-28-15]
A building sewer shall be connected to the public sanitary sewerage system
at the place designated by the Township. The invert elevation of the building
sewer at the point of connection shall be as required by the Township. A
smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection of the building sewer
to the lateral shall be made secure and watertight with a coupling adapter
approved by the Township. Fernco-type couplings are not acceptable, unless
a manufactured coupler is not available and prior approval from the
Township is received. Building sewers shall be installed as direct as
possible. Changes in direction must be made with wyes, combination wye
and eighth-bends or half wyes, or one-eighth bends. Ninety-degree changes
in direction shall be made with a two-foot minimum length of pipe between
the approved fittings. Every change in direction which exceeds 45° shall
include a cleanout. Changes in pipe size where the building sewer is
connected to the lateral shall be made only with fittings. An inspection
C. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe meeting the requirements of ASTM
D-1785, Schedule 40 with purple primed, ASTM F-656, solvent cementtype
joints conforming to ASTM D-2564 — to be used in all interior
plumbing work.
D. Ductile-iron sewer pipe shall conform to ANSI/AWWA C150/A21.50 and
ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51. Pipe joints shall be push-on type or
mechanical joint type. All pipe joint systems shall conform to the
provisions of ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11, Fittings shall be ductile iron
with mechanical joints conforming to ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10 and
ANSI/AWWA C1 11/A21.11 having a pressure rating of 350 psi. Pipe
thickness shall be in no class less than Class 52. The Township, at its
discretion, may require the pipe thickness to be greater than Class 52.
§ C LOGAN CODE § F
1:392
port of the same size as the lateral shall be placed in the sewer discharge
pipe on or about the property line (as determined by the Township) of the
building, house and/or structure being connected to the public sanitary
sewer system. This inspection port shall be constructed by use of at least
a six-inch tee fitting being placed in the lateral at the time of construction
thereof. From the said tee fitting, a vertical stack pipe of at least sixinch
diameter will extend upward to ground level. The top of said vertical
stack pipe shall terminate with an adapter with a screw-on cap. The frame
and cover over the inspection port shall be East Jordan Pattern #1565 or
Neenah Model # R-1975-A2 or approved equal. The frame and cover must
be installed such that no downward forces imparted by a load on the frame
can be transferred to the observation stack. The frame must be installed
on level ground as near to the property line as possible. The frame can
be purchased at the Township office. The inspection port assembly shall
remain in place and accessible at all times by Township personnel. All such
connections shall be installed in such a manner as to be watertight. The
building owner shall have the option to install a barrier for the purpose of
preventing passage of stormwater and/or other waters and/or liquids from
utilizing the trench in which the building sewer is located as a conduit to
the building being serviced by the building sewer.
§ G. Building Sewer Grade.
A building sewer shall be laid on a grade of not less than 1/4 inch per foot
(2.0% grade) and shall have a minimum cover of 2 1/2 feet. The Township
Engineer or authorized representative may grant special permission for a
building sewer to be laid on a grade less than 1/4 inch per foot. A cleanout
shall be placed at no more than every sixty-foot interval along the building
sewer. The cleanout shall be constructed as detailed in the Township's
Sewer Construction Standard Details.
§ H. Building Sewer to Building Drain Connection.
The connection between the building sewer and the building drain shall
be constructed as detailed in the Township's Sewer Construction Standard
Details. Fernco couplings are permitted at this location to connect
dissimilar pipe materials only when a manufactured connector is not
available.
§ I. Grease Trap.
All commercial and institutional facilities processing and serving food must
install a trap, based on acceptable design standards. The unit selection,
computations and catalog cuts must be filed with the Township Engineer
and approved prior to installation.
A. Total Discharge Flow Rate = Fixture Discharge + Dishwasher
Discharge.
§ F ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § I
1:393
§ J. Oil Interceptor.
B. For plumbing fixtures and equipment wastes, determine fixture
discharge. (If more than one fixture can discharge at the same time,
include all discharges.)
(1) Fixture discharge (gpm): for drains discharging plumbing fixtures
and equipment wastes or kitchen drains not discharging "clear"
water.
(2) Dishwasher manufacturer's discharge rating (gpm).
1. The unit selection, computations and catalog cuts must be filed with the
Township Engineer and approved prior to installation.
2. Oil interceptor sizing shall be achieved by determining the greater
demand upon the proposed unit, either discharge flow rate or
emergency oil spill capacity.
A. Discharge Flow Rate.
(1) For drains discharging plumbing fixtures and equipment
wastes or floor drains not influenced by surface water from
roof or exterior drainage areas:
Calculate fixture discharge (if more than one can discharge at
same time, including all discharges)
Total Volume of Fixture (C.F.) x 7.48 Gal. x 0.75/2 min. C.F. =
Discharge Flow Rate (gpm)
Where:
0.75% of fixture volume utilized (2 min. drainage period
from fixture) 7.48 gal./C.F. conversion factor
(2) For drains discharging oily surface water crossing the floor
areas:
Surface Area (S.F.) X 1.2 inches x 2.0 gal.-hr. x hr. 96.26 inc-
S.F. = Discharge Flow Rate (gpm)
Where:
1.2 inches/hr. = two-year rainfall in Central Pennsylvania
2.0 = Minimum storage factor
96.26 in-min-SF units factor = Gal.-hr.
B. Emergency Oil Spill Capacity.
=Max. Grease and/or Oil Discharge (gpm) x 2 min. x .8/2.0
§ I LOGAN CODE § J
1:394
§ K. PA Act No. 38.
Persons installing sewers must comply with the requirements of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Act No. 38 (1991), the provisions of which
are incorporated herein by reference.
§ L. Manhole Construction.
Where:
Maximum grease and/or oil discharge rate from all equipment
that stores and/or delivers products
2 min. = Maximum spill time
0.8 = Separation feeder
2.0 = Sizing factor
The grease capacity (gal.) must be equal to the maximum
grease and/or oil discharge x 2 min.
To convert gallons of oil/grease to pounds, use 6 gallons = 1
pound.
Knowing the proposed discharge flow rate and/or emergency
oil capacity, select a unit with the proper sizing using
manufacturer's catalog information.
1. Manhole sections shall be precast concrete and shall be manufactured
in accordance with the provisions of ASTM C-478. All joints shall be
tongue and groove. The inside diameter of the manhole sections shall
be not less than 48 inches. Manhole tops shall be "eccentric cone"
sections or flat tops having an opening not less than 27 inches in
diameter.
2. All joints in the precast concrete manhole sections shall be thoroughly
cleaned, primed and a joint-sealing compound (two strips per joint)
equal to RAM-NEK Performed Plastic Gasket, as manufactured by K.T.
Snyder Company, or equal, placed entirely around the joint immediately
before the manhole sections are assembled. "Squeezed out" excess joint
material must be neatly trimmed and removed. Through wall lifting
holes shall not be permitted. Lifting keys or lugs shall be factoryinstalled
integrally in the manhole components.
3. Manhole bases shall be precast concrete "flanged" type bases. At each
point where the sewer pipe enters (or leaves) a manhole base, a cast-inplace
flexible pipe gasket system shall be installed. Rubber gasket
materials shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C-443.
4. All precast manhole sections shall be furnished with manhole steps at
twelve-inch centers and properly aligned. The manhole steps shall be
properly aligned vertically as the manhole sections are being
assembled. Reinforced plastic manhole steps shall be 1/2 inch Grade
60, ASTM A615 deformed steel reinforcement completely encapsulated
§ J ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § L
1:395
§ M. Inflow Protection Inserts.
Inflow protection inserts shall be in all manholes which are not "selfsealing."
The inflow protection insert and its associated components shall
be manufactured from corrosion-proof materials suitable for atmosphere
containing gases associated with wastewater collection systems. The
thickness of the insert body shall not be less than 3/32 inch nor greater
than 6/32 inch. The insert body shall not have an overall depth exceeding
in Grade 49108, ASTM D4104 copolymer polypropylene plastic
compound. Manhole steps shall be M.A. Industries, Inc.'s Type PSI-PF.
5. After the manhole is made watertight and completely cured, the
exterior surfaces (and interior surfaces when used within the
Innovative and Alternative District) shall be entirely coated with a coal
tar epoxy coating system equal to one prime coat and the number of
finish coats necessary to provide a final dry film thickness of not less
than 20 mils. The coating shall be applied in strict conformance with
the coating manufacturer's specifications. A written certification
stating that the previously stated waterproofing specification has been
met shall be provided to the Township.
6. Immediately prior to placing the concrete for the flow channels in the
manholes, thoroughly clean the surfaces of the concrete that will make
contact with the concrete for the flow channel, moisten these surfaces
with water and place approximately 1/2 inch of mortar containing a
latex bonding admixture thereon. The bonding mortar shall be fieldmixed
at the manhole site in strict conformance with the
manufacturer's instructions. The flow channel concrete shall be PA-DOT
Class A concrete with PA-DOT No. 1B coarse aggregate and shall be
placed on the bonding grout immediately after the bonding grout is
placed. Smooth flow channels cast in the manhole bases by the manhole
manufacturer will be acceptable.
7. Manhole frames and covers shall be similar to Neenah Foundry
Company Catalog No. R-1753-A self-sealing marked "Sanitary Sewer"
and having an opening not less than 27 inches in diameter. Four holes
shall be drilled in the manhole frame and the top of the precast
concrete manhole eccentric cone section. After cleaning the manhole
frame and the top of the precast concrete manhole eccentric cone
section, place joint-sealing compound on the concrete and securely bolt
the manhole frame to the eccentric cone section top with three-fourthsinch
expanding head concrete anchors. If precast concrete grade
adjustment rings are required to properly bring the manhole cover to
finished grade, joint-sealing compound shall be placed between
adjacent rings, between the ring and frame and between the ring and
eccentric cone section. In all cases, the frame must be bolted to the
eccentric cone section.
8. Provide adequate support in the form of a concrete cradle to
undisturbed earth under all pipes entering or leaving manholes.
§ L LOGAN CODE § M
1:396
6 1/2 inches. The insert shall have a sealing gasket made of close cell
neoprene. The insert shall have a gas relief valve designed to relieve at a
pressure of one pound or less. The valve shall have a leak-down rate not
exceeding 10 gallons per 24 hours, to eliminate the ponding of water over
the manhole. The gas relief valve shall have no metal parts. The valve shall
be positioned so that it is protected and will not be broken by any movement
of the manhole cover. The insert shall have a lift strap attached to the insert
body. The lift strap shall be made of one-inch-width polyester, nylon and
shall be seated at all ends to prevent unraveling or deterioration. The lift
strap shall be attached to the insert body by means of a sealed aluminum
rivet. Attachment of the lift strap to the insert body shall be recessed to
prevent contact with the manhole cover during removal or replacement
of the manhole cover. The manhole frame rim shall be cleaned of all dirt
or debris before placing the insert upon the rim. The insert shall be fully
seated around the manhole frame rim. Inserts shall not be installed until
all testing of the sewer lines has been satisfactorily completed and the
Township has issued written approval to install the inserts.
§ N. Sewer Testing.
1. All sewers, except those building sewers that the Township grants
permission not to be tested, shall be tested for alignment and deflection
and exfiltration as follows:
A. Prior to testing, the person installing the sewer must submit to the
Township for approval the test procedure and test equipment he
proposes to use.
B. The person conducting the test shall furnish the labor, equipment,
materials, and all else necessary to perform the testing specified
herein. All sewers which do not meet the test limits established
herein shall be repaired or removed and replaced to the
satisfaction of the Township.
2. Alignment Test. A test mandrel, constructed according to the
dimensional tolerances shown below, shall be pulled through the sewer
line to determine whether the alignments and deflection of the pipe are
correct and to ensure that all obstructions have been removed. In the
case that the test shows poor alignment or improper deflection of the
sewer pipe, misplaced pipe, obstructions or other defects, such defects
shall be corrected to the satisfaction of the Township. The minimum
mandrel length and outside diameter shall be:
Test Mandrel Construction
Pipe
Diameter
(inches)
Minimum
Mandrel Length
(inches)
Minimum
Mandrel Outside
(inches) Diameter
6 12.0 5.32
8 17.6 7.10
§ M ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § N
1:397
§ O. Manhole Testing.
3. Exfiltration Test (Low-Pressure Air Test). After testing for alignment
and flushing to remove all obstructions, the sewer shall be subjected to
a low-pressure air test as follows:
A. The sewer being tested shall be properly capped and plugged and
carefully braced to resist the thrust actions developed by the test.
B. If the sewer to be tested is submerged in groundwater, the depth of
groundwater over the flow line of the sewer must be determined.
All test pressures must be increased by the amount of backpressure
due to groundwater.
C. Add air slowly to the portion of sewer under test until the internal
air pressure is raised to 5.0 psi.
D. After the internal air pressure of 5.0 psi. is obtained, allow two
minutes for the air temperature to stabilize, adding only the
amount of air necessary to maintain test pressure.
E. After the stabilization period (minimum pressure in the pipe of 5.0
psi.), start the stop watch. Determine the time that is required for
the internal air pressure to reach 4.5 psi. Minimum permissible
holding time shall be 10 minutes for six-inch diameter pipe: 12
minutes for eight-inch diameter; pipe and 30 minutes for twelveinch
diameter pipe.
F. Should any test of sewer pipe laid not meet the test requirements
specified above, the contractor shall, at his own expense, locate
and repair the defective sewer pipe until the pipe meets the test
requirements. In-place grouting to repair defective sewer pipe will
not be permitted.
G. Safety precautions must be observed. Plugs must be braced to
prevent blowouts. Pressurizing equipment must be capable of
being operated remotely, and no one should be permitted in the
manholes during testing.
1. The contractor shall vacuum test EACH manhole constructed in his
contract. The tests shall be conducted in the presence of and to the
complete satisfaction of the Township. Should a manhole not
satisfactorily pass the test, the contractor shall discontinue manhole
construction on the applicable contract until such manhole does test
satisfactorily.
2. The contractor shall provide the tools, materials, equipment and
instruments necessary to conduct manhole testing specified herein.
Vacuum testing equipment and associated testing apparatus shall be
subject to the Township's approval. The contractor shall use vacuum
apparatus equipment equipped with the necessary piping, control
valves and gauges to control the air-removal rate from the manhole and
§ N LOGAN CODE § O
1:398
§ P. Solids Retaining Tank (Innovative and Alternate Sewer System
Only).
to monitor vacuum. An extra vacuum gauge of known accuracy shall be
provided to frequently check test equipment and apparatus. A seal plate
with vacuum piping connections for inserting in the manhole frame
shall be provided.
3. Prior to testing, the contractor shall thoroughly clean the manhole and
seal the openings, to the satisfaction of the Township. Properly sized
plugs shall be used to seal the opening, taking care to securely brace
the plugs. Testing shall be performed with the frame installed. The joint
between the manhole eccentric cone and the manhole frame shall be
included in the test. The contractor may select to make a test for his
own purposes prior to backfilling. However, all vacuum tests of the
manholes for acceptance shall be conducted only after the backfilling
has been completed.
4. The contractor shall perform vacuum testing in accordance with the
testing equipment manufacturer's written instructions: a vacuum of 10
inches of mercury and close the valves. The manhole shall be
considered acceptable when the vacuum does not drop below nine
inches of mercury for the following manhole sizes and themes:
A. Four-foot diameter: 60 seconds.
B. Five-foot diameter: 75 seconds.
5. The contractor shall determine the source or sources of leaks in
manholes failing the vacuum test. The contractor shall repair or replace
defective materials and workmanship, as is the case, and conduct
additional vacuum tests and such subsequent repairs and retesting as
required until all manholes meet testing requirements. All materials
and methods used to make manhole repairs must meet with the
Township approval prior to use. All repairs, replacements and retests
shall be made at no additional expense to the Township.
1. Products.
A. Polyethylene septic tank shall be 1,000 gallons in capacity and be
one of the following:
(1) Heavy-duty type manufactured by AK Industries.
(2) WR-4000 manufactured by Wedco Molded Products.
(3) Norwesco 1,000-gallon single compartment.
B. Manhole frame and cover meeting the specifications found in § L,
must be installed over tank access cover upon a bed of sand or
limestone dust using a four-inch concrete grade ring with 4 3/4
concrete anchors.
§ O ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § P
1:399
C. Tank-to-pipe adapter must be Schedule 40 PVC at tank inlet and
SDR-35 at tank outlet.
D. Gaskets, materials, mastic sealant and screws must provide an
odor-free, watertight installation.
2. Installation.
A. A.K. Industries Tank, Overexcavate no more than six inches under
and around tank. Place tank on six inches of PA-DOT 2B aggregate.
Once the tank is installed, level backfill excavation with PA-DOT 2B
aggregate in six-inch lifts to the spring line being sure to fill in the
corrugations under the haunches. Fill tank with water to spring
line. Install riser with flared end downward and secure to tank with
mastic and 20 stainless steel screws. Be sure that the tank and riser
surfaces are clean and dry. Place PA-DOT 2B in six-inch lifts around
the tank to an elevation equal to the tank and riser joint. Backfill
riser with limestone dust or sand to an elevation of 13 inches below
finish grade. This backfill material must be two feet in thickness.
Approved backfill may be placed between dust or sand and the limit
of excavation. Install four-inch concrete grade ring and manhole
frame and cover to grade and backfill with topsoil. Install septic
tank cover on riser with gasket, material, and stainless steel
screws.
B. Wedco WR-4000 Tank. Overexcavate no more than 12 inches under
and around the tank. Place six inches of compacted PA-DOT 2 RC
aggregate in excavation for tank base. Install tank level and fill with
water to 1/2 tank depth. Place PA-DOT 2RC aggregate in eight-inch
compacted lifts to the midpoint of the tank. Backfill uniformly
around the tank so that one side is not higher than any other during
backfilling. Backfill must be compacted under inlet and outlet
pipes. When making pipe connections, do not twist or deflect pipe
stub installed in the tank. This may cause damage to baffle within
the tank. Install the riser section with mastic and stainless steel
screws. Fill the remainder of the septic tank with water and backfill
with PA-DOT 2 RC aggregate in compacted lifts to the spring line of
the tank. The remainder of backfill over the tank must be PA-DOT 2
RC aggregate in six-inch layers without compaction. Backfill riser
with limestone dust or sand to the top of the tank lid. Secure tank
lid with gasket material and stainless steel screws. Seal the
threaded plug with pipe dope. Install four-inch concrete grade ring
and manhole frame and cover over the tank lid to grade.
C. Norwesco Tank. Excavate to a depth that will provide a minimum of
six inches and a maximum of 30 inches of cover over the top of the
tank. Allow 18 inches to 24 inches on all sides of the tank. Bed the
tank in well-packed sand - six-inch minimum in soil terrain, twelveinch
minimum in rocky terrain. Inlet and outlet piping should be
solvent-welded using standard PVC cement. Prior to backfilling,
install manhole extensions. Fill tank with water as the tank is
§ P LOGAN CODE § P
1:400
§ Q. Septic Tank Effluent Pump Systems (Innovative and Alternate
District).
backfilled with a sand/gravel mix compacting in twelve-inch lifts.
Always compact ends first, making sure to compact around the
inlet and outlet pipes.
3. Testing.
A. Vacuum. Upon receipt of tanks from the manufacturer, each tank
must be vacuum-tested for structural integrity. The test is
conducted by applying a vacuum of 54 psi to the interior of the tank
where deflection of the length or width cannot exceed two inches
after a five-minute test period. Failure of this test constitutes
rejection of this tank. Retest of failed tanks may be granted by the
Township, depending upon circumstances surrounding the failure.
Testing equipment and labor must be supplied by the contractor or
the local supply house.
B. Water. Once the tank is installed, a water test consisting of a full
tank, including the riser section, must stand for 24 hours without
any water loss to be deemed acceptable. The failure of this test
constitutes the removal and replacement of this tank. Retesting
after approved repairs or component replacement may be
approved by the Township. The contractor must supply the
equipment and labor for this test.
4. Cleanout.
A. Within three feet of the outlet of the Wedco WR-4000 tank, a fourinch
cleanout must be installed meeting the requirements of the
Township as shown in § U.
1. PVC Pressure Lateral Pipe. The discharge pipe and fittings (pressure
laterals) for the effluent pumps shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
pressure pipe. The PVC pressure pipe shall meet the requirements of:
ASTM D-1785, Schedule 80, Specification for Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)
Plastic Pipe Schedule 80 and 120, latest revision. The pipe shall be
manufactured from Class 12454-B rigid PVC compounds with a
hydrostatic design stress of 13.8 Mpa (2,000 psi) designated as PVC
1120. Joints shall be socket type. Fittings shall be either socket type
manufactured from Class 12454-B rigid PVC compounds in accordance
with the requirements of ASTM D-2467. Primed and solvent cement
joints shall conform to ASTM F-656 D-2564.
2. Effluent Pump Discharge Pipe Testing. This subsection is applicable to
the testing of the discharge piping from the septic effluent pumps to the
sewer lateral connection. The contractor shall conduct pressure and
leakage tests specified below to the Township's satisfaction. The
contractor shall provide the test pump, pipe connections and all
necessary tools, materials and equipment, including the proper test
§ P ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § Q
1:401
gauges to show pressure (psi) and flow (gallons per minute), required
to properly perform the testing. The hydrostatic testing equipment and
testing installation shall be satisfactory to the Township prior to testing,
and the testing shall be conducted in the presence of the Township
and to the satisfaction of the Township. Water for the testing shall be
furnished by the contractor. When the pipe to be tested is completed, it
shall be tested as follows: The pipe shall be filled by the contractor with
water a minimum of 24 hours before the pipe is tested. Extreme care
must be taken to ensure that all air is expelled from the pipe during
the filling of the pipe with water. After the pipe has been filled with
water for 24 hours, conduct the pressure test for a duration of at least
four hours. The test pressure shall be 50 pounds per square inch (psi).
A leakage test shall be conducted concurrently with the pressure test.
The contractor shall provide suitable means to measure the leakage
during the pressure test, and a record of the water added to the pipe
shall be kept for the period of the test. The leakage shall be defined as
the quantity of water that must be added to the pipe to maintain the
pressure within five psi of the specified test pressure. There shall be no
leakage during the four-hour leakage test. In case the pipe fails to pass
the specified leakage test, take corrective measures necessary to repair
the leaks and retest the pipe.
3. Septic Tank Effluent Pump Assemblies.
A. Basin. The septic tank effluent pump shall be mounted in the
twenty-four-inch diameter by eight feet zero inches deep basin
molded of fiberglass-reinforced polyester resin with smooth, resinrich
interior surface. The basin shall have a nominal wall thickness
of 1/4 inch. A one-piece stainless steel antiflotation plate shall be
molded into the bottom of the basin. A circular fiberglass
antiflotation flange molded with the walls of the basin shall also be
acceptable. The antiflotation plate shall have holes for a minimum
of four stainless steel anchor bolts for securing the plate to the
reinforced concrete base. The stainless steel anchor bolts shall
conform to ASTM A320, Grade BB, AISC Type 303 or 304.
B. Basin Cover. The basin cover shall be of three-sixteenths-inch steel
coated with high-temperature-baked epoxy paint. The cover shall
be bolted to the basin with stainless steel cap screws. Cadmiumplated
nuts for the screws shall be embedded in the fiberglass to
prevent turning and for corrosion resistance. Tapped backoff holes
shall be provided in the cover so that the cover can be lifted with
screws instead of prying. Cover shall be sealed with close-cell highdensity
neoprene foam gasket. The gasket shall be a minimum of
one inch wide by 1/4 inch thick. The gasket shall be cemented to
the basin cover.
C. Pump. The pump shall be a submersible centrifugal-type pump with
a heavy cast-iron motor housing, single vane, enclosed impeller and
stainless steel pump/motor shaft. The pump housing shall be of
high-tensile strength Class 30, ASTM A48, gray cast iron. The
§ Q LOGAN CODE § Q
1:402
casting shall be treated with phosphate and chromate rinse and
painted with high-quality dry alkyd enamel. The pump shall be
capable of handling septic tank effluent and liquids with
temperatures to 140° F. intermittent. The pump shall be capable
of passing three-fourths-inch solids. The pump shall be capable of
discharging 40 GPM against 42 TDH. The pump shall be Model P50
effluent pump as manufactured by F.E. Myers, or approved equal.
The pump discharge fittings shall be of one-and-one-half-inch NPT.
The pump shall be capable of running dry without damage to
components. The pump motor shall of 1/2 HP (minimum), 115/
230 volt, single-phase, 60 Hz, 3,450 RPM. The motor shall be
capable of operating over the full range of the performance curve
without overloading the motor or causing any objectionable noise
or vibration. The motor shall be fully submerged in high-grade
turbine oil, have permanently lubricated heavy-duty bearings
(minimum B-10 life of 50,000), and double-tandem seal
configuration. The common motor pump shaft shall be 416 stainless
steel and shall be heat shrunk into the die-cast motor rotor. The
impeller wear ring shall be Type 304 stainless steel. The
replaceable volute sealing ring shall be Buna-N. The top shaft seal
shall have carbon and ceramic seal faces, and the bottom shaft
seal shall have tungsten carbide faces. All external hardware shall
be Type 304 stainless steel. The motor power cord shall be SJOW/
SOWA. The cable jacket shall be sealed at the motor entrance by
means of a rubber compression washer and compression nut. A
heat-shrunk tube filled with epoxy shall seal the outer cable jacket
and individual leads to prevent liquid from entering the motor
housing. The permanent split-capacitor motor shall have a builtin
on-winding current, and thermal (stops the motor if the motor
winding temperature reaches 266° F.) overload protectors with
automatic reset switch shall be provided for the motor. Seal leak
detector probes to detect water leakage in the seal housing shall
be provided.
D. Stainless Steel Lift Chain. The pump shall be equipped with a
stainless steel lifting chain. The chain shall fasten to the pump
assembly by means of a stainless steel clevis. The cabin shall also
be secured to the top of the basin. The chain shall be of the weldedlink
type and shall be a minimum of 1/4 inch.
E. Pump Discharge Piping. The discharge piping shall be two-inch
Schedule 80 PVC pipe. A union ball valve (see Subsection 3F below)
shall be provided to connect the pump discharge piping to the
pressure lateral pipe.
F. Shutoff Valve. A PVC true union ball-type shutoff valve
manufactured from PVC Class 1245B conforming to ASTM D1784
with Vitron O-ring seals and self-lubricating teflon seats shall be
furnished and installed in the discharge piping.
§ Q ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § Q
1:403
G. Check Valve. A PVC double union ball-type check valve
manufactured from PVC Class 1245AB conforming to ASTM D1784
with Vitron O-ring seals shall be furnished and installed in the
discharge piping.
H. Basin Inlet Flange. A basin inlet flange for four-inch Schedule 40
PVC pipe shall be provided for field mounting. The flange shall be
mounted in the field at inlet height required by the specific
installation.
I. Basin Inlet Pipe. The polyvinyl chloride (PVC) basin inlet pipe shall
be ASTM D1785, Schedule 40 manufactured from Class 12454-B
rigid PVC compounds designated PVC 1120.
J. Basin Discharge and Electrical Conduit Connections. These
connections shall be made watertight flanges and adapter
furnished by the basin manufacturer as required for the type and
size of pipe.
K. Liquid Level Controls. Provide three mercury-type float switches to
control pump operations at the levels indicated on the drawings. A
PVC float pole shall also be acceptable. Switches shall be
waterproof design with mercury switch and eccentric weight
housed in a smooth, chemical-resistant polypropylene casing.
Provide sufficient heavy neoprene jacketed, waterproof cables and
stainless steel mounting bracket to install the switches at the
elevations shown. Cable attachments shall permit adjustment of
the float level.
L. Junction Box. The junction box shall be constructed of fiberglass.
The junction box shall have a fully gasket cover held in place by
four captive stainless steel screws that cannot be removed from the
cover, with heads totally encapsulated in PVC so that no metal parts
are exposed. The cover shall be fastened to the main body of the
junction box by means of a totally corrosion-resistant tether to
prevent dropping the cover into the basin. The junction box shall be
designed to NEMA 6 standards for occasional submergence. An
adequate number of plug-in connectors shall be provided for
incoming pump cord and level control switches. Waterproof male
plugs shall be supplied on the pump power cord and control cord
and the cords for the level control switches and soul mate to a
female socket mounted in the junction box. The plugs and cords
shall be of the proper size to handle the voltage and current
requirements of the pump level switches. The plug and receptacle
shall fit like a cork into the flexible shroud portion of the male. In
addition, individual neoprene shoulders around the contacts shall
fit into recesses in the female section. The cable shall be neoprene
molded, one-piece design, and the connectors shall have threaded
coupling for positive tight connections and quick release. The
mating connectors shall have an indexing tab to ensure proper
alignment.
§ Q LOGAN CODE § Q
1:404
M. Warranty. The pump manufacturer shall provide a warranty which
guarantees the pumps to be free from defects in material and
factory workmanship for a period of two years from the date of
acceptance by the owner. All repairs, parts and parts replacement
required as a result of such defects shall be made by the pump
manufacturer free of charge to the owner, including all shipping
and handling costs, during the warranty period.
4. Pump Control System.
A. Manufacturer. The control panels described herein shall be
manufactured by EG Pump Controls, Inc., or approved equal.
(Manufacturer's representative: John P. Place, Inc., 90 Clairton
Boulevard, Pittsburgh, PA 15236, telephone: 412-892-2000).
B. General. The simplex pump control panel shall be of the floatcontrolled
type. The factory assembled system shall include:
(1) NEMA 4X fiberglass enclosure.
(2) Intrinsically safe controller.
(3) Alarms and sensors as specified herein.
(4) Two-year warranty on all components.
C. Control System Operation. The control system shall provide
automatic control for one electric-driven pump specified under § C
herein. The control panel shall be built to accept 230 volts, singlephase,
three-wire services. The necessary three float switches shall
be supplied and installed by the pump supplier.
(1) The pump basin liquid level shall be monitored and controlled
as follows:
(a) Level 3: high-level alarm.
(b) Level 2: start pump on rising level.
(c) Level 1: stop pump on falling level.
(2) Based upon the liquid level, the float switches shall energize
the appropriate control contacts to start and stop the pump
and to energize an audible and visual alarm.
D. Enclosure. All control elements shall be housed in an enclosure
rated per NEMA 4X standards and suitable for outdoor installation.
The enclosure shall be manufactured corrosion-resistant fiberglass
and have provisions for padlocking. All hardware, including the
hinges, latches and padlock provisions shall be stainless steel. The
enclosure shall have a removable subpanel fabricated from Type
5052-H32, 0.080-thick, marine alloy aluminum. The enclosure shall
have a continuous piano-hinged door (deadfront) fabricated from
Type 5052-H32, 0.080-thick, marine alloy aluminum. The inner
§ Q ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § Q
1:405
door shall be held closed by two hand-operated one-fourth-inch
turn fasteners. All mounting holes shall be drilled and tapped. Selftapping
metal screws shall not be used to mount any components.
All bolts, nuts, washers, lock washers, and machine screws shall
be AISC Type 304 or 316 stainless steel. The enclosure shall have
external mounting feet to allow for wall mounting. The contractor
shall wall-mount the enclosure using AISC Type 304 and 316
stainless steel fasteners and anchors. The contractor shall provide
a padlock conforming to the requirements of Federal Specifications
FF-P-106 for each panel. All padlocks shall be keyed alike and shall
be keyed into the Logan Township master key system. Six keys shall
be provided.
E. Logic Controls. The simplex logic control shall consist of an
intrinsically safe controller mounted on the subpanel and the pilot
devices operable without opening the inner door (deadfront). The
control circuit shall be protected by a separate 15A circuit breaker.
F. Intrinsically Safe Controller. The controller shall consist of a single
solid-state module designed for ease of maintenance and
replacement, complete with diagnostic capabilities. The use of
individually mounted components will not be acceptable. The
controller shall be EG Pump Controls, Model No. SIR-24-123.
(1) The controller shall consist of:
(a) Hand-Off-Auto selector switch.
(b) Call-to-run indicating light.
(c) Float condition indicator light/test switch. Each float shall
have an indicator lamp to indicate when the control circuit
is energized and one normally open spring return test
switch to test pump operation.
(d) 16 amp @ 120 volt rated output contacts (for starters and
alarms).
(e) 100 microamp @ 5 volt float control.
(f) Artificial intelligence to detect float switch failure. Should
any float fail, the sequence of operation shall automatically
shift to the next float (i.e., if FS1 "Off float fails, then FS2
shall become the "Off" float and FS3 shall become the
"Start Pump and High Level Alarm" float).
(2) Separate metal barriers shall be supplied to completely isolate
intrinsic safe wiring from all other wiring within the control
panel enclosure.
G. Alarms. The following alarms shall be provided:
§ Q LOGAN CODE § Q
1:406
(1) Elapsed Time Meter. A nonresettable elapsed time meter shall
be mounted on the deadfront to indicate pump run time. The
elapsed time meter shall have five digits for hours, one digit for
1/10 hours, and one digit for 1/100 hours. A rotating
mechanical indicator on the front of the elapsed time meter
shall rotate to indicate that the meter is running.
(2) Seal Failure. A moisture-sensing system shall be installed and
connected to the relay logic to illuminate an amber neon
indicator on the inner door. Sensitivity shall be 60K ohms
minimum. (Moisture-sensing probes shall be supplied and
installed in the pumps by the pump manufacturer.)
(3) Pump Over-Temperature (Auto Reset). The over-temperature
sensor shall lock out the pump motor starter and illuminate a
red neon indicator on the inner door.
(4) Overload Trip. A contact on the overload relay shall be used to
illuminate a red neon indicator on the inner door indicating a
tripped condition. The circuit shall require a manual reset
push-button.
(5) Control Circuit Breaker Trip. A red neon indicator on the inner
door shall be illuminated indicating a tripped condition.
(6) High-Level Alarm Pilot Light. A full size (13/16 inch), oiltight
pilot shall be mounted on front of the enclosure door. The pilot
light shall be full voltage and shall include a closed-cell
neoprene gasket to ensure watertight integrity. The lamp and
socket shall be removable from the inside of the enclosure.
(7) Audible Alarm. A NEMA 4X encapsulated electronic horn shall
be mounted on the side of the enclosure. Audible rating of the
horn shall be a minimum of 85 decibels at two feet.
H. Silence Push-Button. A heavy-duty oiltight push-button located on
the side of the enclosure shall be provided to silence the horn
during an alarm. The alarm condition shall automatically reset
itself upon lowering of the level.
5. Power Handling.
A. Main Lugs. Main lugs of the appropriate size shall be furnished for
connecting the incoming supply power. The lugs shall be suitable
for use with aluminum or copper conductors. Pump motor circuit
breaker line side lugs shall not qualify as main lugs.
B. Ground Lugs. Ground lugs of appropriate size shall be bolted to the
subpanel. Individual lugs shall be provided for incoming power and
pump connection.
C. Motor Circuit Protection. Motor circuit protection shall be selected
in accordance with the National Electric Code and be either a
§ Q ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § Q
1:407
thermal magnetic circuit breaker or magnetic motor circuit
protector. The breaker shall be interlocked with the deadfront so
that the deadfront may not be opened with the breaker in the
ON position. Thermal magnetic breakers shall comply with Federal
Specification W-C 3 57A as Class 2 breakers. Symmetrical amperes
interrupting ratings are 10,000 amps minimum for 240-volt rated
breakers. Magnetic motor circuit protector shall have an adjustable
instantaneous trip setting. Circuit breaker toggles shall be
operated through cutouts in the inner door (deadfront). A circuit
breaker shall be installed for the control circuit in place of a fuse.
D. Motor Starters. Motor starters shall be full voltage - non reversing
(FVNR) rated for 1,000,000 full load operations minimum. Motor
starters shall have three poles, Class 10, ambient compensated
overload relays with automatic reset capability. All starters shall be
size 00 minimum.
6. General Features. The following components shall be provided:
A. Receptacle. A duplex 120 VAC GFI receptacle shall be mounted in
the enclosure.
B. Lightning/Surge Arrestor. A lightning/surge arrestor connected to
the main circuit breaker. The lightning arrestor shall meet or
exceed the requirements of ANSI/IEEE Standard C62.1-1984,
Sections 8.6.1 and 8.7.3.
C. Space Heater. A heating system shall be supplied to maintain the
interior temperature 2°-3° F. above ambient temperature to
prevent corrosion due to condensation.
D. Wiring Diagram. Each panel shall have a complete laser-screened
laminated Mylar wiring diagram (5 mil thickness minimum) placed
on the inner door. The diagram shall contain an electrical
schematic, physical component layout, and a complete bill of
materials.
E. Wiring Channel. All wiring within the enclosure shall be neatly
bundled inside a wiring channel. The channel shall have a
removable cover for ease in troubleshooting.
F. UL Label. All control panels must have the capabilities and
functions as outlined above and be assembled by a UL "ENCLOSED
INDUSTRIAL CONTROL PANEL" label within the enclosure door to
assure a high grade of quality.
G. Nameplates. All nameplates shall be weatherproof laser-screened
laminated Mylar (five mil thickness minimum), gold in color with
black letters. A nameplate shall be supplied to identify each switch,
pilot light, and all components mounted to the back panel.
Nameplates shall be attached such that all weather conditions shall
not permit peeling.
§ Q LOGAN CODE § Q
1:408
H. Testing. Each panel shall be shop-tested to assure proper operation
of every function. Test records shall be furnished to the Engineer
prior to final approval of the control panel.
I. The control system shall include any additional devices required by
the pump manufacturer to validate the pump warranty.
J. The manufacturer of the pump controller shall warrant it to be free
from defects in materials and workmanship for two years from the
date of acceptable installation as determined by the owner.
7. Electrical Work.
A. Codes/Rules/Ordinances/Certificates.
(1) All the electrical work, materials, and methods of installation
to satisfactorily complete the contract shall comply with the
following:
(a) The National Electrical Code (NEC).
(b) The National Electric Safety Code.
(c) The Federal Occupational Safety Health Act (OSHA).
(d) Installation rules and requirements of the Pennsylvania
Electric Company.
(e) Regulations and ordinances of Logan Township.
(f) Federal and state codes and regulations applicable to the
project.
(2) All of the above-specified regulations shall be of the latest
published edition. These are hereby to be part of the contract
documents. If conflict between these written specifications and
the reference codes and regulations exist, the codes and
regulations shall take preference.
(3) The contractor shall be solely responsible for obtaining all
permits and inspections for approval and shall pay all fees for
procuring permits and certificates pertaining to the electrical
work.
(4) The contractor shall produce an inspection certificate or panel
label at the completion of the contract. This shall be done by
the prevailing authority regarding the installation and
execution of this work. All costs for this service shall be solely
borne by the contractor.
B. Tests. The tests and demonstrations shall be performed at the
completion of the work and shall show that all work and materials
for this contract are performing to their original intent and comply
with the NEC.
§ Q ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § Q
1:409
C. Intent. Should anything be omitted from either plans or
specifications, which is usual practice in first-class electrical work
and is essential or necessary for the proper completion of the
electrical work in the opinion of the Township, it shall be furnished
by the contractor as though herein definitely specified or shown on
the drawings. Should, in the contractor's opinion, the electrical
work shown or specified prevent the installation of a first-class
efficient plant or be inconsistent with such a result, he shall so
notify the Township in writing when submitting his proposal.
Electrical system layouts indicated on drawings are generally
diagrammatic, and location of equipment is approximately correct;
exact routing of conduit and locations of equipment shall be
governed by structural conditions and obstructions. This is to be
coordinated with an approval by the Township. The drawings shall
not be scaled. The right is reserved to make any reasonable change
in location of outlets and equipment prior to rough-in without
involving additional expense.
D. Materials and Equipment. The installation shown on location plan
sheets and more particularly described hereinafter shall be made
by competent, skilled mechanics using the best of new materials.
The various materials and apparatus hereinafter specified denote
the standard of quality desired and shall be adhered to unless
otherwise directed or approved by the Township. Materials and
appliances of the types for which there are Underwriters'
Laboratories standard requirements, listing and labels shall
conform to their requirements, in which case certified statements
and examination reports by a recognized independent testing
laboratory acceptable to the Engineer are required. All materials
and equipment offered under these specifications shall be limited
to products regularly produced and recommended by the
manufacturer for the service intended. The materials and
equipment shall have capacities and ratings sufficient to amply
meet the requirements of the contracts. Equipment shall be
installed in strict accordance with manufacturer's instructions for
type and capacity of each piece of equipment used. The contractor
shall obtain these instructions from the manufacturer, and these
instructions shall be considered part of these specifications. Insofar
as possible, use one type and quality.
(1) The following materials and equipment will be required for the
electrical work under the scope of this contract. Equipment
provided must be similar to the catalog cut sheets attached.
(a) 100 AMP, 12 space, rainproof load center.
(b) 100 AMP, 20 space, interior load center.
(c) 100 AMP, interior, breaker type, service disconnect.
(d) Stainless steel pedestal.
§ Q LOGAN CODE § Q
1:410
(e) Stainless steel mounting plate.
(f) 100 AMP meter socket Kilowatt-hour (KWH) meter.
(2) The following materials and equipment will be required (but
not all inclusive) for this electrical work under these contracts:
(a) 100 AMP entrance cable.
(b) 100 AMP service heads.
(c) 100 AMP, three-wire, twisted, direct burial cable two-inch.
(d) PVC, Schedule 40 conduit.
(e) Two-inch rigid steel conduit (mast).
(f) Three-fourths-inch rigid steel conduit.
(g) Three-fourths-inch coated rigid steel conduit.
(h) 10-3 OF wire to ground.
(i) No. 10 copper wire stranded.
(j) Ground rods.
(k) No. 6 copper ground wire.
(l) Single-pole circuit breakers.
(m) Double-pole circuit breakers hangers.
(n) Clamps.
(o) Connectors.
(p) Antioxidant paste fasteners.
E. Cutting and Patching. The contractor shall do all cutting, chasing,
and drilling required and necessary in connection with his work. All
such cutting, chasing, and drilling shall be done in a workmanlike
manner without disfiguring or weakening the exterior of buildings,
or any other work. The contractor shall be held responsible for any
damage or defects due to neglect or carelessness on the part of his
employees in connection with the work.
F. Underground Work. Underground work shall include all
excavating, conduits, and backfilling required under this contract.
The contractor shall be responsible for clearing all underground
service line, such as sanitary and drainage piping. All excavation,
trenching, backfilling, and compaction for electrical work shall be
as set forth in the applicable sections of the General Technical
Provisions, unless otherwise modified by this section of the
Detailed Technical Provisions. Trench excavations shall be made by
open cut to proper alignment and grade. Trenches shall be of
§ Q ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § Q
1:411
sufficient width to provide free working space on each side of the
conduit(s) to a maximum of the conduit's or conduits' width plus
12 inches. In earth excavation, the trench shall be carried to the
elevations indicated on the drawings. Where rock is encountered,
the trench shall be carried to a point six inches below the bottom
of the conduit. Conduits shall not be allowed to rest directly upon
the rock but shall be cushioned by a six-inch layer of PennDOT
2RC aggregate. Open trenches under driveways or other paved
areas the entire depth of trench shall be backfilled with PennDOT
2RC aggregate in accordance with the applicable provisions of
Section GT-33(d), "Trench Backfilling," of the General Technical
Provisions of these contract documents. Upon completion of the
backfill and construction operations, all excess soil, rocks, trash
and debris shall be removed from the site and the construction
area left neat and clean. Under no circumstances shall excavated
material remain, even temporarily, where it will interfere with
the project or other contractors' operations. Where excavation is
required in seeded areas, the seeded areas shall be graded to
match the existing grade and reseeded as specified herein.
G. Conduit. All conduits shall be installed in accordance with
applicable provisions of the NEC, using approved fittings and
couplings and as specified herein or as shown on the drawings.
Rigid steel conduit shall be full-weight, heavy-wall, mild steel pipe
with a protective coating inside and outside by sheradizing or
galvanizing methods conforming to Federal Specifications WWC-
581. Rigid steel conduit installed underground shall be coated
with two coats of bitumastic paint. Rigid PVC conduit shall be highimpact,
Schedule 40 (except where required by NEC to use
Schedule 80) PVC conduit and fittings conforming to NEMA.
Specifications TC-2, 90C, UL-rated and labeled and made from
compounds conforming to ASTM D1784. PVC conduit shall have
material strengths of 5m500 psi tensile, 11,000 psi flexural and
8,600 psi compression; all at 78° F. In all instances, couplings and
outlet connectors shall be made tight. Bends in rigid galvanized
steel conduit shall be made only with approved mechanical
benders. Fittings shall be constructed of the same material as the
conduit to which they are attached and shall comply with the
requirements of the National Electrical Code, Article 370, for
materials and uses in conduit systems and Federal Specification WJ-
800C. No set-screw or indented-type connectors or couplings will
be permitted on the contract. All conduit shall be run as straight
and direct as possible to reduce the number of bends. Conduit shall
be installed in such a manner that wire may be removed and
replaced at any later date. Running threads will not be permitted.
Approved threaded couplings shall be used. All couplings shall be
pulled up tight and made waterproof in such a manner as to not
interrupt the electrical bond.
§ Q LOGAN CODE § Q
1:412
H. Installation of Wire. All wiring shall be installed in accordance with
the applicable provisions of the NEC and specified herein or shown
on the drawings. Conductor sizes shall be in accordance with sizes
shown on the drawings. Conductor sizes shall not be less than No.
12 AWG for branch circuits whose total length from panel to center
outlet exceeds 100 feet, including switch leg. Conductors shall be
continuous from outlet to outlet, and no splices or joints shall be
made except in outlet boxes. Conductors for secondary distribution
circuits for installation in raceways shall be high-conductivity
copper metal, 600 volts with thermoplastic insulation of heatresistant
grade, Type THW or TBHN. All wiring shall be installed in
rigid galvanized steel or PVC conduit, as indicated otherwise on the
drawings and specified herein. Aboveground conduit runs shall be
surface-mounted as specified on the drawings. Make taps and
splices in wire No. 8 and smaller mechanically tight by using
Western Union or pigtail splice. Splices may be made with coppersleeve-
type solderless connectors such as manufactured by
Buchanan Electrical Products Co., Scotch-Lok or equal. The
pressure tool shall take three or more indentions in the solderless
connector, and the solderless connector shall be insulated with a
vinolite insulating cap. Make taps and splices in wire No. 6 and
larger by means of brass or copper pressure connectors applied
after wire has been cleaned; make tight and fully insulate as
specified in these Specifications. Use parallel taps where necessary
to conserve space. The sizes of wire specified herein or as shown on
the drawings are the minimum that will be acceptable. Wire and
cable shall be as follows: building wire - No. 12 AWG through No.
750 MCM AWG - 600 volt - Type THW or THEN thermoplastic
insulation. Wiring in the pump basin must be UL-approved to meet
the requirements for use in Class I, Group D, Division 1, locations
as defined in Article 500, "Hazardous Locations," of the National
Electrical Code.
I. Grounding. All conduit, motors, and equipment installed under this
contract shall be properly bonded and grounded. Method and size
of ground wire shall be installed in accordance with the NEC, latest
edition, and the National Fire Protection Association. A bonding
jumper shall connect the grounding terminal of all receptacles to
the grounded box. Bonding jumpers shall be of copper or other
corrosion-resistant materials and shall be of sufficient size to have
a current-carrying capacity not less than is required in Table
250-95 of the NEC. The jumper shall be connected to the grounded
box by means of a grounding screw which shall be used for no other
purpose. All grounding wire shall be green color coded and may be
run in the same conduit or raceway as phase and neutral wires.
Neutral wiring systems will not be used for the purpose of
grounding. No ground wire may be less than No. 12 AWG wire and
shall conform to the capacity as set forth by NEC, as specified
above. The entire system shall be grounded by means of a
§ Q ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § Q
1:413
connection between the system and a driven ground rod system on
the exterior of the building in the earth.
J. Disconnects. Switches shall be heavy-duty, enclosed, nonfusible
switches with NEMA 3R weatherproof enclosure. All current
carrying parts shall be plated with a suitable material such as silver
to prevent corrosion and oxidation. Switches shall be rated 250 or
600 volts, AC, as indicated on the drawings. Switches shall be I-T-E,
Square "D" or approved equal. Provide ground lugs in all switches.
K. Wire Identification. Factory color code all wires per the schedule
below. Identify wires by the actual circuit number of all important
junction boxes. Wiring shall be one-phase as indicated on the
drawings.
Wire 120/208 or 120/240
Neutral White
Phrase "A" Black
Phase "B" Red
Phase "C" Blue
Ground Green
8. Electrical Service.
A. The contractor shall provide and install a complete electrical
service for each pumping installation as detailed on the contract
drawings.
B. In general, this service shall include:
(1) A complete 120/240 volt, one-phase, three-wire underground
service.
C. Provide all necessary accessories and appurtenances for a
complete and operational system as herein specified and as shown
on the drawings.
D. The contractor shall install the electrical service to the pump
control system from the property owner's existing panelboard and
provide all necessary accessories and appurtenances and pay all
costs involved. The contractor shall coordinate and schedule his
work with the property owner to reduce disruption of the property
owner's activities. Any damage to private property of the property
owner shall be corrected by the contractor, at the contractor's sole
expense, to the satisfaction of the property owner and the owner.
E. If 100 amp minimum capacity is not existing, the contractor shall
upgrade existing service to meet 100 amp minimum requirement.
The contractor shall verify the new complete service entrance with
the utility company to assure that it complies with their
requirements and make changes as necessary.
§ Q LOGAN CODE § R
1:414
§ R. Clanking Manhole/Cleanout Covers.
All manhole/cleanout covers and frames shall fit properly to prevent
"clanking." "Clanking manhole/cleanout covers shall be machined to
produce a proper fit, or "clanking" manhole/cleanout covers shall be
removed.
§ S. Concrete and Reinforcing Steel.
§ T. Epoxy Cement Grout.
1. Unless otherwise noted on the contract drawings, all concrete used
shall be PennDOT Class A concrete (6.00 bags/cubic yard). There will be
no admixtures allowed unless approved by the Township Engineer. The
concrete shall be in accordance with all applicable provisions of
PennDOT Publication Form 408 Specifications, latest edition. All
references to "concrete" on the contract drawings and in these
Specifications and contract documents shall mean "cement concrete."
Where "bituminous concrete" is specified or meant, it shall be noted
"bituminous concrete."
2. All reinforcing steel shall be deformed as defined in ASTM
Specifications. All reinforcing steel, unless noted on the contract
drawings, shall be Grade 60 as defined in the American Society for
Testing and Materials, "Specifications for Steel Bars of Concrete
Reinforcement" (ASTM A615, A616, or A617). Bar and rod mats for
concrete reinforcement shall conform to specifications for "Fabricated
Steel Bar or Rod Mats for Concrete Reinforcement" (ASTM A184).
1. The epoxy cement grout shall be a moisture-insensitive, solvent-free,
high-solids, high-modulus, epoxy-resin grout formulated of epoxy
component and selected silica aggregate in a preproportioned package.
The grout properties shall be as follows;
A. Compressive strength, ASTM D695: minimum 12,000 psi in 28 days
at 73° F. ambient and material temperature.
B. Flexural strength, ASTM D970: minimum 3,800 psi in 28 days at
73° F., ambient strength and material temperature.
C. Tensile, shear strength, ASTM D638: minimum 1,500 psi in 28 days
at 73° F., ambient and material temperature.
D. Acceptable manufacturers:
(1) Sika Corporation: Sikadur Grout-Pak;
(2) The Euclid Chemical Company: Poly-Patch;
(3) Or equal.
2. Surfaces to receive the grout shall be prepared in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. The epoxy cement grout shall be mixed in
§ R ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § T
1:415
§ U. Wye Connections and Service Laterals.
§ V. Sewer Pipe Cleanouts.
Cleanouts shall be constructed as detailed on the contract drawings. The
pipe shall be as specified herein. Concrete shall be as specified herein.
The client frames shall be an Allegheny Foundry Company Pattern 345, or
approved equal, having ten-and-one-half-inch openings. The cleanout covers
shall be Allegheny Foundry Company Pattern No. 346, or approved equal,
marked "SEWER." The frame shall be secured to the concrete encasement,
as detailed on the drawings.
§ W. Restoration of Disturbed Areas.
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions for preconditioning
and two-component mixing. Place the grout in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
1. Wye connections and service laterals shall be provided for each house
and building and at vacant lots as directed by the Township. The
location of the wye connections and the service laterals will be
determined by the Township. Laterals shall run from the wye
connection to the right-of-way line or property line as shown on the
drawings and as directed in the field by the Township. Where directed
by the Township, a drop-type service lateral shall conform to the
applicable details on the drawings. Pipe caps shall be installed at the
ends of all laterals. All lateral end points shall be designated by using a
wooden post no less than two inches by four inches and shall extend
from the lateral stub to two feet above the ground surface. Each
marking post shall clearly indicate the depth to the lateral stub.
2. Wye connections, service laterals, fittings and caps shall be PVC pipe
conforming to ASTM D3034, SDR 35, as specified therein.
3. Wye connections must be installed CONCURRENT with the installation
of the sanitary sewer pipe. Under no circumstances will the contractor
be permitted to install the wye connections subsequent to sanitary
sewer pipe installation.
1. Materials and Method of Construction. All materials and methods of
construction for restoration of disturbed areas shall comply with the
applicable sections of PennDOT Publication 408 Specifications, latest
edition.
A. Section 305: Bituminous Concrete Base Course.
B. Section 350: Subbase.
C. Section 401: Plant Mixed Bituminous Concrete Base.
D. Section 420: Bituminous Wearing Course ID-2 and Bituminous
Wearing Course ID-2, RPS.
§ T LOGAN CODE § W
1:416
E. Section 421: Bituminous Binder Course ID-2 and Bituminous
Binder Course ID-2, RPS.
F. Section 460: Bituminous Tack Coat.
G. Section 491: Milling of Bituminous Pavement Surface.
H. Section 630: Plain Cement Concrete Club.
I. Section 641: Plain Cement Concrete Curb Gutter.
J. Section 653: Paved Should, Type 3.
K. Section 703.3: Select Granular Material.
L. Section 802: Topsoil Furnished and Placed.
M. Section 804: Seeding and Soil Supplements.
N. Section 805: Mulching.
O. Section 806: Water Course Erosion Protection.
P. Section 962: Painting Traffic Lines and Markings.
2. Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Roadways. Repaving of
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) roadways shall
be as specified herein and as shown on the contract drawings.
A. On all PennDOT roadways, the upper 1 1/2 inches of existing
pavement shall be milled in preparation for the overlay pavement
in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408 Specifications,
Section 491.
B. Prior to placement of the overlay pavement, condition the milled
surface in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408
Specifications, Section 401.3(f).
C. Patch existing pavement to the satisfaction of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
D. Repair or replace, to the satisfaction of the utility owner, utility
facilities damaged by the milling operation.
E. Prior to placing the finished pavement, paint the inside faces of
existing curbs and curb and gutter sections with a thin application
of asphaltic compound to provide a closely bonded watertight joint.
F. Remove all surplus material to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer and PennDOT.
3. Logan Township and City of Altoona Roadways. Repaving of Logan
Township (and City of Altoona) streets will require conforming to the
standards and specifications of each entity that are in effect at the time
§ W ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § W
1:417
of construction and do not necessarily follow what roadway material is
excavated from the construction area.
4. Stabilized Areas. Restoration of stabilized areas shall be completed as
detailed on the drawings and as set forth in the contract documents.
The contractor is to understand that since the pipe trenches under
stabilized areas will be backfilled with PennDOT 2RC select granular
material, there will be no payment for restoration of stabilized areas.
Contractor shall grade, shape and compact the full width of the
stabilized roadway and all other stabilized areas.
5. Ninety-Day Temporary Pavement Restoration. Refer to drawings for
requirements for ninety-day temporary pavement restoration on
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation roadways.
6. Prior to placing the bituminous concrete overlay pavement, apply a
bituminous tack coat consisting of a thin application of emulsified
asphalt at such rate and in such manner as set forth in PennDOT
Publication 408 Specifications, Section 460.
7. The contractor shall adjust existing shoulders, driveways, street
approaches, accesses, businesses, parking areas, etc., to conform to the
finished pavement elevation. This work will be considered incidental to
the placement of the bituminous wearing course and will not be paid for
separately.
8. Restoration of driveways, street approaches, sidewalks, parking areas,
curbs, curb gutters, etc., shall be replaced "IN KIND," in accordance
with PennDOT Standards or as detailed on the drawings and in the
contract documents. As a minimum, concrete pavement restoration
shall be six inches thick with six by 6 4/4 welded wire fabric reinforcing,
and bituminous concrete pavement restoration shall be four inches
thick, after proper compaction, PennDOT bituminous concrete base
course with a one-inch-thick, after proper compaction, PennDOT
bituminous wearing course ID-2, SRL-L. Cement concrete curb and
cement concrete curb gutter shall be replaced to the same shame,
thickness, workmanship and finish as the original curb or curb gutter
unless otherwise required by the Township.
9. All pipe trenches under bituminous concrete surfaces and stabilized
surfaces shall be backfilled with PennDOT 2RC select granular
material. The contractor is to understand that payment for this backfill
material will not be made directly but will be considered incidental and
subsidiary obligations to the other pay items as set forth in the contract
form of proposal.
10. Prior to the placement of the permanent pavement, the existing
pavement must be concrete saw cut in a neat, straight line, to the
bottom elevation of the existing base course, one foot on each side of
the trench removed, or the existing pavement shall be removed to the
edge of the existing pavement, if so directed by the Township Engineer.
No separate payment will be made under this project for removing
§ W LOGAN CODE § W
1:418
§ X. Connections to Existing Sewage Collection Facilities.
The contractor shall be required to make the connections between existing
sewer laterals, sewer mains and manholes owned by the Township or any
other municipal entity. The construction of each connection shall be
completed in strict conformance with the drawings and the requirements
of the applicable public entity. The contractor shall furnish all pipe, fittings,
couplings, adapters and other materials necessary to make the connections.
The contractor shall take all necessary precautions and provide the
necessary plant, labor, materials, and equipment to prevent interruption of
the flow in the existing sewers. The contractor shall be responsible for and
shall correct, to the satisfaction of the public entity and the owner, any
and all damages to the existing manhole sewage treatment plant and sewer
lines caused by the contractor's operations. All pipe and fittings shall be as
specified herein for sanitary sewer pipe and laterals.
existing pavement. The contractor must adjust all necessary storm
inlets of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Township of
Logan and City of Altoona and shall be responsible to coordinate (and
bear the cost of, if required) the adjustment of all private and public
utilities (valve boxes, curb boxes, manhole covers and cleaned covers)
to conform to the finished pavement elevation. No separate payment
will be made under this project for adjusting the height of storm inlets
and utility boxes.
11. All joints between the new pavement and existing pavement, between
curbs (curb gutters) and new pavement and around storm inlets, valve
boxes, curb boxes, manhole covers and cleaned covers shall be sealed
with a hot bituminous material of the class and type designated for the
wearing course. The hot bituminous material shall have a minimum
width of 12 inches at the joints and shall extend 12 inches from the curb
(curb gutters), storm inlets, valve boxes, curb boxes, manhole covers
and cleanout covers. Prior to sealing, clean and free harmful material
from the area to be sealed.
12. The contractor shall perform temporary restoration of trenched areas
immediately upon satisfactory completion of laying and backfilling of
the sewer pipe in order to return all roadways to a condition that will
permit safe, free and unobstructed movement of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic. Failure of the contractor to comply with this
requirement will constitute sufficient cause of the Township to order an
immediate stoppage of all construction work until trench restoration
requirements are completed to the satisfaction of the Township.
13. Dust Control. The contractor shall provide effective dust control during
the entire project. Dust control shall be accomplished by the use of
water or calcium chloride or by other methods approved by the
Township.
§ W ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § Y
1:419
§ Y. Water Meter Installation.
When required by Chapter 18 of the Logan Township Code of Ordinances,
the installation of a water meter upon the portable water sources must meet
the Altoona Water Authority Specifications as amended from time to time.
§ Z. As-Built Drawings.
Prior to final acceptance of any sanitary sewer extension by the Township,
the developer shall furnish to the Township "as-built plans" showing the
angle and distance between manholes, the top and invert elevation of each
manhole and the exact location of all sewer lateral connections relative to
the nearest manhole both downstream and upstream, including the depth
at lateral end.
§ Y LOGAN CODE § Z
1:420
Chapter 19
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 19, Signs and Billboards, adopted by Ord. 06-28-07, as
amended, was repealed by Ord. 10-24-13. For current provisions, see
Ch. 27, Part 16.]
Chapter 20
SOLID WASTE
§ Z ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § Z
1:421

Part 1
REGULATING THE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE
ARTICLE A.
Title, Purpose and Definitions.
§ 101. Title. [Ord. 12-27-90]
This Part shall be known as the "Solid Waste and Recyclables Storage,
Collection, Disposal and Processing Ordinance."
§ 102. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. 12-27-90; Ord. 12-22-94]
§ 103. through § 110. (Reserved) [Ord. 12-27-90; as amended by
Ord. 12-02-93B; by Ord. 12-22-94; and by Ord. 04-24-08C]
1. It is the intent and purpose of this Part to promote the public health,
safety and welfare, and to eliminate public health hazards,
environmental pollution, and economic loss by providing that all
residential, commercial, and industrial refuse accumulated or stored
upon any property within the Township shall be collected and removed
by a responsible person or hauler who shall be licensed with the
Township, and shall be disposed in an area authorized by and approved
by the Township in accordance with all State, Federal and local laws
and ordinances.
2. It is also the intent and purpose of this Part to promote the public
health, safety and welfare, and to eliminate public health hazards,
environmental pollution, and economic loss by providing that all
material separated and stored for recycling at any residential,
commercial, institutional or municipal establishment in accordance
with the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act
(Act 101) and local ordinances and regulations shall be collected and
removed by a responsible person or licensed hauler who shall be
approved by the Township and shall be delivered to a recycling
processing center authorized and approved by Township for processing
and marketing in accordance with all State, Federal and local laws and
ordinances.
1. For the purpose of interpreting the provisions of this Part, the following
words shall have the meaning or meanings ascribed:
ASHES — Residue from the burning of coal, coke, or other combustible
material.
BULKY WASTE — Municipal waste which is too large and/or heavy to
be placed in standard thirty-gallon garbage (municipal waste) bags and/
or garbage (municipal waste) receptacles including, but not limited to,
appliances, furniture and large auto parts.
CARTWAY — Paved area of a street, alley, road, avenue, etc.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:423
CONSTRUCTION AND/OR DEMOLITION WASTE — Solid waste (as
defined in Act 101) resulting from the construction and/or demolition
of buildings and other structures including, but not limited to, wood,
plaster, metals, asphaltic substances, brick, block and unsegregated
concrete. The term also includes dredging waste. For the purposes of
this Part, the term "municipal waste" shall not include "construction
and demolition waste" and regulation of collection including, but not
limited to, licensing for collection, of construction and demolition waste
shall be the responsibility of the Blair County Solid Waste Authority. The
term does not include the following, however, if the same are separate
from other waste and are used as "clean fill" (e.g., materials used to
level uneven areas of real estate):
DISPOSAL — Storage, collection, disposal, or handling or garbage,
municipal waste, and other refuse material.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal, fish, foul, fruit or vegetable waste
incident to and resulting from the use, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
HAULER — A person who collects, transports, and/or disposes of
municipal waste other refuse material, and/or recyclables from
residential, commercial and/or industrial establishments.
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
Uncontaminated: Soil; rock; stone; gravel; unused bricks; blocks;
and/or concrete.
A.
Waste from land clearing, grubbing and excavation, including
trees, brush, stumps and vegetative material.
B.
Any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or other wastewater
treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or air
pollution control facility and other discarded material, including
solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contain gaseous material resulting from
municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional, mining or
agricultural operations and from community activities or any
combination of the above, does not include solid or dissolved
material and domestic sewage or solid or dissolved materials in
irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are point
sources subject to permits under Section 402 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, as amended (86 Stat. 880), or source, special
nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the U.S. Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923), which, because
of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical, or infectious
characteristics may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality
or an increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total
population;
(1)
A.
§ 103 LOGAN CODE § 103
1:424
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Logan.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community
activities (including, but not limited to, festivals). The term does not
include source separated recyclable materials.
NUISANCE — Any condition, structure, or improvement which shall
constitute a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the
Township.
OCCUPANT — Person generally in possession and control of any
residential, commercial, institutional or industrial establishment.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, firm or corporation.
Person also includes a lessee as well as an owner of a residential
establishment, and includes a person, association, firm or corporation
which owns a residence or business.
RECYCLABLES — Materials generated by a person which can be
separated from municipal waste and returned to commerce to be
reused as a resource in the development of useful products.
Recyclables include the following: newsprint, aluminum cans,
bimetallic cans, clear and/or colored glass, plastic beverage containers,
high grade office paper, corrugated paper, leaf waste and such other
materials as may be designated or deleted from time to time by
resolution.
RECYCLING PROCESSING CENTER — A facility that receives, sorts,
separates, prepares, and markets collected recyclables.
REFUSE — Any material other than residual waste, municipal waste,
hazardous waste and/or recyclables.
RESIDUAL (WASTE) — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material
or other waste including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations
and any sludge that is not otherwise hazardous from an industrial,
mining or agricultural water supply treatment facility, wastewater
treatment facility or air pollution control facility, or agricultural water
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
(2)
The term "hazardous waste" shall not include coal refuse, as
defined in the Act of September 24, 1968 (P.L. 1040, No. 318),
known as the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act. "Hazardous waste"
shall not include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage
treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to
and in compliance with a valid permit issued pursuant to the Act of
June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as the "Clean Streams
Law."
B.
§ 103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:425
supply treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution
control facility, or recycling processing center, provided that it is not
hazardous. The term "residual waste" shall not include coal refuse,
as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act." Residual waste
shall not include treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment
plants, disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to and in
compliance with a valid permit issued pursuant to the Clean Streams
Law.
SPECIAL RECYCLABLES — Recyclables other than those recyclables
mandated herein to be collected at the curb side, that are marketable
as scrap, recyclable or reusable such as angle and cast iron, copper,
etc.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Logan, Blair County, Pennsylvania.
WASTE DUMPSTER AND/OR WASTE CONTAINER — Any nonmotorized
and/or non-propelled receptacle designed to hold and/or
receive municipal waste and/or other refuse material, capable of being
lowered and lifted by motor vehicle or truck for the purpose of
municipal waste and/or other refuse material collection.
2. In this Part, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
3. Other words not defined herein shall have the meaning set forth in the
Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act (Act
101), the Collection and Recycling Waste Ordinance [Chapter 20 Part
2A], § 223 of the Recycling Ordinance Guidelines [Chapter 20 Part 2B],
promulgated pursuant to the Collection and Recycling Waste
Ordinance, and any other applicable ordinance or regulation of the
Township.
§ 103 LOGAN CODE § 103
1:426
ARTICLE B.
Hauler Requirements.
§ 111. (Reserved) [Ord. 12-27-90; as amended by Ord. 12-02-93B;
by Ord. 4-15-93; and by Ord. 04-24-08C]
§ 112. Collection of Recyclables Required. [Ord. 12-27-90; as
amended by Ord. 1-18-96; and by Ord. 04-24-08C]
§ 113. through § 116. (Reserved) [Ord. 04-24-08C]
§ 117. Collection Vehicles; Specification and Condition. [Ord.
12-27-90; as amended by Ord. 12-19-91; by Ord. 12-02-93B; and by
Ord. 04-24-08C]
1. Except as provided in § 112(2) of this Part or as may be provided by any
other ordinance or regulation of the Township, any person who collects
municipal waste and/or other refuse material generated from any
establishment in the Township unless said person shall also collect the
recyclables generated from such establishments in accordance with
this Part and all other applicable ordinances and regulations of the
Township. In the event a commercial, municipal, and/or institutional
establishment is having recyclables generated therein collected by a
person pursuant to § 112(2) hereof, then the hauler collecting municipal
waste and/or other refuse from such commercial, municipal, and/or
institutional establishments shall not be required to collect the
recyclables from those said establishments.
2. A person may collect only recyclables generated from commercial,
municipal, and/or institutional establishments located in the Township
and said person (hereinafter "Recycler") shall not be required to collect
the municipal waste and/or other refuse material generated from said
establishments. The Recycler shall, however, be required to collect all
recyclables generated from said establishments regardless of the value
of such recyclables except when the persons owning, operating, and/or
occupying such commercial, municipal, and/or institutional
establishments under this § 112(2) have a written contract executed
with another person pursuant to this Part to collect and transport those
recyclables not collected by the Recycler under this § 112(2). Any
person collecting recyclables pursuant to this § 112(2) shall register on
or before January 30 of each year with the Township and/or its
designated agent and shall comply with all provisions of this Part
including but not limited to reporting the volume of recyclables
collected and any and all other applicable ordinances and/or
regulations of the Township, which said section shall not be applicable
to this § 112(2). Nothing herein shall be construed to relieve the
persons owning, operating, and/or occupying commercial, municipal,
and/or institutional establishments from complying with all
requirements under this Part including but not limited to § 222.3.D. of
the Recycling Guidelines promulgated by the Township.
§ 111 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 117
1:427
1. Specifications.
A. (Reserved)
B. No hauler shall operate, cause or permit to be operated any motor
vehicle or truck for collecting or disposing of municipal waste, and/
or other refuse material within the limits of Township of Logan
unless such motor vehicle or truck shall be equipped with a
fireproof and leak proof compacting compartment. Said
compacting compartment, in addition to meeting any other
specifications herein required, shall facilitate complete
containment of solid waste and be equipped with operable drain
plugs at the lowest point. Only bulky, oversized waste or
recyclables may be collected in open bed vehicles and said items
shall be secured and completely covered with a waterproof
tarpaulin.
2. No vehicle used in the collection, transportation or disposal of
municipal waste, recyclables and/or other refuse material, shall scatter
any of said material, leachate or vehicle fluids on the streets, roads,
highways, alleys or other property (private or public) in the Township of
Logan.
3. Vehicles used to collect or transport municipal waste and/or other
refuse material shall be maintained in a sanitary condition so as to
present a satisfactory outward appearance and shall meet all the
requirements of Township and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources.
4. The Township shall have the right to inspect any vehicles used to collect
or transport municipal waste, other refuse material or recyclables at
any reasonable time for the purpose of determining compliance with
this Part or any other ordinance, resolution and/or regulation of the
Township. The hauler shall correct deficiencies immediately upon
notification by the Township, and said collection vehicle shall not be
used for the purposes set forth in this Part until said deficiencies have
been corrected.
5. Each hauler shall maintain its equipment in such condition as to be able
to maintain the collection schedule.
6. Trucks and/or other vehicles used for the collecting, transporting,
disposing or removing any municipal waste, other refuse material, or
recyclables in the Township shall meet the following requirements:
A. Packers. All municipal waste, other refuse material, or any
recyclables shall be enclosed within the confines of the cargo area,
which shall be watertight.
B. Dump Trucks. If constructed with completely metal beds and
lacking additional wooden side boards, such truck shall be covered
with a waterproof tarp as set forth in § 117(1) of this Part. Dump
§ 117 LOGAN CODE § 117
1:428
§ 118. through § 120. (Reserved) [Ord. 12-22-94; as amended by
Ord. 04-24-08C]
Trucks may be used to collect only bulky oversized waste or
recyclables.
C. (Reserved)
D. (Reserved)
E. Any trucks or vehicles used for the collection and/or transporting of
recyclables within the Township shall conform to the requirements
of the Recycling Ordinance Guidelines promulgated pursuant to the
Collection and Recycling Waste Ordinance, and any other
applicable ordinance, resolution or regulation of the Township.
F. Any and all vehicles used for collection of municipal waste, other
refuse material and/or recyclables, shall be clearly marked to
identify the person which collects municipal waste, other refuse,
and/or recyclables pursuant to this or any other applicable
Township ordinance. The marking used by said person shall contain
lettering no less than six inches in height.
1. Any Waste Dumpster and/or Waste Container(s) shall, in addition to
being subject to the requirements of Subpart B, § 131, Subsection 5, be
illuminated with a warning light, light reflector, or a reflectorized
material visible to oncoming vehicles for a distance of not less than 300
feet, between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
2. Any Waste Dumpster and/or Waste Container shall be equipped with a
cover so that when not in use, material will not blow from the container,
nor will significant amounts of water accumulate in the Waste Dumpster
and/or Waste Container so as to cause leakage.
3. Liquid leachate shall not leak from any Waste Dumpster and/or Waste
Container onto any street, sidewalk, or public right-of-way.
4. Only permitted, non-recyclable municipal waste shall be placed in such
containers, in compliance with all applicable Ordinances and/or
guidelines.
5. The name of the hauler responsible for the placement, emptying or
removal of the Waste Dumpster and/or Waste Container must
prominently be displayed thereon.
6. No person shall park or place any Waste Dumpster and/or Waste
Container on any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, or right-of-way within
the Municipality, under any circumstances, other than the conditions
enumerated under Subsection 7.
7. Subsection 6 of this § 118 shall not be applicable to the temporary
parking/placement of said Waste Dumpster and/or Waste Container
upon proof of sufficient cause, to the Municipality, at which time a
§ 117 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 118
1:429
permit will be issued for a temporary period of time determined as
reasonable. The permit will not be valid unless the Waste Dumpster
and/or Waste Container meets all specifications required by this Part.
Additionally, at no time will a Waste Dumpster and/or Waste Container
be placed onto any running lane of the roadway restricting the flow of
traffic.
8. Upon official notification by the Township of violation of this Part and/or
other applicable Ordinances and/or guidelines, the hauler responsible
for the placement, emptying or removal of same or the owner of the
same shall remove said Waste Dumpster and/or Waste Container in
violation from the street, alley, highway, or sidewalk within 24 hours. If
the Waste Dumpster and/or Waste Container has not been removed, and
the hauler responsible for the placement, emptying or removal of same
or the owner of the same has not shown cause for a time extension, the
Township may, in its discretion, move or cause to be moved, at the said
hauler or owner's expense, said equipment in violation, to a suitable
facility where it may be reclaimed by the said hauler and/or owner upon
payment of costs.
9. The Waste Dumpster and/or Waste Container permit fee under this Part
shall be as established from time to time by the Municipality and shall
be in addition to all other license fees or tax required to be paid by the
Laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or the Ordinance of the
Municipality.
§ 118 LOGAN CODE § 118
1:430
ARTICLE C.
Disposal and/or Processing of Recyclables.
§ 121. through § 130. (Reserved) [Ord. 12-27-90; as amended by
Ord. 12-22-94; and by Ord. 04-24-08C]
1. The Municipality and/or its designee may, from time to time, execute
such contracts on terms and conditions as deemed advisable with not
more than six persons to enable such person and/or persons to operate
or cause to be operated a recycling processing center for the purpose of
accepting recyclables collected within the Municipality for processing
and/or disposal. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to engage
in the business of operating or causing to operate a recycling
processing center for the purpose of accepting recyclables collected
within the Municipality unless said person shall have secured a contract
with the Municipality to permit such business.
2. Nothing in this Part shall be construed as granting permission to any
person and/or persons to operate a recycling processing center outside
the corporate limits of the Municipality. Each recycling processing
center shall comply with all applicable requirements of the host
Municipality and/or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including, but
not limited to, zoning and subdivision laws.
3. In the event that any hauler has a contract or agreement existing as of
December 1990, to deliver some, but less than all, recyclables collected
in the Township to a non-approved site for recovery, said hauler shall
submit, prior to the acceptance by the approved recycling processing
center of any recyclables, a copy of said contract or agreement to the
approved recycling processing center, and in that event, the approved
recycling processing center shall accept the remaining material
delivered to it by said hauler, for an additional fee as may be set forth in
the contract between the Municipality and the approved recycling
processing center. In this event, said approved recycling processing
center shall, within five working days of receipt of said contract or
agreement, provide to the Municipality a copy of said contract or
agreement provided to said recycling processing center by the hauler.
4. Any breach of a contract by a person and/or persons executing the same
with the Municipality for the purposes of operation of a recycling
processing center shall be considered a violation of this Part and shall
subject said person and/or persons, in addition to contractual remedies,
to the penalties provided herein.
§ 121 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 121
1:431

ARTICLE D.
Collection of Municipal Waste, other Refuse Material and/or
Recyclables.
§ 131. Point of Collection. [Ord. 12-27-90; as amended by Ord.
12-02-93B; and by Ord. 04-24-08C]
§ 132. Days and Hours of Operation. [Ord. 3-2-95; as amended by
Ord. 12-27-90; by Ord. 12-02-93B; by Ord. 12-22-94; by Ord. 3-2-95;
and by Ord. 04-24-08C]
1. Municipal waste, other refuse or recyclables shall be placed at the edge
of the cartway or any other designated place for collection no sooner
than 6:00 p.m. on the day before the scheduled day for collection each
week.
2. Each hauler pursuant to this Part shall collect all municipal waste, other
refuse material and/or all recyclables that have been placed at the side
of the cartway or other designated location by its customers for
collection, except as otherwise provided in this Part or any other
ordinance, resolution or regulation of the Township.
3. Each hauler owning, leasing and/or otherwise placing or causing to be
placed any container at any type of establishment for the purpose of
placing municipal waste, other refuse material and/or recyclables
therein for later collection shall ensure that any such container is
emptied within 48 hours of the same becoming full to capacity,
regardless of whether the fee for collection of the same has been paid.
Nothing herein shall prevent the hauler from removing said haulerowned
or leased container from the establishment for nonpayment of
collection services so long as the container is emptied, with regard to
municipal waste, at a permitted landfill facility licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and, with regard to recyclables, at a
recycling center licensed by the Township.
1. Any Hauler hereunder shall not be permitted to collect, remove and/or
transport municipal waste, other refuse material or recyclables from
residential establishments and/or multi-family establishments with four
or more units on Saturdays (except as hereinafter provided) Sundays,
Thanksgiving Day, New Year's Day, and Christmas Day, and at such
other times as may be announced by the Township in situations
considered to be an emergency by the Township. If regular collection
occurs on any of such holiday, the Saturday preceding or following that
holiday may be used for collection hereunder. Additionally, in the event
a weather emergency prevents said collection as set forth in § 132,
Subsection 2, hereof, Saturdays occurring the day after such
emergency may be used for said collection. Collection shall only occur
between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Memorial Day, Independence Day,
and Labor Day so long as said days do not occur on a Saturday or
Sunday. Collection may, at the discretion of the person required to be
§ 131 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 132
1:433
licensed herein, occur on the Saturday preceding Memorial Day,
Independence Day or Labor Day. Any time and date of collection may
at any time be changed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of the
Township.
2. The collection of municipal waste, other refuse material and/or
recyclables at residential establishments and/or multi-family dwellings
having more than four units per structure, shall only occur between the
hours of 5:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any single day of collection and
shall not occur at any other time, unless otherwise provided herein or
by the Municipality. In the event the Municipality declares a weather
emergency or like situation, collection of said waste and recyclables
may continue to take place during the above-stated hours, however,
said collection, by a hauler, will be permitted to also take place between
the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. the day following the termination
of such weather emergency or like situation unless otherwise
announced by the Municipality. In the event the weather emergency or
like situation is of a severe nature, as the same shall be announced by
the Municipality, no such collection shall take place during such time
but shall be permitted to occur the day following the termination
thereof between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. unless otherwise
instructed by the Municipality. All declarations and/or announcements
by the Municipality with regard to weather emergencies or like
situations may be accomplished through print, television, radio and any
other such media deemed appropriate by the Municipality.
3. Each hauler licensed pursuant to this Part shall, for its own customers,
collect and remove any municipal waste and/or refuse material placed
for collection by occupants of residential establishments at least once
each week, except for the collection of recyclables at residential
establishments, which shall be collected as set forth in § 132(5) of this
Part.
4. Each hauler shall collect municipal waste or other refuse material from
commercial establishments at least once every week, and shall collect
said municipal waste and/or other refuse material more often if
necessary to control health hazards, or to prevent the accumulation of
municipal waste or other refuse material so as to create a nuisance,
odor, unsightly appearance, except for the collection of recyclables
from commercial establishments which shall be collected as set forth in
§ 132(6) of this Part.
5. Recyclables shall be collected from residential establishments at least
once every other week as set forth in § 223 of the Recycling Ordinance
Guidelines promulgated pursuant to the Collection and Recycling Waste
Ordinance, and any other applicable ordinance or regulation of the
Township.
6. Recyclables shall be collected from commercial establishments at least
once every other week, and shall be collected more often if necessary to
control health hazards, or to prevent the accumulation of recyclables so
§ 132 LOGAN CODE § 132
1:434
§ 133. Preparation for Collection. [Ord. 12-27-90; as amended by
Ord. 12-19-91; by Ord. 12-02-93B; and by Ord. 04-24-08C]
It shall be the duty of the owner of all residential establishments, rented
or otherwise occupied by said owner and of all establishments containing
multifamily rental housing property with four or more units and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments to contract the
services of a hauler to collect any municipal waste, other refuse material
(on at least a weekly basis) and/or recyclables (on at least a once every
two-weeks basis) resulting from the operation of any such establishment
unless said establishment, by some other means, disposes of the same
at a duly licensed municipal, waste facility, or a duly Township approved
recycling processing facility, retaining as proof thereof, at a minimum,
monthly disposal receipts from such a facility, and all such establishments
shall prepare said materials as follows:
as to create an nuisance, odor, unsightly appearance, as set forth in
§ 223 of the Recycling Ordinance Guidelines promulgated pursuant to
the Collection and Recycling Waste Ordinance, and any other applicable
ordinance or regulation of the Township.
7. All haulers, upon oral and/or written notification by persons who own
and/or occupy residential establishments, shall, within 14 days of such
notification, collect bulky waste and/or special recyclables from the
residential establishment indicated in such notification.
8. Specific times and days of the week for collection, removal and/or
transportation of municipal waste, other refuse material or recyclables
from residential establishments and/or multifamily establishments with
four or more units shall be established by resolution by the Township
and/or its approved Agent, as the same may be deemed appropriate
giving due regard to the days and times of such collection established in
other Intermunicipal Recycling Committee communities.
9. Upon establishment of specific times and days of the week for collection
as set forth in Subsection 8 of § 132 herein, any hauler hereunder may
apply to the Township and/or its designated agent for a special permit
to allow multiple collection at certain residential establishments
(multifamily or otherwise). Said hauler shall indicate on the permit
application the address of said residential establishment and name of
the occupant thereof together with the signature of the said occupant
verifying that collection is desired on not only the authorized day of
collection but also on a day(s) (naming said day(s)) when collection is
not otherwise authorized. Said application may contain such other
provisions as the Township and/or its designated agent may deem
appropriate to avoid misuse of said special permit for multiple
collection. The Township in its sole discretion may or may not approve
said application.
§ 132 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 133
1:435
§ 134. Transfer of Municipal Waste. [Ord. 12-27-90; as added by
Ord. 12-19-91; and amended by Ord. 04-24-08C]
No person shall transfer or permit the transfer of municipal waste and/
or other refuse material from one collection vehicle to another collection
vehicle in any area of the Township except as follows:
A. All municipal waste and/or material shall be drained of liquid insofar as
practical, and shall be placed in sanitary sealed bags, containers, and/
or cans made of non-absorbent material.
B. Containers used by residential establishments shall not exceed 30
gallons in size; cans shall be a rust-resistant material and shall be
furnished and kept clean by the occupant and shall be replaced by the
occupant when no longer in satisfactory condition.
C. All municipal waste which cannot be disposed of in containers shall be
assembled, boxed or bundled separately in such a way that it can be
handled conveniently and will not be disseminated by wind or otherwise
while awaiting collection.
D. All refuse except bulky waste shall be of units such as can be handled by
one person and shall be placed in containers or piled and assembled in
such a way as to facilitate collection.
E. All containers shall be kept on the resident's property until it is placed
for collection as in § 131 of this Part.
F. All recycling shall be prepared for collection as set forth in the
Recycling Ordinance Guidelines promulgated pursuant to the
Collection and Recycling Waste Ordinance, and any other applicable
ordinance, resolution or regulation of the Township.
G. Establishments containing multi-family rental housing property with
four or more units and commercial municipal and institutional
establishments shall place all municipal waste emanating from said
establishments in containers made from rust-resistant material of
sufficient size and strength to fully accommodate all such municipal
waste and of such design to prevent animals from gaining access to
such waste. Said containers kept at such establishments shall be kept
clean and be replaced when needed by the occupants, owners,
landlords and/or agents of such persons.
H. Construction and/or demolition waste must be placed in a rigid
container, roll off or solid waste vehicle, and may not be stored on the
ground, next to structures (as the same may be defined in the Township
Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27] and/or on public rights-of-ways. A
separate container must be provided for mandated recyclable materials
(including, but not limited to, corrugated cardboard).
A. When said vehicles are parked at a duly licensed transfer station; or
§ 133 LOGAN CODE § 134
1:436
§ 135. Inspection of Municipal Waste and Recyclables. [Ord.
12-27-90; as added by Ord. 12-19-91; and amended by Ord.
04-24-08C]
In order to ensure compliance with all applicable municipal ordinances,
the Township, its agents (including, but not limited to, the Blair County
Recycling Coordinator) and/or the Township's employees and/or the Blair
County Solid Waste Department employees, may conduct inspections of any
and all municipal waste, other refuse material and/or recyclables placed at
the point of collection for pickup and may inspect, at any time, any recycling
processing center approved by the Township.
§ 136. through § 140. (Reserved) [Ord. 12-27-90; as added by Ord.
12-02-93B; and amended by Ord. 04-24-08C]
All haulers must, on a form provided by the Township and/or any of its
agents and/or the Blair County Solid Waste Department, report all persons
for whom the hauler collects, whether residential, commercial, municipal
and/or institutional establishments, that fail, during the monthly reporting
period, at any and all times, to separate and prepare recyclables for
collection as set forth in the Recycling Ordinance Guidelines and/or has
had service discontinued for any reason. All haulers shall also submit the
name and address of any and all new persons for whom the hauler has been
requested to collect during the monthly reporting period. Said report shall
be completed in its entirety by the said hauler and supplied to the Blair
County Recycling Coordinator by the first day of each month.
B. When, due to terrain and/or weather conditions, the hauler's collection
vehicle, due to its size and/or tire traction, is unable to gain access to
the area (e.g., a rural or extremely hilly area of the Township) where the
said waste is placed by the hauler's customer for collection. Only solid
waste collected under these conditions may be so transferred from one
collection vehicle to another collection vehicle.
§ 134 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 136
1:437

ARTICLE E.
Miscellaneous.
§ 141. Insurance Coverage. [Ord. 12-27-90; as amended by Ord.
04-24-08C]
§ 142. (Reserved) [Ord. 04-24-08C]
§ 143. (Reserved) [Ord. 04-24-08C]
§ 144. Accumulation of Garbage Prohibited. [Ord. 12-27-90]
It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain any municipal waste or
refuse material, or other material subject to decay, including recyclables,
except yard waste that is composted in an acceptable manner, anywhere in
the Township except in a tightly covered metal or plastic container.
§ 145. Independent Contractor Status. [Ord. 12-27-90; as amended
by Ord. 04-24-08C]
All haulers shall not in any manner be construed as an agent, servant or
employee of the Township but shall at all times be considered and remain
an independent contractor. Furthermore, any and all personal and/or real
property owned, leased or controlled by any person granted a license, as set
forth herein, shall at all times be considered and remain as the sole personal
and/or real property of said person.
§ 146. Township Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 12-27-90]
The Township is hereby authorized to promulgate rules and regulations and
to issue forms as necessary to implement this Part.
§ 147. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 12-27-90; as amended by
Ord. 9-19-96; by Ord. 2-13-97; and by Ord. 04-24-08C]
1. All haulers shall carry an insurance policy providing comprehensive
liability and property damage insurance, the limits of said insurance
policy shall be not less than $300,000 for personal liability, and
$300,000 for property damage, and shall furnish proper certificate of
insurance coverage to the Township.
2. All haulers shall carry an insurance policy providing for Worker's
Compensation insurance, as required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and shall furnish proper certificate of insurance coverage
for Worker's Compensation to the Township.
1. Enforcement. In addition to the enforcing provisions of § 143 of this
Part, any police officer and/or other authorized agent and/or other
person authorized by the Board of Supervisors, including the Blair
County Solid Waste Department may enforce the provisions of this Part.
§ 141 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 147
1:439
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 147 LOGAN CODE § 147
1:440
Part 2
COLLECTION AND RECYCLING OF WASTE
ARTICLE A.
Recycling Program.
§ 201. Legislative Purpose. [Ord. 9-26-90]
§ 202. Definitions. [Ord. 9-26-90; as amended by Ord. 04-24-08D]
ALUMINUM CANS — All aluminum cans (typically used for packaging
beverages).
BIMETALLIC CANS — This item consists of ferrous or "tin cans" commonly
used in packaging food products and also those cans consisting of steel and
aluminum.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — This shall mean those properties used
primarily for commercial or industrial purposes and those multiple dwelling
residential buildings containing four or more dwelling units.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as
"cardboard," typically used for boxing material.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable waste incident
to and resulting from the use preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone,
the product may be transparent, translucent, or colored and may be used as
a container for glass, automotive glass, blue glass, leaded glass, pyrex and
porcelain and ceramic products and lids.
HAULER — A person who collects, transports and disposes of municipal
waste, recyclables (including leaf waste) from residential, commercial and/
or industrial establishments.
1. The reduction of the amount of municipal waste and conservation of
recyclable materials is an important public concern by reason of the
growing problem of municipal waste disposal and its impact on the
environment. The collection of newsprint, aluminum cans, bimetallic
cans, clear and colored glass, plastic beverage containers and leaf
wastes for recycling from homes, apartments and other residential
establishments and, in addition to these recyclables, high grade office
paper and corrugated paper from commercial and institutional
establishments in Logan Township and such other recyclables that shall
be by resolution determined to serve the general public interest, may
reduce storage, collection, transportation and disposal costs of said
waste and preserve valuable natural resources.
2. This Part has been developed to implement municipal responsibilities
under the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act (Act 101 of 1988).
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:441
HIGH GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and
in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people such as hospitals, schools, daycare centers, nursing
homes, prisons and churches.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residue, shrubbery, tree trimmings and
similar material, not including grass.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material, resulting from the operation of residential, municipal, commercial
or institutional establishments and from community activities (including,
but not limited to, festivals). The term does not include source separated
recyclable materials.
NEWSPRINT — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newspaper"
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, firm or corporation. Person
also includes a lessee as well as an owner of a residential establishment, and
includes a person, association, firm or corporation which owns a residence
or business.
PLASTIC - BEVERAGE CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage
containers. Due to the large variety of types and plastic, the recycling
guidelines may stipulate specific types of plastic which may be recycled.
RECYCLABLES — Materials generated by a person which can be separated
from municipal waste and returned to commerce to be reused as a resource
in the development of useful products. Recyclables include the following:
newsprint, aluminum cans, bimetallic cans, clear and/or colored glass,
plastic beverage containers, high grade office paper, corrugated paper, leaf
waste and such other materials as may be designated or deleted from time
to time by resolution.
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any single family or multi-family
dwelling having less than four dwelling units per structure from which the
Township of Logan collects municipal waste, recyclables and leaf waste.
§ 203. Establishment of Recycling Program/Grant of Power. [Ord.
9-26-90; as amended by Ord. 04-24-08D]
Logan Township hereby establishes a recycling program for the mandatory
separation and collection of the designated recyclables as set forth in
the guidelines promulgated pursuant to this Part from all residential,
commercial and/or institutional establishments in Logan Township.
Collection of the materials to be recycled shall be made by Logan Township
and/or its designated hauler.
§ 202 LOGAN CODE § 204
1:442
§ 204. Establishment of Collection Guidelines. [Ord. 9-26-90; as
amended by Ord. 04-24-08D]
The Board of Supervisors of Logan Township are hereby authorized and
empowered to establish guidelines by resolution regarding the manner,
days (which shall not be less than two days per month), and times of
collection of recyclable materials, and the bundling, handling, location and
time of placement of such material for collection.
§ 205. Separation and Collection. [Ord. 9-26-90; as amended by
Ord. 04-24-08D]
§ 206. Ownership of Recyclable Materials. [Ord. 9-26-90; as
amended by Ord. 1-18-96A; and by Ord. 04-24-08D]
All recyclables placed for collection by the persons owning, operating,
and/or occupying any residential, multi-family rental housing property,
1. All persons shall separate recyclables and leaf waste specified in the
guidelines promulgated pursuant to this Part from municipal waste
produced at their homes, apartments and other residential
establishments and shall store such material for collection, and shall
place the same for collection by the Township of Logan and/or the
haulers contracted by such establishment at the typical location for
collection of municipal waste in accordance with the collection
guidelines.
2. An owner, landlord, or agent of an owner or landlord of a multifamily
rental housing property with four or more units shall comply with its
recycling responsibilities by establishing a collection system for
recyclables and leaf wastes as set forth in the guidelines promulgated
pursuant to this Part at each property. The collection system must
include containers (which shall be approved by Logan Township) for
collecting and sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the
containers, and written instructions to the occupants of said property
concerning the use and availability of the collection system.
Arrangements shall be made by owner for collection of these materials
by Logan Township and/or haulers contracted by such establishment.
3. All persons must separate leaf wastes from other municipal waste
generated at their houses, apartments and other residential
establishments for collection unless those persons have otherwise
provided for composting of leaf waste as approved by the Township of
Logan.
4. Persons must separate recyclables and leaf wastes specified in the
guidelines promulgated pursuant to this Part generated at commercial,
municipal or institutional establishments and from community activities
(such as festivals) and store the material until collection. Arrangements
shall be made by persons operating commercial, municipal or
institutional establishments for collection of these materials.
§ 204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 206
1:443
commercial, municipal, and/or institutional establishments in the Township
of Logan for collection by Township of Logan and/or its hauler pursuant
to this Part and the guidelines authorized hereunder shall, from time of
collection, become the property of the Township of Logan and/or the hauler
designated by such persons owning, operating, and/or occupying, except
as otherwise provided by § 208 of this Part. Only the hauler so designated
by the persons owning, operating, and/or occupying any residential, multifamily
rental housing property, commercial, municipal, and/or institutional
establishments to collect recyclables shall have to right to collect such
recyclables once placed for collection and all other persons are hereby
prohibited from collecting such recyclables.
§ 207. Collection Prohibited. [Ord. 9-26-90; as amended by Ord.
04-24-08D]
It shall be a violation of this Part for any person other than Logan Township
and/or haulers contracted to collect recyclables placed by a resident for
collection by Logan Township and/or a hauler, unless such person has prior
written permission to make such collection as set forth in § 208 of this
Part. Each unauthorized collection in violation hereof from a residence,
commercial, municipal and/or institutional establishment shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 208. Other Means of Recycling. [Ord. 9-26-90]
Any person may donate and/or sell recyclables and/or leaf waste to any
person, whether operating for profit or not, provided that the receiving
person shall not collect such donated recyclable materials from the
collection point of a residence without the prior written permission of
Logan Township to make such collection. Every person, whether operating
for profit or not, collecting recyclables and/or leaf waste, pursuant to this
section, shall be subject to any and all reporting requirements, as to the
types and amounts of recyclables and/or leaf waste collected, as set forth in
the guidelines promulgated pursuant to this Part.
§ 209. Designated Site. [Ord. 9-26-90; as amended by Ord.
04-24-08D]
Logan Township may designate, by guidelines promulgated pursuant to this
Part, recycling recovery facilities to which all recyclable materials collected
in Logan Township shall be directed.
§ 210. Contracts. [Ord. 9-26-90; as amended by Ord. 04-24-08D]
1. General Rule. Nothing in this Part shall be construed to interfere with,
or in any way modify, the provisions of any contract for recyclable
material recovery, processing or collection in force in Logan Township
on September 26, 1990.
2. Renewals. No renewal of any existing contract upon the expiration or
termination of the original term thereof, and no new contract for
§ 206 LOGAN CODE § 210
1:444
§ 211. Annual Report. [Ord. 9-26-90]
On or before February 15 of each year, the Secretary of Logan Township
shall submit a report to the County of Blair which shall describe the weight
or volume of materials that were recycled by the municipal recycling
program in the preceding calendar year.
§ 212. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 9-26-90; as amended by Ord.
9-19-96; by Ord. 2-13-97; and by Ord. 04-24-08D]
§ 213. through § 220. (Reserved) [Ord. 9-26-90; as amended by Ord.
04-24-08D]
Recycling operations that are in existence on September 26, 1990, may
continue their operation so long as they abide by the provisions of this Part
and the guidelines promulgated pursuant to this Part.
recyclable material recovery, processing or collection shall be entered
into after the effective date of this Part, unless such renewal or such
new contract shall conform to the applicable guidelines promulgated
pursuant to this Part.
3. Renegotiation Option. No contract renewal or new contract for
recyclable material recovery, processing or collection shall be entered
into unless such contract contains a provision for renegotiation to
conform to the guidelines promulgated pursuant to this Part.
1. Any person who shall violate the provisions of § 205 and/or § 208 shall
receive an official warning of noncompliance for the first offense.
Thereafter, all such violations shall be subject to the penalties
hereinafter provided.
2. A. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other authorized agent and/
or other person authorized by the Board of Supervisors, including
but not limited to the Blair County Solid Waste Department may
enforce the provisions of this Part.
B. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution,
and/or be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Every day that a violation of this Part continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense which shall be subject to
the aforesaid penalties.
3. Logan Township and/or haulers reserves the right not to collect
municipal waste containing or mixed with recyclable materials, or
recyclable material containing or mixed with municipal waste, in
combination with non-recyclable materials.
§ 210 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 213
1:445

ARTICLE B.
Recycling Guidelines.
§ 221. Intent. [Res. 12-27-90]
The following represent guidelines, adopted pursuant to the Collection and
Recycling of Waste Ordinance (hereinafter "Part 2A") of the Township of
Logan and shall regulate the manner in which said Ordinance is to be
effectuated. Any and all words and phrases used in these guidelines shall
have the same meaning ascribed to them in the Ordinance if so defined in
said Ordinance. All other terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them
under the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act,
and if not so defined in said Act, the meaning ascribed to them in every day
usage.
§ 222. Responsibilities of Persons Required to Recycle. [Res.
12-27-90; as amended by Res. 01-10-91; by Res. 11-7-91; Res.
9-2-93; by Res. 12-22-94; by Res. 10-6-94A; by Res. 5-16-96A; and by
Res. 04-24-08]
1. Persons owning and/or occupying a residential establishment shall
perform the following duties:
A. Separate from municipal waste (trash) the following materials for
recycling:
(1) Aluminum cans.
(2) Clear and colored (brown and green) glass. Excluded are plate
glass, window glass, drinking glasses, mirror glass, automotive
glass, blue glass, leaded glass, pyrex, porcelain and ceramic
products, light bulbs, caps and lids.
(3) Bimetallic cans. These items consist of ferrous or "tin cans"
commonly used in packaging food products and also those cans
consisting of steel and aluminum, such as empty paint cans.
(4) Newspaper (including inserts), Magazines, Catalogs and
Telephone Books. It is the intent of this amendment to include
magazines and catalogs as a recyclable, that the same be
recycled and separated in the same manner as newspaper with
the words "magazine" and "catalogs" being defined in the usual
sense of the words as found in any accredited dictionary.
(5) HDPE plastic jugs (milk/spring water, detergent bottles, etc.).
(6) PET plastic beverage containers (soda and water bottles, etc).
(7) Leaf waste.
B. Prepare recyclables for collection as follows:
§ 221 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 222
1:447
(1) Thoroughly rinse all bottles and containers, and remove all
caps and lids. Place all bottles and containers, including the
empty oil bottles and containers, in a designated recycling
container.
(2) Bundle all newspaper (including inserts), magazines, catalogs
and telephone books with twine and/or place the same in kraft
bags (brown paper grocery bags), keeping magazines and
catalogs separate, and place the same on top of or beside the
recycling container for collection.
C. Place recyclables for collection on the following dates and times:
(1) Recyclables shall be placed at the location designated by
agreement between the resident and the resident's contracted
hauler, which date shall be not less than once every other week
in accordance with § 223(2)(A) of this subpart.
(2) Leaves shall be separated from general refuse for disposal by
one and/or all of the following methods: placed in kraft paper
leaf bags for collection by Township collection crews or
designated haulers; placed at the property line of a property at
the point at which said property line adjoins a public street for
vacuuming by the Township, ensuring, however, that said
leaves are not placed on any such public street and said leaves
do not cause a sight distance problem for vehicular traffic; or
residents may transport the bagged leaf waste to disposal
areas designated by the Township. Date of collection in
neighborhoods will be announced through schedules published
in a locally circulated newspaper and/or signs posted in
neighborhoods in advance of collection.
2. Persons owning, managing and/or occupying a multi-family rental
housing property with four or more units shall perform the following
duties:
A. Owners, managers and/or occupants (including, but not limited to,
lessees and sublessees) of multi-family rental housing property
with four or more units shall separate from municipal waste (trash)
for recycling the following materials:
(1) Aluminum cans.
(2) Clear and colored (brown and green) glass. Excluded are plate
glass, window glass, drinking glasses, mirror glass, automotive
glass, blue glass, leaded glass, pyrex, porcelain and ceramic
products, light bulbs, caps and lids.
(3) Bimetallic cans. These items consist of ferrous or "tin cans"
commonly used in packaging food products and also those cans
consisting of steel and aluminum, such as empty paint cans.
§ 222 LOGAN CODE § 222
1:448
(4) Newspaper (including inserts), magazines, catalogs, and
telephone books, high-grade office paper and corrugated
cardboard.
(5) HDPE plastic jugs (milk/spring water, detergent bottles, etc.).
(6) PET plastic beverage containers (soda, and water bottles, etc.).
(7) Leaf waste.
B. Prepare recyclables for collection as follows:
(1) Thoroughly rinse all bottles and containers, and remove all
caps and lids. Place all bottles and containers in a designated
recycling container/receptacle made available for use by all
occupants of said multi-family rental housing property with
four or more units by the owner and/or manager of said rental
property.
(2) Bundle all newspaper, (including inserts), magazines, catalogs
and telephone books with twine and/or place the same in kraft
bags (brown paper grocery bags), keeping magazines and
catalogs separate, and place the same on or beside the
recycling container/receptacle provided by the owner and/or
manager of said rental property for the use of all occupants of
said rental property.
C. Owners, landlords and/or agents of an owner or landlord of a multifamily
rental housing property with four or more units shall comply
with the following requirements:
(1) Provide containers/receptacles, as specified in § 224(A)(2) of
these Guidelines, in which occupants of said rental units shall
be able to place prepared recyclables. Said containers/
receptacles shall be placed in a location convenient and agreed
upon by both the occupants and the hauler servicing said
rental property.
(2) Have the recycling containers/receptacles serviced by a hauler
at regular intervals which shall not be less than once every
other week or more frequently as needed, all in accordance
with § 223(2)(B) of this subpart to prevent recyclables from
overflowing and causing an unsightly nuisance.
(3) Ensure that the recyclables are not contaminated with refuse
and/or garbage.
(4) Leaves shall be separated from general refuse for disposal by
one and/or all of the following methods: placed in kraft paper
leaf bags for collection by Township collection crews or
designated haulers; placed at the property line of a property at
the point at which said property line adjoins a public street for
vacuuming by the Township, ensuring, however, that said
§ 222 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 222
1:449
leaves are not placed on any such public street and said leaves
do not cause a sight distance problem for vehicular traffic; or
transport the bagged leaf waste to disposal areas designated
by the Township. Date of collection in neighborhoods will be
announced through schedules published in a locally circulated
newspaper and/or signs posted in neighborhoods in advance of
collection.
3. Persons owning, operating and/or occupying commercial, municipal
and/or institutional establishments and/or sponsoring community
activities (including, but not limited to, festivals) shall perform the
following duties:
A. Separate from municipal waste (trash) for recycling the following
materials:
(1) Aluminum cans.
(2) Clear and colored (brown and green) glass. Excluded are plate
glass, window glass, drinking glasses, mirror glass, automotive
glass, blue glass, leaded glass, pyrex, porcelain and ceramic
products, light bulbs, caps and lids.
(3) Bimetallic cans. These items consist of ferrous or "tin cans"
commonly used in packaging food products and also those cans
consisting of steel and aluminum, such as empty paint cans.
(4) Newspaper (including inserts), magazines, catalogs and
telephone books.
(5) HDPE #2 plastic jugs (milk/spring water, detergent bottles,
etc).
(6) PET #1 plastic beverage containers (soda and water bottles,
etc.).
(7) High-grade office paper.
(8) Corrugated cardboard.
(9) Leaf waste.
B. Prepare recyclables for collection as follows:
(1) Thoroughly rinse all bottles and containers, and remove all
caps and lids. Empty bottles and containers which had motor
oil, antifreeze, etc., stored therein shall not be rinsed but all
lids and rings shall be removed from the bottles and containers
and they shall be drained of all the substance contained
therein. Place all bottles and containers in a designated
recycling container/receptacle made available by the owner
and/or operator of said commercial, municipal and/or
institutional establishments. All empty bottles and containers
§ 222 LOGAN CODE § 222
1:450
having had therein motor oil, anti-freeze, etc., shall be kept
separate from all other recyclables to prevent contamination.
(2) Bundle all newspaper (including inserts), magazines, catalogs
and telephone books with twine and/or place the same in kraft
(brown paper grocery) bags, keeping magazines and catalogs
separate, and place the same in a receptacle as described in
Subsection 3 hereinbelow, separate and apart from the
recycling container/receptacle made available for the other
recyclables required to be recycled.
(3) High-grade office papers and corrugated paper shall be
prepared in a manner consistent with the collection needs of
the hauler responsible for collecting the said material. Highgrade
office papers and newspaper shall be placed for
collection in receptacles labeled "newspaper and/or recyclable
paper" in order to prevent contamination and to insure the said
paper is kept dry.
C. Owners and/or operators of commercial, municipal and/or
institutional establishments shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) All recyclables, after proper preparation, shall be placed in a
separate marked receptacle for recyclables only which shall be
placed in a convenient location for utilization by individuals
required to recycle and haulers servicing said establishment.
High grade office papers and newspaper, (including insert),
magazines, catalogs and telephone books shall be placed for
collection in receptacles labeled to prevent contamination and
to insure the said paper is kept dry.
(2) Receptacles must be serviced on an as-needed basis at least
once every other week and more frequently, if necessary, all in
accordance with § 223(b)(2) of these Guidelines, to prevent
recyclables from overflowing and causing an unsightly
nuisance.
(3) Ensure that the recyclables are not contaminated with refuse
and/or garbage.
(4) Leaves shall be separated from general refuse and placed in
kraft paper leaf bags for collection by Municipal collection
crews or haulers. Date of collection in neighborhoods will be
announced through schedules published in a locally circulated
newspaper and/or signs posted in neighborhoods in advance of
collection. Residents may transport the bagged leaf waste to
disposal areas. designated by the Municipality.
D. Persons owning, operating and/or occupying commercial,
municipal and/or institutional establishments within the Township
shall be exempt from the duties of § 222(3)(1-3 inclusive) of these
§ 222 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 222
1:451
§ 223. Responsibilities of Haulers. [Res. 12-27-90; as amended by
Res. 01-10-91; by Res. 11-7-91; by Res. 12-02-93; by Res. 12-22-94;
by Res. 5-16-96A; by Res. 04-24-08; and by Res. 03-10-11]
guidelines, if said persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of materials they are required by Part 2A and these
Guidelines to recycle. To be eligible for an exemption under these
Guidelines, a commercial or institutional solid waste generator
must annually provide written documentation, on forms provided
by the Township, to the Township on January 31 of each year
regarding the total number of tons recycled pursuant to said
exemption.
1. (Reserved)
A. (Reserved)
B. Except as otherwise provided in § 223(1)(C)(3) of these Guidelines,
any person desiring to collect municipal waste within the Township
shall also collect recyclables in the manner as herein set forth.
C. Any person desiring to collect municipal waste but not desiring to
collect recyclables within the Township shall present an executed
contract, satisfactory to the Township, evidencing an agreement
between said person and a hauler setting forth at a minimum, the
following:
(1) The names of the parties.
(2) The term of the agreement (which said term shall not be less
than one year).
(3) A provision requiring the hauler who will be collecting the
recyclables and to collect recyclables from all customers of the
person desiring not to collect said recyclables.
(4) A provision requiring the collection of the recyclables from
residential establishments as per § 223(2) of these Guidelines
and at least once every other week or more frequently for the
servicing of commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments.
(5) A provision requiring the hauler of recyclables to abide by Part
2A and the Guidelines promulgated thereunder.
(6) (Reserved)
D. (Reserved)
2. Time of Collection of Recyclables.
§ 222 LOGAN CODE § 223
1:452
A. Recyclables shall be collected from residential establishments not
less than once every other week beginning the week of January 28,
1991.
B. Recyclables shall be collected from multi-family rental housing
property with four or more units, commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments and from community activities at a
frequency mutually agreed upon between the establishment and/or
sponsor and the hauler but in all events shall not be less than once
every other week, and at such intervals which prevents recyclables
from overflowing and causing an unsightly nuisance.
3. Manner of Collection and Delivery of Recyclables.
A. Manner of Collection.
(1) If recyclables are collected in the same vehicle as, and
simultaneously with municipal waste (trash), the recyclables
shall be kept completely separate by a solid barrier, approved
by the Township, of sufficient strength, size and composition to
ensure that the recyclables are not contaminated whatsoever.
(2) If recyclables are collected in the same vehicle used for
collection of municipal waste (trash), but not collected
simultaneously therewith, the said vehicle shall be thoroughly
cleansed of all such waste, in accordance with Federal State
and local law, prior to collection of recyclables to prevent any
contamination whatsoever.
(3) Haulers shall ensure that all newspaper (including inserts,
magazines, catalogs and telephone books, collected by said
hauler, shall be kept separate from not only municipal waste
(trash), but also from other recyclables, in and/or on all
collection vehicles.
(4) Recyclables collected by a hauler from residential
establishments and multi-family rental housing property with
four or more units and recyclables collected from commercial,
municipal and/or institutional establishments shall be
separated and prepared by the hauler in accordance with
Chapter 20, Part 2, Subpart B, § 223(3)(B), hereof.
B. Delivery of Recyclables.
(1) Recyclables shall be collected and separated and be delivered
pursuant to Subsection B(2) hereof, by all haulers to the
approved recycling centers responsible for the processing and
marketing of such materials, which said center shall be
designated by the Township from time to time pursuant to the
Solid Waste and Recyclable Storage, Collection, Disposal and
Processing Ordinance [Chapter 20, Part 1], unless the hauler
§ 223 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 223
1:453
can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Township, that all
recyclables are being fully recovered through other means.
(2) All haulers shall deliver all recyclables to approved recycling
processing centers in accordance with the following
specification:
(a) Corrugated Paper. Must be clean, dry, domestic non-waxed
corrugated paper ("cardboard"). Asian-made corrugated
paper "cardboard" or pressboard shall not be delivered to
any center for processing.
(b) Glass. All glass must be separated by color (clear, green
and brown). Only container glass will be accepted. Caps
and lids must be removed. Glass should not be crushed. No
ceramics, china, drinking glasses, plate glass, light bulbs
or Pyrexware shall be included. Mixed colored glass shall
not be delivered to any center for processing.
(c) High-Grade Office Paper. White ledger paper and
computer print-out paper may be mixed together. No
colored paper, address labels, Post-it notes, paper clips,
envelopes, fax paper, NCR carbonless duplicate paper, or
other mixed papers shall be included. All paper must be
clean and dry, and free of excessive contamination.
(d) Metal Cans. Steel, aluminum and bi-metal food and
beverage cans may be mixed together. Empty paint cans
shall also be accepted. No aerosol cans shall be accepted.
All material should be free of food residue and liquid paint.
(e) Plastic. Only number one (PET) and number two (HDPE)
plastic bottles shall be delivered. Containers must be free
of residue with caps and lids removed. No wide-mouth tub
containers (margarine, yogurt, etc.) nor any automotive
petroleum-based fluids shall be delivered to any center for
processing.
(f) Newspaper, Magazines, Telephone Books and Catalogs -
Must be free of wet or excessively soiled paper.
Newspaper, Magazines, Telephone Books and Catalogs
shall be separated and placed for collection in separate
paper bags.
(g) Contamination of Recyclables. Plastic bags of any type or
size shall be considered contaminants. All recyclables
must be removed from plastic bags. Approved recycling
centers shall be permitted to reject any and all loads of
recyclables that are excessively contaminated.
Contamination that is discovered in a load of recyclables
after the hauler has left the processing center may be the
responsibility of the hauler.
§ 223 LOGAN CODE § 223
1:454
(h) Restrictions. All recyclables shall be delivered to one
approved recycling center. Haulers are not permitted to
market some recyclables for profit while dumping lower
valued recyclables at approved centers.
C. If any and/or all recyclables are being fully recovered by other
means, it shall be the responsibility of the hauler to report the
amount of each recyclable so recovered to the Township, quarterly,
by the 10th calendar day following the end of each quarter ending
on March 30, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each
year.
D. In the event that any hauler has a contract or agreement to deliver
some, but less than all, recyclables to a non-designated site for
recovery, then the procedures set forth in the Solid Waste and
Recyclables Storage, Collection, Disposal and Processing
Ordinance, § 122(13) and (14) [Chapter 20, Part 1] shall be
followed.
E. Haulers must deliver each load of recyclables collected in the
Township to one approved processing center as the same is
delineated in the Solid Waste and Recyclables Storage Collection,
Disposal and Processing Ordinance, unless otherwise provided in
said ordinance, this Part, and/or Part 2A.
F. Haulers must report, to the recycling processing center at which
said recyclables are delivered, the quantity and/or volume of each
load of recyclables collected in the Township and delivered to the
said recycling processing center.
G. (Reserved)
H. Haulers may receive recycling containers from the Township and
distribute the same to each of the residential establishments and
each unit of a multi-family rental housing property with less than
four units as noted on said person's customer list submitted
pursuant to Subsection (7) above. Distribution of the said
containers shall be accomplished within 14 days of receipt of said
containers from the Township.
4. Hauler Requirements.
A. (Reserved)
B. All haulers, during the month of December of each and every year,
shall distribute to every owner and/or occupier of any residential
establishment, and/or multifamily rental housing property with
more than four units, a written customer specification or service
summary that lists, with regard to said hauler:
(1) Day of municipal waste collection.
(2) Day and week of recyclable collection.
§ 223 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 223
1:455
§ 224. Miscellaneous. [Res. 12-27-90; as amended by Res. 04-24-08]
(3) Arrangements for special collection of bulky waste, corrugated
cardboard, and/or construction and/or demolition waste.
(4) Rates and billing arrangements for all services offered to the
specific individual which is receiving said customer
specification and/or service summary.
C. All haulers shall offer a low volume generator rate in addition to
standard subscription rates for owners and/or occupiers of
residential establishments. All levels of service will include
unlimited collection of recyclables generated at residential
establishments and/or each unit of a multifamily rental housing
property with more than four units at least once every other week
and weekly collection of municipal waste as detailed in the hauler's
customer specifications and/or service summary.
D. Facilities for storage, maintenance and parking of any motor
vehicles and/or trucks, equipment or any and all materials collected
and/or owned by a hauler shall comply with all applicable zoning
ordinance requirements and any other applicable local, State and
Federal laws, rules and/or regulations.
E. At least one individual employed by a hauler to collect municipal
waste and/or recyclables, must participate in training sessions and/
or meetings specified and/or sponsored by Blair County, the time of
which shall not exceed six hours in length per year. Written notice
of said training sessions and/or meetings shall be given to the
hauler by the entity specifying and/or sponsoring the same.
F. All haulers shall complete and submit all forms and surveys
required by the County of Blair, the Township and/or the Blair
County Intermunicipal Relations Committee by deadlines
established and noted on the form or survey.
G. All haulers shall have office staff and/or telephone answering
service available for accepting calls and/or complaints expressed in
person or by telephonic means from any residential, commercial,
municipal and/or institutional establishment for which the hauler is
providing hauling services from 8:30 a.m. until 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, except for holidays on which residential collection
is prohibited.
1. Designated Recycling Containers.
A. All recycling containers shall be approved by the Township.
(1) Recycling containers for residential establishments shall
initially be purchased and distributed by the Township to
residential establishments for the sole purposes of storing
recyclables and placing the same out for collection by haulers.
§ 223 LOGAN CODE § 224
1:456
(2) In the event additional recycling containers or replacement
recycling containers are needed, the same may be obtained by
contacting the business office of the Township, which said
office shall supply the said container at the price for which the
Township paid for the same.
B. Recycling containers/receptacles for storing recyclables at multifamily
rental housing property with four or more units, commercial,
municipal or institutional establishments and for community
activities shall be of an appropriate size to accommodate a quantity
of material which will be accumulated over a predetermined,
mutually agreed upon time period, and shall be provided by either
the owner/sponsor of the establishment/activity or the hauler. The
recycling container/receptacle must be clearly marked as a
recycling container/receptacle.
2. Accommodations for the Disabled.
A. When the provisions of this Part require that recyclables be placed
for collection at a location designated by agreement between the
resident and the hauler and the hauler has been notified by the
resident that said resident has a disability pursuant to the
definition of the same under the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990, which said disability prevents the resident from placing
recyclables at the curbside for collection, then the hauler shall
make reasonable accommodations with the said resident to collect
the resident's recyclables at a place more accommodating to said
resident.
B. If a person who is disabled pursuant to the immediately preceding
subsection, requests said person's hauler to make reasonable
accommodations as to a more accommodating place for placement
and collection of municipal waste, refuse and/or recyclables and
said hauler refuses and/or the person believes the accommodations
made are not reasonable, said person, or said person's agent
(hereinafter "complainant"), shall notify the Manager of the
Township within 30 days of said accommodations, if believed to be
unreasonable by the complainant or within 30 days of a request by
the complainant for reasonable accommodations if none have been
made by the complainant's hauler. The Manager of the Township or
the Manager's duly authorized agent, shall, within 15 days of said
notice by the complainant, investigate the complaint and if found to
be valid shall, within 30 days of said complaint, notify the
complainant's hauler, in writing, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of the deficiency, with a photocopy of said notice to the
complaint and indicate the corrective action to be taken within 10
days of receipt of said notice. Failure of said hauler to comply with
the directives of the notice shall constitute a violation of this Part
and may subject the said hauler to penalties.
3. Variances.
§ 224 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 224
1:457
A. Suspension of Processing Recyclables. The Blair County Recycling
Coordinator, subject to permission from the Intermunicipal
Recycling Committee (IRC), shall be authorized to suspend the
processing of certain recyclables for reasons deemed appropriate
by the said recycling coordinator including, but not limited to,
market conditions and every said suspension shall be based upon
reliable and documented data showing the necessity of the same.
Said recycling coordinator shall endeavor to notify, in writing, all
recycling processing centers of the recyclables subject to the
suspension and/or of the termination of any such suspension of
processing. All suspensions of recyclables shall be terminated upon
notification of the IRC to the recycling coordinator. In no event
shall the number of designated recyclables to be collected fall
below the minimum number of recyclables required to be collected
as set forth in Act 101, as amended.
B. IRC Approval. The IRC is hereby authorized to permit, approve,
ratify and/or deny any request by the Blair County Recycling
Coordinator for suspension of the processing of recyclables. The
IRC shall review all suspensions of recyclables at every regular
meeting of the IRC to determine whether to terminate the said
suspension and thereby reinstate the processing of the recyclables
which had been subject of the suspension. Nothing herein
contained in this section shall permit the haulers to reject any
recyclables placed for collection which include the suspended
recyclable items and said hauler shall continue to collect all
recyclables so designated by these Guidelines.
4. Enforcement. The Logan Township Code Enforcement Department and
the Logan Township Police Department are hereby authorized to
enforce the provisions of these Recycling Guidelines, and any and all
Solid Waste and/or Recycling Ordinances, all as may be amended from
time to time, enacted by the Township of Logan. Any and all monies
collected and received by the Township in such enforcement through
the efforts of the Intermunicipal Relations Committee only shall be
allocated to the Intermunicipal Relations Committee and paid to it by
the Township on at least a quarterly basis. [Amended by Res.
03-24-16B]
§ 224 LOGAN CODE § 224
1:458
Chapter 20.5
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 224 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 224
1:459

Part 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 101. Short Title. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Stormwater
Management."
§ 102. Statement of Findings. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
§ 103. Purpose. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
1. The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater
resulting from development throughout a watershed increases
runoff volumes, flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and
storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry
and control stormwater, undermines floodplain management and
flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety, and
increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including reasonable regulation of development and activities
causing accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health,
safety, and welfare and the protection of people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and supports the base
flow of streams.
D. The use of green infrastructure and low-impact development (LID)
are intended to address the root cause of water quality impairment
by using systems and practices which use or mimic natural
processes to: 1) infiltrate and recharge; 2) evapotranspire; and/or
3) harvest and use precipitation near where it falls to earth. Green
infrastructure practices and LID contribute to the restoration or
maintenance of predevelopment hydrology.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities
are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from
their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program.
1. The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare
within the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:461
§ 104. Statutory Authority. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,15 as amended, and/or the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the
Stormwater Management Act.
§ 105. Applicability. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter.
§ 106. Repealer. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Township inconsistent
with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency only.
maximizing the benefits described in § 102 of this chapter, through
provisions designed to:
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
B. Preserve natural drainage systems.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff
volumes and mimic predevelopment hydrology.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best
management practices (BMPs) that are implemented within the
municipality.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 103 LOGAN CODE § 107
1:462
§ 107. Severability. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 108. Compatibility with Other Requirements. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.
§ 109. Erroneous Permit. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the municipality
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 110. Waivers. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
§ 111. Liability Disclaimer. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
1. If the municipality determines that any requirement under this chapter
cannot be achieved for a particular regulated activity, the municipality
may, after an evaluation of alternatives, approve measures other than
those in this chapter, subject to § 110, Subsections 2 and 3.
2. Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this chapter may be
approved by the municipality if enforcement will exact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question,
provided that the modifications will not be contrary to the public
interest and that the purpose of the chapter is preserved. Cost or
financial burden shall not be considered a hardship. Modification may
be considered if an alternative standard or approach will provide equal
or better achievement of the purpose of the chapter. A request for
modifications shall be in writing and accompany the stormwater
management site plan submission. The request shall provide the facts
on which the request is based, the provision(s) of the chapter involved
and the proposed modification.
3. No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be
granted by the municipality unless that action is approved in advance
by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or the delegated
county conservation district.
1. Neither the granting nor the denial of any approval nor the compliance
with the provisions of this part or with any condition imposed by the
§ 107 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 111
1:463
Township, its officials, employees, or designated representatives
thereunder, shall relieve any person from any responsibility for damage
to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by
law, nor impose any liability upon Township officials, employees or its
designated representatives to the maximum extent permitted by law.
2. Neither the granting nor the denial of any permit which includes any
stormwater management requirements shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Township, the
Township officials, employees, or designated representatives thereof of
the practicability or safety of any stormwater structure or facility, use
or other plan proposed, and shall create no liability or cause of action
upon any Township official, employee, or designated representative
thereof for any damage that may result pursuant thereto to the
maximum extent permitted by law.
§ 111 LOGAN CODE § 111
1:464
Part 2
DEFINITIONS
§ 201. Word usage. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
§ 202. Terms defined. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of human activity and natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, land clearing,
plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and
raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction
of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural
activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
1. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
2. These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in
pertinent regulations or statutes, and are intended for this chapter only.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:465
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CHANNEL — A perceptible natural or artificial waterway which periodically
or continuously contains moving water or which forms a connecting link
between two bodies of water. It has a definite bed and banks which confine
the water.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in Section
3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)] that has the authority
under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to administer and enforce
all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code 102.
CULVERT — A closed conduit for the free passage of surface drainage under
a highway, railroad, canal or other embankment.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION — The slowing, dampening or attenuating of runoff flows
entering the natural drainage pattern or storm drainage system by
temporarily holding water on a surface area in a detention basin or within
the drainage system.
DETENTION BASIN OR POND — A basin or reservoir, usually small,
constructed to impound or retard surface runoff termporarily.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — The person, persons, or any corporation, partnership,
association, or other entity or any responsible person therein or agent
therefor that undertakes the activities associated with changes in land use.
The term "developer" is intended to include but not necessarily be limited
to the term "subdivider," "owner," and "builder" even though the individuals
involved in successive stages of a project may vary.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISCHARGE — The flow or rate of flow from a canal, conduit, channel or
other hydraulic structure.
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
§ 202 LOGAN CODE § 202
1:466
DRAINAGE — In general the removal of surface water from a given area.
Commonly applied to surface water and groundwater.
DRAINAGE AREA —
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
ENCROACHMENT — Any structure or activity which in any manner
changes, expands, or diminishes the course, current, or cross section of any
watercourse, floodway, or body of water.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn
away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being
a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that comprise Group 13
soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania DEP Technical Manual for
Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by
DEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided
by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence
to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from
the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include conducting
a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on the
site where it is generated.
The area of a drainage basin or watershed, expressed in acres, square
miles, or other unit of area. Also called catchment area, watershed, and
river basin.
1.
The area served by a sewer system, receiving storm- and surface water,
or by a watercourse.
2.
§ 202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:467
GROUNDWATER — Subsurface water occupying the saturation zone, from
which wells and springs are fed.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of groundwater naturally
by precipitation or runoff or artificially by spreading or injection.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the
soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area
of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can
be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils
become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS1.2).16
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that prevents
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas)
shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor living spaces,
patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and any new streets
or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as
impervious areas if by design they do not prevent infiltration.
INFILTRATION —
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such
as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of the
following meanings: i) the improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving: a) a
group of two or more buildings; or b) the division or allocation of land or
space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features; ii) any subdivision of
land; iii) development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the PA Municipalities
Planning Code.17
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Site design approaches and smallscale
stormwater management practices that promote the use of natural
systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of rainwater. LID can
be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and revitalization projects.
LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate, filter, evaporate, and store
runoff close to its source. Rather than rely on costly large-scale conveyance
The flow or movement of water through the interstices or pores of a soil
or other porous medium.
1.
2. The absorption of liquid by the soil.
16.Editor's Note: See § 1001, Subsections 1 and 2, of this chapter.
17.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 202 LOGAN CODE § 202
1:468
and treatment systems, LID addresses stormwater through a variety of
small, cost-effective landscape features located on site.
MUNICIPALITY — Logan Township, Blair County, Pennsylvania. Also
referred to at times as "Township."
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OUTFALL — The point, location or structure where drainage discharges
from a sewer, drain, or other conduit. Also a conduit leading to the ultimate
discharge point.
OUTLET CONTROL STRUCTURE — The means of controlling the
relationship between the headwater elevation and the discharge, placed at
the outlet or downstream end of any structure through which water may
flow.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92,18 25 Pa. Code 102,
or the Clean Streams Law.19
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent
chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A permanent area of trees and shrubs located
adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
18.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
19.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:469
RUNOFF CHARACTERISTICS — The surface components of any watershed
which affect the rate, amount, and direction of stormwater runoff. These
may include but are not limited to: vegetation, soils, slopes and man-made
landscape alterations.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.20
STORM FREQUENCY — The average interval in years over which a storm
event of a given precipitation volume can be expected to occur.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries intercepted surface runoff, street
water and other drainage but excludes domestic sewage and industrial
waste.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and retention basins;
open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the development site in accordance with this chapter.
"Stormwater management site plan" will be designated as "SWM site plan"
throughout this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.21
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
runoff.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel for conveyance of surface water having
a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
20.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
21.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 202 LOGAN CODE § 202
1:470
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
surface water of this commonwealth.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
§ 202 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:471

Part 3
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
§ 301. General Requirements. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
1. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 302:
A. Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
B. No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. No final subdivision/land development plan shall be approved or
permit authorizing construction issued until the final stormwater
plan for the site is approved in writing by the Township.
2. SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with § 406,
shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
3. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the
Clean Streams Law.22
4. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law.23 Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual),24 No. 363-2134-008, as amended and
updated.
5. Impervious Areas:
A. The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages. Any areas designed initially
or otherwise to be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be
impervious.
B. For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
22.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
23.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
24.Editor's Note: See § 1001, Subsection 4, of this chapter.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:473
C. For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter; except that the volume controls in § 303 and the peak rate
controls of § 304 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
6. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification to the adjacent property owner(s). Such stormwater flows
shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
7. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
A. Protect health, safety, and property.
B. Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(1) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(2) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(3) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(4) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(5) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
C. Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual4).25 If methods
other than green infrastructure and LID methods are proposed to
achieve the volume and rate controls required under this chapter,
the SWM site plan must include a detailed justification
demonstrating that the use of LID and green infrastructure is not
practicable.
8. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects.
9. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
10. Normally dry, open top, storage facilities should completely drain both
the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not
less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design
storm.
25.Editor's Note: See § 1001, Subsection 3, of this chapter.
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:474
§ 302. Exemptions. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
11. The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge should be obtained from the latest version of the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOAA's Atlas 1426 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
12. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm
Water Management Act.27
13. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual.28
14. No developer or person, corporation, or other entity shall block, impede
the flow of, alter, construct any structure, or deposit any material or
thing, or commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any
communal stream or natural watercourse without having prior approval
from the Township and/or the Pennsylvania DEP, whichever is
applicable.
1. Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less
than 5,000 square feet are exempt from the requirements in §§ 303,
304, and Part 4 of this chapter.
2. Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
3. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM
site plan preparation requirements of this chapter provided the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
4. Minor land disturbance associated with existing one- and two-family
dwellings and use of land for gardening for home consumption.
5. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 301, Subsections 4 through 11.
6. The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.
26.Editor's Note: See § 1001, Subsection 5, of this chapter.
27.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq. and 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., respectively.
28.Editor's Note: See § 1001, Subsection 3, of this chapter.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 303
1:475
§ 303. Volume Controls. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
1. The green infrastructure and low-impact development practices
provided in the BMP Manual29 shall be utilized for all regulated
activities wherever possible. Water volume controls shall be
implemented using the Design Storm Method in Subsection A or the
Simplified Method in Subsection B below. For regulated activity areas
equal or less than one acre that do not require hydrologic routing to
design the stormwater facilities, this chapter establishes no preference
for either methodology; therefore, the applicant may select either
methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic
limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated with
each methodology and other factors.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual)30 is
applicable to any size of regulated activity. This method requires
detailed modeling based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the postdevelopment total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour
duration precipitation.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas
must be considered meadow in good condition.
(b) Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow in good condition in the model
for existing conditions.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual)31 provided below
is independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design
Storm Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to
regulated activities greater than one acre or for projects that
require design of stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious
surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
29.Editor's Note: See § 1001, Subsection 3, of this chapter.
30.Editor's Note: See § 1001, Subsection 3, of this chapter.
31.Editor's Note: See § 1001, Subsection 3, of this chapter.
§ 303 LOGAN CODE § 303
1:476
§ 304. Rate Controls. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 304, Rate
Controls.
1. For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan: Postdevelopment discharge rates shall
not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-,
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm
events. If it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the
postdevelopment analysis are less than or equal to the peak-rates of
discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for one-, two-, five-,
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour
storms, then the requirements of this section have been met.
Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary
to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement.
2. For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan: For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm events, the
postdevelopment peak discharge rates will follow the applicable
approved release rate maps. For any areas not shown on the release
rate maps, the postdevelopment discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates.
3. This criterion shall apply to the total activity even if the activity is to
take place in stages. More stringent criteria may be required in
sensitive areas where stormwater problems presently exist. These
requirements may be modified based on a detailed engineering study
completed by a licensed professional engineer of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, on behalf of the developer, which demonstrates that
modification of these requirements is justified, and such plan is
reviewed and recommended by the Logan Township Engineer for
approval by the Logan Township Board of Supervisors.
4. The stormwater plan for the development site shall consider all of the
stormwater runoff flowing over the site.
A. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development site are
not subject to this control standard when determining allowable
peak runoff rates; however, on-site drainage facilities shall be
designed to safely convey off-site flows through the development
site.
B. Where the site area to be impacted through a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area
§ 303 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 304
1:477
(less than 10%), only the proposed impact area shall be subject to
the runoff criteria.
5. Storm Frequencies. The USDA NRCS twenty-four-hour, Type II Rainfall
Distribution shall be used for analyzing stormwater runoff for both preand
postdevelopment conditions.
6. Calculation Methods:
A. Development Sites. For the purpose of computing peak flow rates
and runoff hydrographs from development sites, calculations shall
be performed using one of the following: USDA NRCS publications,
Technical Release (TR) 55 or 20, HEC I or Penn State Runoff Model
(PSRM) or Modified Rational Method. Under special circumstances
other computation methods may be used subject to the approval of
the Township Engineer.
B. Stormwater Collection/Conveyance Facilities. For the purposes of
designing storm sewers and other stormwater runoff collection and
conveyance facilities, Rational Method or other method as
approved by the Township Engineer may be applied. Rainfall
intensities for design shall be obtained from the PennDOT, Storm
Intensity-Duration-Frequency Charts, as amended to date.
C. Routing of hydrographs through detention/retention facilities for
the purpose of designing those facilities shall be accomplished
using the Modified-Pulls Method or other recognized reservoir
routing method subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
D. Predevelopment Conditions. Predevelopment conditions shall be
assumed to be those that exist on any site prior to commencing any
development activities. SCS runoff curve numbers selected for use
in the calculations shall accurately reflect existing conditions
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer. The hydroponic
conditions for all areas with pervious cover (i.e., fields, woods, lawn
areas, pastures, cropland, etc.) shall be assumed to be in "good"
condition and the lowest recommended SCS runoff curve number
(CN) shall be applied for all pervious land uses within the
respective range for each land use and hydroponic soil group.
Impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to, any roof,
parking, or driveway areas, and any new roadways and sidewalks.
Any areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be
assumed to be impervious for the purposes of these criteria. The
computed existing runoff rates shall be reconciled with field
observations and conditions. If the designer of the stormwater
management facilities can substantiate through actual physical
calibration that more appropriate runoff values should be used at a
particular development site, then appropriate variations may be
made upon review and approval of the Township Engineer.
Calibration shall require detailed gauge and rainfall data for the
particular development site in question.
§ 304 LOGAN CODE § 305
1:478
§ 305. Riparian Buffers. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
1. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian buffer
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or
land development that encompasses a riparian buffer.
2. Except as required by Chapter 102,32 the riparian buffer easement shall
be measured to be the greater of the limit of the one-hundred-year
floodplain or a minimum of 35 feet from the top of the stream bank (on
each side).
3. Minimum Management Requirements for Riparian Buffers.
A. Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian buffer easement.
B. Whenever practicable invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed and the riparian buffer easement shall be planted with
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
4. The riparian buffer easement shall be enforceable by the municipality
and shall be recorded in the appropriate County Recorder of Deeds
office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the
property located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued
private ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area as
required by Zoning, unless otherwise specified in Chapter 27, Zoning.
5. Any permitted use within the riparian buffer easement shall be
conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing onehundred-
year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and
preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
6. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted within riparian buffers:
A. Trails shall be for nonmotorized use only.
B. Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
7. Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the riparian buffer easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.
32.Editor's Note: See Pa. Code Chapter 102.
§ 305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 305
1:479

Part 4
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 401. Plan Requirements. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
1. The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
A. Appropriate sections from the Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Chapter 22, and other applicable local ordinances,
shall be followed in preparing the SWM site plans. In instances
where the Township lacks subdivision and land development
regulations, the content of SWM site plans shall follow the county's
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
B. The Township shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion
and in accordance with this part, when a SWM site plan is found to
be deficient, the municipality may either disapprove the submission
and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the
municipality may accept submission of modifications.
C. Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M)
plan discussed in Subsection E(9) below.
D. The following signature block for the municipality:
(1) "(Municipal official or designee), on this date (Signature date),
has reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM site plan
meets all design standards and criteria of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances. This certification is based entirely
on the certifications by the Engineer for the applicant and this
municipal certification shall place no liability on the
municipality or the municipal engineer herein involved."
(2) Approval Signatures and Date. A place shall appear on the plan
cover sheet for the date of approval and signatures of the
Chair, Vice-Chair, and Secretary-Treasurer of the Board of
Supervisors.
(3) The following stormwater management statement shall appear
on the plan cover sheet:
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 401
1:481
"On this _____ day of _____, 20 _____ the Developer is
responsible for the perpetual operation and maintenance of
the stormwater management system. Furthermore,
Developer acknowledges the stormwater management
system to be a permanent fixture which can be altered or
removed only after approval of a revised stormwater plan by
the Township."
(Individual) (President, Vice-President)
(Partner) (Secretary, Asst. Secretary)
If Corporation, Affix
Corporate Seal
(Partner)
(4) The following engineer's certificate shall appear on the plan
cover sheet:
"I, ___________________, have reviewed the plans and
specifications and hereby certify that the plan meets all
design standards and criteria of all Federal and
Commonwealth statutes and regulations, Chapter 20.5, and
Chapter 22 of the Township of Logan Code of Ordinances."
E. The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(1) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(2) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual33. A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for
projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas, such as
brownfields.
(3) Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to
demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have
been taken to meet the requirements of this chapter, including
the recommendations and general requirements in § 301.
(4) Expected project time schedule.
(5) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(6) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic
33.Editor's Note: See § 1001, Subsection 3, of this chapter.
§ 401 LOGAN CODE § 401
1:482
features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system
that may be affected by the project.
(7) Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
(8) SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and
proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells.
(9) The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing
and proposed physical stormwater management facilities. This
plan shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for
O&M as well as schedules and costs for O&M activities.
(10) A justification must be included in the SWM site plan if BMPs
other than green infrastructure methods and LID practices are
proposed to achieve the volume, rate and water quality
controls under this chapter.
(11) General Format. The stormwater plan shall be drawn on sheets
24 inches by 36 inches with a graphic scale of not less than one
inch equals 200 feet. All plan sheets shall contain a title block
with: name and address of the developer and engineer, graphic
scale, North arrow, legend, date of original preparation and
date and description of each revision to the plan sheet.
(12) Existing and Proposed Features. The plan shall show the
following under both predevelopment and postdevelopment
conditions:
(a) Watershed Location. Provide a key map showing the
location of the development site within the watershed(s)
and watershed subarea(s). On all site drawings, show the
boundaries of the watershed(s) and watershed subarea(s)
as they are located on the development site and identify
watershed name(s) and watershed subarea number(s).
(b) Floodplain Boundaries. Identify one-hundred-year
floodplain on the development site (as appropriate) based
upon the Township Flood Insurance Study maps.
(c) Natural Features. Show all bodies of water (natural or
artificial), watercourses (permanent and intermittent),
swales, wetlands and other natural drainagecourses on the
development site, or which will be affected by runoff from
the development site.
(d) Soils. Provide an overlay showing all soil types and
boundaries within the development site (consult the
County Conservation District, SCS and U.S. Geological
Survey for information).
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 401
1:483
(e) Contours. Show existing and final contours at intervals of
two feet. In areas with slopes greater that 15%, five-foot
intervals may be used.
(f) Land Cover. Show existing and final land cover
classifications as necessary to support and illustrate the
runoff calculations performed.
(g) Drainage Area Delineation. Show the boundaries of the
drainage areas employed in the runoff calculations
performed.
(h) Stormwater Management Controls. Show any existing
stormwater management or drainage controls and/or
structures, such as storm sewers, swales, culverts, etc.,
which are located on the development site, or which are
located off site but will be affected by runoff from the
development site.
(13) Professional Certification. The stormwater plan (including all
calculations) shall be prepared and sealed by an engineer,
surveyor or landscape architect licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and with training and
expertise in hydrology and hydraulics. The Township may
require documentation of such qualifications.
(14) Stormwater Controls. All proposed stormwater runoff control
measures must be shown on the drawings including methods
for collecting, conveying and storing stormwater runoff on site
which are to be used both during and after construction.
Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be shown in
accordance with Chapter 22, § 407, Erosion and Sedimentation
Control. The plan shall provide information on the exact type,
location, sizing, design and construction of all proposed
facilities and relationship to the existing watershed drainage
system. The plan shall include technical specifications for
materials and methods to be used in the construction of the
stormwater management facilities.
(a) If the development is to be constructed in phases, the
developer must demonstrate that all stormwater facilities
will be installed to manage stormwater runoff safely
during each stage of development.
(b) A schedule for the installation of all temporary and
permanent stormwater control measures and devices shall
be submitted.
(c) If appropriate, a justification shall be submitted as to why
any preferred stormwater management techniques, as
listed in this chapter, are proposed for use.
§ 401 LOGAN CODE § 401
1:484
§ 402. Plan Submission. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
(15) Easements, Rights-of-Way, Deed Restrictions. All existing and
proposed easements and rights-of-way for drainage and/or
access to stormwater control facilities shall be shown along
with any areas subject to special deed restrictions relative to or
affecting stormwater management on the development site.
(16) Other Permits/Approvals. A list of any approvals/permits
relative to stormwater management that will be required from
other governmental agencies (Pennsylvania DEP Chapters 105
and 106 permits and/or NPDES permit) and anticipated dates
of submission/receipt shall be included with the stormwater
plan submission. Copies of permit applications shall be
furnished to the Township.
(17) Maintenance Program. The proposed maintenance plan for all
stormwater control facilities shall be submitted with the
stormwater plan and shall:
(a) Identify the proposed ownership entity (e.g., Township,
property owner, private corporation, homeowner's
association or other entity).
(b) Identify the type of maintenance, probable frequencies,
personnel and equipment requirements and estimated
annual maintenance costs.
(c) Identify method of financing continuing operation and
maintenance if the facilities are to be owned by other than
the Township.
(d) Include copies of any legal agreements required to
implement the maintenance program and, if applicable,
copies of the maintenance agreement required by this
chapter.
(18) Evidence of Notification of Downstream Municipality. The
developer shall notify (by certified mail) the municipality
immediately downstream of the municipality within which the
development is proposed that a stormwater control plan has
been prepared and submitted. This letter should identify the
location of the proposed development site and the name of the
affected stream. The developer shall submit a copy of this
letter and a copy of the certified mail return receipt.
1. Preapplication Phase.
A. Before submitting the stormwater plan, the developer is urged to
consult with the Township on the applicable regulations and
techniques for safely managing runoff from the development site.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:485
§ 403. Plan Review. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
The Township may also be helpful in providing necessary data for
the stormwater plan.
B. The developer is encouraged to submit a sketch plan with a
narrative description of the proposed stormwater management
controls for general guidance and discussion with the Township.
C. The preapplication phase is not mandatory; any review comments
provided by the Township are advisory only and do not constitute
any legally binding action on the part of the Township.
2. Stormwater plans for review shall be submitted with the preliminary/
final subdivision and land development plans. Five copies of the SWM
site plan shall be submitted to the Township and distributed as follows:
A. Two copies to the Township.
B. One copy to the Municipal Engineer (when applicable).
C. One copy to the County Conservation District.
D. One copy to the Blair County Planning Commission/Office.
1. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the municipality for consistency
with the provisions of this chapter.
2. The Township shall notify municipalities adjacent to the subdivision/
land development site that may be affected by the stormwater runoff
and proposed controls for the site. Copies of plan shall be made
available to such municipalities upon request. The Township Engineer
will consider comments received from any affected municipalities.
3. The Township Engineer shall recommend approval or disapproval of the
stormwater plan based upon the requirements of the applicable
Township ordinances, the standards and criteria of this chapter and
good engineering practices. The Township Engineer's review of the
subdivision/land development plan shall include a written report to the
Township, along with supporting documentation, stating the reasons for
recommending approval or disapproval.
4. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM site
plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification
shall occur within the time period allowed by the Municipalities
Planning Code.34 (90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by
other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified
by the municipality.
34.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 402 LOGAN CODE § 403
1:486
§ 404. Modification of Plans. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
§ 405. Resubmission of Disapproved SWM site plans. [Ord.
09-14-17A]
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the municipality's concerns, to the municipality in accordance
with this part. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission of
a disapproved SWM site plan.
5. For any SWM site plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green
infrastructure and LID practices to achieve the volume and rate
controls required under this chapter, the municipality will not approve
the SWM site plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and
LID practices are not practicable.
6. If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the municipality will
state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The municipality also
may approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide
the acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
7. Where the proposed development requires an obstruction permit from
the Pennsylvania DEP or an erosion/sedimentation permit from the
Blair County Conservation District, final stormwater plan approval shall
not be granted until receipt of such permits. No building permit shall be
issued, nor construction started, until such permits are received and
copies filed with the Township.
1. A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in
SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of
SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are
not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the municipality
shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in
accordance with this part.
2. If the request for a plan modification is initiated after construction is
underway, the Township Engineer shall recommend approval or
disapproval of the modification based upon field inspection and review
of any design calculations and information requested by the Township
Engineer provided:
A. The requested changes in stormwater controls do not result in any
modifications to other approved Township land use/development
requirements (e.g., building setbacks, yards, buffer zones, etc.);
and
B. The performance standards set forth in this chapter are met.
Notification of the Township Engineer's action shall be sent to the
governing body which may issue a stay of the plan modification and
require the developer to resubmit the plan modification for full
stormwater plan review.
§ 403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 406
1:487
§ 406. Authorization to Construct and Term of Validity. [Ord.
09-14-17A]
1. Upon final stormwater plan approval, receipt of all necessary permits,
execution of any agreement with a developer and posting of the
necessary financial security, the developer may commence to install or
implement the approved stormwater plan.
2. The municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the
regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term
of validity of five years following the date of approval. The municipality
may specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for
any specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the
date the municipality signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an
approved SWM site plan is not completed according to § 407 within the
term of validity, then the municipality may consider the SWM site plan
disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. SWM site plans that
are considered disapproved by the municipality shall be resubmitted in
accordance with § 405 of this chapter.
3. If the site development or building construction does not begin within
two years of the date of final approval of the stormwater plan, then,
before doing so, the developer shall resubmit the stormwater plan to
verify that no condition has changed within the watershed that would
affect the feasibility or effectiveness of the previously approved
stormwater management controls. Further, if for any reason
development activities are suspended for two years of more, then the
same requirement for resubmission of the stormwater plan shall apply.
4. No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the preceding
phase has been inspected and approved by the Township in accordance
with § 407. If there are deficiencies in any phase, the Township
Engineer shall issue a written description of the required corrections
and stipulate the time by which the corrections must be made.
5. If, during construction, the developer or the developer's contractor
identifies any site conditions, such as subsurface soil conditions,
alterations in surface or subsurface drainage which could affect the
feasibility of the approved stormwater management facilities, the
developer shall notify the Township Engineer within 24 hours of the
discovery of such condition and request a field inspection. The
Township Engineer shall determine if the condition requires a
stormwater plan modification.
6. The Township Engineer or a designated representative shall inspect the
construction of the temporary and permanent stormwater management
system for the development site. The developer shall notify the
Township Engineer at least 48 hours in advance of the completion of the
following key development phases:
§ 406 LOGAN CODE § 406
1:488
§ 407. As-Built Plans, Completion Certificate, and Final Inspection.
[Ord. 09-14-17A]
A. At the completion of preliminary site preparation including
stripping of vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil and construction of
temporary stormwater management and erosion control facilities.
B. At the completion of rough grading but prior to placing of topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements and
ground covers.
C. During construction of the permanent stormwater facilities at such
times as specified by the Township Engineer.
D. Completion of permanent stormwater management facilities
including established ground covers and plantings.
E. Completion of final grading, vegetative control measures or other
site restoration work done in accordance with the approved plan
and permits.
7. In cases where stormwater control facilities are to be installed in areas
of landslide-prone soils or other special site conditions exist, the
Township Engineer, at its sole discretion, may require special
precautions such as soil tests and core borings, full-time inspectors
and/or similar measures. All costs of any such measures shall be borne
solely of the developer.
1. The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans
shall be submitted to the municipality.
2. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications. The latitude and longitude coordinates for all permanent
SWM BMPs must also be submitted, at the central location of the BMPs.
If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the construction
plans, then a licensed qualified professional must sign the completion
certificate.
3. After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the
municipality may conduct a final inspection.
§ 406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 407
1:489

Part 5
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROLS
§ 501. General Criteria. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
§ 502. Criteria for Infiltration Systems. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
1. The developer may select runoff control techniques, or a combination of
techniques, which are most suitable to control runoff from the
development site. All controls shall be subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer. The Township Engineer may request specific
information on design and/or operating features of the proposed
stormwater management controls in order to determine their suitability
and adequacy in terms of the standards of this chapter.
2. The developer must consider the effect of the proposed stormwater
management techniques on any special soil conditions or geological
hazards that may exist on the development site. In the event such
conditions are identified on the site, the Township Engineer may
require in-depth studies by a competent geotechnical engineer. Not all
stormwater methods may be allowable at a particular development site.
3. In developing a stormwater plan for a particular site, stormwater
controls shall be selected according to the following order of
preference:
A. Infiltration of runoff on site, such as underground perforated pipe
with clean coarse aggregate backfill wrapped with geotextile
material.
B. Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural
depressions.
C. Construction of stormwater detention/retention structures.
4. Infiltration practices shall be used to the extent practicable to reduce
volume increases and promote groundwater recharge. A combination of
successive practices may be used to achieve the applicable minimum
control requirements. The developer shall provide justification for
rejecting each of the preferred practices based upon actual site
conditions.
1. Infiltration systems shall be sized and designed based upon local soil
and groundwater conditions.
2. All infiltration systems shall be located at least 10 feet from basement
walls.
3. Infiltration systems shall not be used to handle runoff from commercial
or industrial working or parking areas. This prohibition does not extend
to roof areas that are demonstrated to be suitably protected from the
effects of the commercial/industrial activities.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 502
1:491
§ 503. Criteria for Flow Attenuation Facilities. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
§ 504. Criteria for Stormwater Detention/Retention Facilities. [Ord.
09-14-17A]
4. Infiltration systems may not receive runoff until the entire drainage
area tributary to the system has received final stabilization.
5. The stormwater infiltration facility design shall provide an overflow
system with measures to provide a nonerosive velocity of flow along its
length and at the outfall.
6. Roof drain infiltration facilities shall provide an effective volume of at
least one cubic foot for every two square feet of roof surface.
7. Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as to
maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
1. If flow attenuation facilities are employed to assist in the control of peak
flows of discharge, their effects must be quantified using SCS Technical
Release (TR) 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds or other
method approved by the Township Engineer. The effects of flow
attenuation facilities on travel time should be reflected in the
calculations.
2. Flow attenuation facilities such as swales and natural depressions
should be properly graded to ensure positive drainage and avoid
prolonged ponding of water.
3. Swales shall be properly vegetatively stabilized or otherwise lined to
prevent erosion.
4. Swales shall be designed according to the recommendations contained
in the latest edition of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual.
1. If detention/retention facilities are utilized for the development site, the
facility(ies) shall be designed such that postdevelopment peak runoff
rates from the developed site are controlled to those rates defined by
this chapter.
2. Shared-storage facilities that provide detention of runoff for more than
one development within a single subarea are encouraged wherever
feasible and provided such facilities meet the criteria contained in this
chapter. In addition, runoff from the developments involved shall be
conveyed to the facility in a manner that avoids adverse impacts (such
as flooding or erosion) to channels and properties located between the
development and the shared-storage facility.
3. Where detention/retention facilities will be utilized, multiple use
facilities (such as wetlands, lakes, ballfields or similar recreational/
§ 502 LOGAN CODE § 504
1:492
open space uses) are encouraged wherever feasible, subject to the
approval of the Township Engineer and compliance with the
Pennsylvania DEP's Chapter 105 regulations.
4. Construction of the detention/retention facilities shall conform to the
construction specifications of the PennDOT, Publication 408
Specifications, latest edition, and RC Standards for Roadway
Construction, latest edition.
5. Design of the detention/retention facilities shall include the following:
A. Inflow and outflow structures shall be designed and installed to
prevent erosion to the side slopes. Inflow and outflow structures,
pumping stations and other structures shall be designed to
minimize safety hazards.
B. Bottoms of stormwater detention/retention basins shall be graded
with sufficient slope to provide positive surface drainage. Bottoms
of storage facilities shall be protected from erosion. A subdrainage
system may be required depending upon the location of the pond
bottom relative to groundwater levels.
C. Stormwater detention/retention basins shall have an emergency
spillway. The emergency spillway shall have capacity to handle a
one-hundred-year storm with at least one foot of freeboard. The
Township may require more stringent criteria in sensitive areas
where stormwater problems presently exist. Erosion protection
shall be provided for the emergency spillway compatible with the
computed maximum discharge velocity. The minimum size of rock
lining shall be PennDOT Class R-4.
D. If the fill height for a stormwater detention/retention facility
exceeds five feet, a compaction study must be performed. Fill must
be place in compacted lifts. Where the fill height exceeds five feet,
compaction testing shall be performed during construction and the
developer shall provide the Township with documentation that the
fill was compacted to a density of at least 95% of the Standard
Proctor (ASTM Specification D698).
E. Side slopes inside of the stormwater detention/retention basins
shall not exceed a ratio of 2 1/2:1 horizontal to vertical dimension.
This requirement may be modified based on a detailed engineering
study completed by a licensed professional engineer of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, on behalf of the developer, which
demonstrates that modification of these requirements is justified,
and such plan is reviewed and recommended by the Logan
Township Engineer for approval by the Logan Township Board of
Supervisors.
F. Landscaping shall be provided for the stormwater detention/
retention facility that harmonizes with the surrounding area.
Vegetative cover shall be provided for all areas disturbed by the
§ 504 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 504
1:493
§ 505. Criteria for Collection/Conveyance Facilities. [Ord.
09-14-17A]
construction of the storage facilities, including the interior side
slopes.
G. Control and removal of debris both in stormwater detention/
retention structure and in all inlet and outlet devices shall be a
design consideration.
H. Stormwater detention/retention facilities shall be located to
facilitate maintenance taking into consideration the frequency and
type of equipment that will be required.
I. The perimeter of all detention/retention facilities shall be
completely fenced with a fence having a minimum height of six feet.
Said fence shall be constructed of chain link or other similar
material as may be approved by the Township. A double gate
having a minimum width of 12 feet shall be installed in the fence to
provide access to the stormwater storage facilities. The developer
shall furnish a gate lock.
(1) Fencing may be waived if the proposed facility meets the
following three criteria:
(a) Maximum possible ponding depth of 12 inches or less;
(b) Maximum side slopes of the facility are three horizontal to
one vertical;
(c) Calculations are provided to demonstrate the facility will
dewater within 72 hours of a storm event.
J. To facilitate maintenance and inspection, all stormwater storage
facilities shall be provided with a stabilized access road of a type
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer. When located on
undedicated land, the access road shall be placed within an
easement not less than 20 feet wide, as approved by the Township
Engineer, who may require additional width of easement as
circumstances warrant.
K. Upon completion of the stormwater detention/retention facilities,
the developer shall provide to the Township a certification from an
engineer, licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
certifying that said facilities were constructed in accordance with
this chapter and the plans approved by the Township.
1. All stormwater runoff collection and conveyance facilities shall be
designed in accordance with the following basic standards.
A. Any property(ies) or watercourse(s) receiving stormwater from a
site shall contain an easement from the property owner(s) granting
permission to convey stormwater over the property or watercourse.
§ 504 LOGAN CODE § 505
1:494
The existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto
adjacent properties shall not be altered without a notarized
statement of approval from the adjacent property owner (or
downstream property owners if required by the Municipal
Engineer), accepting the revisions to the concentrated flow. All
such statements shall be recorded in the Blair County Recorder's
office. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent
properties shall be managed such that, at minimum, the peak
diffused flow does not increase in the general direction of
discharge, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. If diffused
flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto adjacent
property, the developer must document that there are adequate
downstream conveyance facilities to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no harm will result
from the concentrated discharge. Areas of existing diffused
drainage discharge shall be subject to any applicable release rate
criteria in the general direction of existing discharge whether they
are proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused
drainage areas. The developer must submit to the Township a
statement, properly acknowledged and notarized, from the
adjacent property owner (or downstream property owners if
required by the Township Engineer), accepting the altered flow. All
such statements shall be recorded in the Blair County Recorder's
office at the sole cost of the person obtaining the same.
B. Where a development site is traversed by a natural watercourse,
there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way
conforming substantially to the line of such natural watercourse
and of such width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage.
The terms of the easement or right-of-way shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that
may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of
the easement or right-of-way. Also maintenance, including mowing
of vegetation within the easement or right-of-way shall be required,
except as approved by the appropriate governing authority. If
applicable, the developer shall obtain drainage easements or
rights-of-way from downstream property owners.
C. In order to promote overland flow and infiltration/percolation of
runoff, roof drains shall not be connected to roadways or storm
sewers unless permitted on a case-by-case basis by the Township.
Lots located on the high side of roadways shall extend footer drains
to the curbline storm sewer, if applicable. Low side lots shall extend
footer drains to a stormwater collection/conveyance/control system
or natural watercourse in accordance with the approved
stormwater plan for the development site. If applicable, stabilized
outlets shall be provided for all roof drains and footer drains.
§ 505 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 505
1:495
D. Collection/conveyance facilities shall not be installed parallel and
close to the top or bottom of a major embankment to avoid the
possibility of failing or causing the embankment to fail.
E. All stormwater drainage collection/conveyance facilities shall be
designed to convey the twenty-five-year storm peak flow rate from
the contributing drainage area and to carry it to the nearest
suitable outlet such as a stormwater control facility, curbed
roadway, storm sewer or natural watercourse without damage to
the drainage structure or roadway. All stormwater drainage
collection/conveyance facilities shall be designed to convey the
runoff from the twenty-five-year design storm. Roadway crossings
located within designated floodplain area must be able to convey
runoff from the one-hundred-year design storm with a minimum of
1.0 foot freeboard measured below the lowest point along the top of
the roadway. Stormwater drainage collection/conveyance facilities
must also be designed to convey the one-hundred-year storm event
to any stormwater detention facilities so as not to endanger life or
seriously damage property.
F. Stormwater drainage shall not be permitted to cross over
intersections or the crown of the public street. Trench drains shall
be used to control drainage from entrances (driveways, business
accesses) to a public street.
G. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the development site cannot adequately provide
for drainage, open channels may be constructed conforming
substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainageways.
Work within natural drainageways shall be subject to the approval
of the DEP through its Joint Permit Application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by the DEP, through its General Permit
process.
H. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, to drain all low points
along roadways and to intercept stormwater runoff along roadways
at intervals reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area
drained.
I. Existing points of concentrated stormwater drainage that
discharge from the development site onto adjacent property shall
not be altered without the permission of the altered property
owner(s) and shall be subject to any applicable discharge criteria
specified in this chapter.
J. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to
any applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of the
existing discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or
maintained as diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise
provided by this chapter. If diffused flow is proposed to be
§ 505 LOGAN CODE § 505
1:496
concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the developer
must document that adequate downstream conveyance facilities
exist to safely transport the concentrated discharge, or otherwise
prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will
result from the concentrated discharge.
K. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter
that would be located in or adjacent to waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or wetlands shall be subject to
approval by the DEP through its Joint Permit Application process,
or, when deemed appropriate by the DEP, through its General
Permit process. When there is a question whether wetlands may be
involved, it shall be the responsibility of developer to show that the
land in question cannot be classified as wetlands, otherwise
approval to work in the area in question must be obtained from the
DEP.
L. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter
that would be located within the right-of-way of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
M. All spring and sump pump discharges shall be collected so as not to
flow onto any roadway. Stabilized outlets shall be provided for all
spring and sump pump discharges.
2. Storm sewers shall comply with the following criteria.
A. Where practical, the storm sewers shall be designed to traverse
under seeded and planted areas. If constructed within 10 feet of
road paving, walks or other surfaced areas, storm sewers shall
have a narrow trench and maximum compaction of backfill to
prevent settlement of the superimposed surface or development.
B. Storm sewers shall be installed after excavating and filling in the
area to be traversed is completed, unless the storm sewer is
installed in the original ground with a minimum of three feet of
cover and adequate protection is provided during the fill
construction.
C. Storm sewers shall be designed with concrete cradle, the type of
which shall be approved by the Township, when traversing fill area
and/or with concrete anchors when grades exceed 20%.
D. Storm sewers shall be backfilled with PennDOT 2RC or PennDOT
2B coarse aggregate when traversing under paved areas and
shoulder areas.
E. Storm sewers shall be designed to adequately handle the
anticipated stormwater flow. Pipe within a Township right-of-way
shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches, unless the Township
approves a smaller diameter.
§ 505 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 505
1:497
F. Storm sewers shall be constructed of one of the materials specified
in PennDOT Publication 408 Specifications, Sections 601, 602 and
603. All corrugated polyethylene pipe shall be Type S.
G. Trenching, bedding and backfilling requirements and materials
shall conform to the requirements of PennDOT Publications 408
Specifications, as supplemented and amended by this chapter.
H. Storm inlets and structures shall be designed to be adequate, safe,
self-cleaning and unobtrusive and consistent with PennDOT and
Township standards. The maximum spacing of inlets shall not
exceed 600 feet. Inlets shall be PennDOT Type C or M with cast-inplace
reinforced concrete or precast concrete tops.
I. The appropriate type grates shall be provided for all storm inlets,
structures and other entrance appurtenances.
J. Manholes shall be designed so that the top shall be at finished
grade and sloped to conform to the slope of the finished grade. Top
castings of structures located in roads or parking areas shall be
machined or installed to preclude "clanking."
K. Where a proposed storm sewer connects with an existing storm
sewer system, the developer shall demonstrate that sufficient
capacity exists in the downstream storm sewer system to the
handle the additional flow. The developer shall provide a letter from
the purveyor providing the existing storm sewer service approving
the connection of the proposed storm sewer system.
L. Storm sewer outfall shall be provided with either reinforced
concrete headwalls or pipe end sections and energy dissipation
devices to prevent erosion and conform to the applicable
requirements of the Pennsylvania DEP for stream encroachment
(Chapter 105 of the Pennsylvania DEP Rules and Regulations).
M. Storm sewers shall be placed in front of the curb or curbline when
located in a public street right-of-way. When storm sewers are
located in undedicated land, storm sewers shall be placed within an
easement not less than 20 feet wide as approved by the Township
Engineer, who may require additional width of easement as
circumstances warrant.
§ 505 LOGAN CODE § 505
1:498
Part 6
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
§ 601. Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners. [Ord.
09-14-17A]
§ 602. Operation and Maintenance Agreements. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
1. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The Township may require a dedication of such facilities as part of
the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the Township will accept the
facilities. The Township reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
A. If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which roadways, storm sewers and other
public improvements are to be dedicated to the Township,
stormwater collection/conveyance facilities shall be dedicated to
and maintained by the Township. The ownership and operation/
maintenance of stormwater infiltration systems, flow attenuation
facilities and stormwater detention/retention facilities shall be the
responsibility of the developer or private management entity in
perpetuity.
B. If a development site is to be maintained in single ownership or if
storm sewers and other public improvements are to be privately
owned and maintained, then the ownership and operation/
maintenance of any and all stormwater control facilities shall be
the responsibility of the developer or private management entity in
perpetuity.
2. Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated
as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed
restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.
3. The O&M Plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
4. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this part.
1. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see
Appendix A)35 covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned. Said O&M agreement may be part of a land
development agreement with a developer at the option of the Township.
35.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 602
1:499
§ 603. Performance Guarantee. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter
in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.36 The security shall be in
accordance with the requirements of Chapter 22 of the Township of Logan
Code of Ordinances.
§ 604. Township Stormwater Maintenance Fund. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
A. The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
agreement.
B. The owner shall convey to the municipality conservation easements
to assure access for periodic inspections by the municipality and
maintenance, as necessary.
C. The owner shall keep on file with the municipality the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change,
new information shall be submitted by the owner to the
municipality within 10 working days of the change.
2. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
municipality may perform the services required following due notice by
the Township to the stormwater control owner to correct the problem(s)
and charge the owner appropriate fees. The facility's owner shall
reimburse the Township for all costs within 30 days of the date of the
Township's cost statement. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien
against the property in addition to any other remedy available to the
Township.
1. Persons installing stormwater facilities shall be required to pay a
specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund to
help defray costs of periodic inspections and maintenance expenses.
The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
A. If the stormwater facility is to be privately owned and maintained,
the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections performed
by the Township for a period of 10 years, as estimated by the
Township Engineer. After that period of time, inspections will be
performed at the expense of the Township.
36.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509, 10510 and 10511.
§ 602 LOGAN CODE § 604
1:500
§ 605. Dedication of Public Improvements. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
B. If the stormwater facility is to be owned and maintained by the
Township, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The Township Engineer
will establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by
the applicant.
C. The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The Township Engineer shall
determine the present worth equivalents which shall be subject to
the approval of the governing body.
2. If a stormwater facility is proposed that also serves as a recreational
facility (e.g., ball field, lake), the Township may reduce or waive the
amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of the
land for public recreation purposes.
3. If in the future a stormwater facility (whether publicly or privately
owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or other
stormwater facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit
will be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to
the storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit
remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to
the depositor.
1. Dedication of public improvements shall conform to applicable
provisions of Chapter 22 of the Township of Logan Code of Ordinances.
§ 604 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 605
1:501

Part 7
FEES AND EXPENSES
§ 701. General. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
1. The Township may charge the applicant all costs incurred in the review
fee charged to an applicant.
2. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the
following:
A. Administrative/clerical processing.
B. Review of the SWM site plan.
C. Attendance at meetings.
D. Inspections.
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 701
1:503

Part 8
PROHIBITIONS
§ 801. Prohibited Discharges and Connections. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
1. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the surface waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
2. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except: 1) as provided in
Subsection 3 below: and 2) discharges authorized under a state or
federal permit.
3. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution of a regulated small MS4 or to
the waters of this commonwealth:
A. Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
B. Discharges from potable water sources including waterline
flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of total residual chlorine (TRC).
C. Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance,
landscape drainage and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
D. Diverted stream flows and springs.
E. Noncontaminated pumped groundwater and water from foundation
and footing drains and crawl space pumps.
F. Noncontaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal
systems.
G. Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where
cleaning agents are not utilized.
H. Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.
4. In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection 3 significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
5. Upon notice provided by the Township under Subsection 4, the
responsible person/discharger will have a reasonable time, as
determined by the Township, to cease the discharge consistent with the
degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
§ 801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 801
1:505
§ 802. Roof Drains and Sump Pumps. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
§ 803. Alteration of SWM BMPs. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
6. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibility under
state law.
1. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or
vegetative BMPs wherever feasible.
2. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside ditches except when it is more advantageous to connect the
roof drains to streets, storm sewers, or roadside ditches, as permitted
by the Township.
1. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures that were installed as a requirement of
this chapter without the written approval of the Township.
2. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation
within a drainage easement, which would limit or alter the function of
the easement without written approval of the Township.
§ 801 LOGAN CODE § 803
1:506
Part 9
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
§ 901. Right of Entry. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Township or its designated
agent may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the Township
to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard
to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 902. Inspection. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
§ 903. Enforcement. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
§ 904. Suspension and Revocation. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
1. The landowner or the owner's designee (including the Township for
dedicated and owned facilities) shall inspect SWM BMPs, facilities and/
or structures installed under this chapter according to the following
frequencies, at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/or
structures continue to function as intended:
A. Annually for the first five years.
B. Once every three years thereafter.
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year-or-greater
storm.
2. Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following
precipitation events. A written inspection report shall be created to
document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the date
and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the
inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected,
observations on performance, and recommendations for improving
performance, if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the
municipality within 30 days following completion of the inspection.
1. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 302.
2. It shall be unlawful to violate § 803 of this chapter.
3. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the municipality.
1. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended or revoked for:
A. Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
§ 901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 904
1:507
§ 905. Penalties. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
§ 906. Appeals. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
B. A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
C. The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
2. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Township when:
A. The Township has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
B. The Township is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
3. An approval that has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
4. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the Township may provide a limited time
period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
Township will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
1. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties
shall be cumulative.
2. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
1. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the
municipality within 30 days of that action.
2. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to
the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Blair County Court of
Common Pleas within 30 days of the Township's decision.
§ 904 LOGAN CODE § 907
1:508
§ 907. When Effective. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
This chapter shall become effective upon enactment thereof.
§ 907 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 907
1:509

Part 10
REFERENCES
§ 1001. List of references. [Ord. 09-14-17A]
1. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology,
1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
2. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
3. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
4. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
5. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
§ 1001 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1001
1:511
Chapter 21
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 1001 LOGAN CODE § 1001
1:512
Part 1
STREET EXCAVATIONS
§ 101. Exceptions. [Ord. 6-6-74]
In accordance with the provisions of Section 1156 of Article XI of the
Second Class Township Code, as amended, no railroad or street railway
shall hereafter be constructed upon any Township road, nor shall any
railroad or street railway crossings, nor any gas pipe, water pipe, electric
conduits, or other piping, be laid upon or in, nor shall any telephone,
telegraph, or electric light or power poles, or any coal tipples or any
other obstructions be erected upon or in, any portion of a Township road
except under such conditions, restrictions and regulations relating to the
installation and maintenance thereof, as may be prescribed in permits
granted by the Township for such purpose.
§ 102. Application for a Permit. [Ord. 6-6-74]
The application for a permit shall be on a form prescribed by the Township
and submitted to the Township in triplicate. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee in accordance with the Schedule of Fees set forth
by the Department of Transportation, for Highway Occupancy Permits and
Restoration Charges. In addition, the applicant shall submit three copies of
a sketch showing such dimensions as the location of the intended facility,
width of the traveled roadway, right-of-way lines and a dimension to the
nearest intersecting street.
§ 103. Issuance of Permit. [Ord. 6-6-74]
A permit shall be issued to the applicant after all the aforementioned
requirements have been filed.
§ 104. Specifications for Trench Backfill and Street Restoration.
[Ord. 6-6-74; as amended by Ord. 9-3-92A]
Any person issued a permit pursuant to this Part shall backfill any trench
excavation upon or in any Township street and restore any such street in
accordance with specifications adopted by the Board of Supervisors, from
time to time, by resolution, which said specifications shall be in accordance
with, and shall not be less stringent than, those specifications adopted
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for State highway and
street restoration.37
§ 105. Township Inspection and Cost. [Ord. 6-6-74; as amended by
Ord. 9-3-92A]
Immediately prior to commencement of backfilling of any trench in any
Township street, the applicant granted the permit shall notify the Township
37.Editor's Note: See Specifications for Public Improvements [Chapter 22, Part 4].
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 105
1:513
and shall not undertake to begin backfilling any such trench until the
Township, or its duly authorizing representative, is present to inspect said
backfilling to insure compliance with said Township specifications. The
Township shall also, whenever necessary, enforce compliance with the
conditions, restrictions and regulations prescribed by the permit and
specifications. Where any settlement or defect in the work occurs, if the
applicant shall fail to rectify any such settlement or other defect within 15
days after written notice from the Township to do so, the Township may do
the work and shall impose upon the applicant the cost thereof, together with
an additional 20% of said cost. All costs of inspection by the Township or
its duly authorized representative shall be borne solely by the permit holder
and shall be paid to the Township within 30 days of the date of billing of
said cost to the permit holder by the Township. The Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Logan shall, from time to time, establish a fee for the cost
of said inspection.
§ 106. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 6-6-74; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; by Ord. 9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 105 LOGAN CODE § 106
1:514
Part 2
REGULATION OF DRAINAGE PIPES FOR DRIVEWAYS
§ 201. Title. [Ord. 12-18A-86]
This Part 2 shall be known and may be cited as "The Regulation of Drainage
Pipes for Driveways Ordinance of Logan Township."
§ 202. Definitions. [Ord. 12-18A-86]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part 2 shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
PERSON — Any association, firm, partnership, corporation or any other
entity, as well as, a natural person male or female. The singular shall include
the plural.
TOWNSHIP COORDINATOR — The person authorized and empowered by
the Logan Township Board of Supervisors to issue permits designating the
type of pipe required and to oversee the enforcement of this Part 2.
§ 203. Imposition of Regulations. [Ord. 12-18A-86]
It is hereby ordained that from and after the effective date of this Part
2 it shall be unlawful for any person to install, cause to be installed or
permit the installation of driveways over Township culverts, ditches and
drains without first securing a permit from the Township Coordinator; and
it shall be unlawful for any person to install, cause to be installed or permit
the installation of any driveway not in accordance with the specifications
hereinafter set forth.
§ 204. Pipe Regulations; Specifications and Prohibitions. [Ord.
12-18A-86]
1. It shall be mandatory for anyone installing a driveway over a drain,
culvert or ditch on a Logan Township right of way to use as a drain
through said driveways, pipes constructed of one of the following
materials:
A. Steel of such gauge or strength as to withstand the maximum
weight of vehicles traveling said driveway; or
B. Concrete, of such gauge or strength as to withstand the maximum
weight of vehicles traveling said driveway; or
C. Heavy Duty Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe, manufactured by
Advanced Drainage Systems, (ADS) Inc.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 204
1:515
§ 205. Powers and Duties of the Township Coordinator. [Ord.
12-18A-86]
The Township Coordinator, upon application of any person desiring to install
a drainage ditch, culvert or drain on a Logan Township right of way, shall
issue a written permit designating the size and type of pipe to be used for
said ditch so as to insure proper and actual flow of water in the said ditch,
and to insure the pipe will withstand the weight of vehicles traveling over
such drive.
§ 206. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 12-18A-86 as amended by
Ord. 10-27-88 by Ord. 9-19-96; and by Ord.2-13-97]
Provided, that if ADS Heavy Duty Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe is
used in a driveway over which vehicles will travel, then in such
case the ADS Heavy Duty Corrugated Polyethylene Pipe must be
covered with at least 12 inches of fill. Said fill may consist of
crushed stone, gravel or compacted soil.
Provided further, that if ADS Heavy Duty Corrugated Polyethylene
Pipe is used in a ditch, culvert or drain, over which no vehicles will
be traveling, then no fill shall be required.
2. It is hereby directly prohibited for any person to use new or used water
tanks with the ends cut out for the purpose as a drain through any
driveway.
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 204 LOGAN CODE § 206
1:516
Part 3
REGULATION OF SKATEBOARDS AND SIMILAR DEVICES
§ 301. Title. [Ord. 3-29-90]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as "The Regulation of
Skateboards and Similar Devices Ordinance of Logan Township."
§ 302. Definitions. [Ord. 3-29-90]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BICYCLE — A vehicle propelled solely by human powered pedals.
TRAFFICWAY — The entire width between property lines, or other
boundary lines, of every way or place of which any part is open to the public
for purposes of vehicular travel as a matter of right or custom.
§ 303. Imposition of Regulations. [Ord. 3-29-90; as amended by
Ord. 5-31-90]
§ 304. Enforcement. [Ord. 3-29-90; as amended by Ord. 5-31-90]
It shall be the duty of the Logan Township Police Department to enforce
the provisions of this Part with respect to all areas, except the areas under
control and ownership of the Altoona Area School District, wherein it shall
be the duty of the security person or employee of the Altoona Area School
District to enforce the provisions of this Part with regard to its property.
1. No person shall ride upon, or utilize in any manner upon the streets and
trafficways in the Township of Logan, or a sidewalk of or property of the
Altoona Area School District, any skateboard, roller skates, scooters, or
any other human powered device, other than bicycles.
2. No person shall ride upon, or utilize any skateboard, roller skates,
scooters, bicycles or any other human powered device upon a sidewalk
in a business district in the Township of Logan.
3. Any person riding upon, or utilizing any skateboard, roller skates,
scooters, or any other human powered devices, upon a sidewalk other
than in a business district or property of the Altoona Area School
District, in a playground, or any other places open to pedestrian traffic,
shall yield right-of-way to any pedestrian, and shall utilize any such
devices with all due regard to the safety of pedestrians and property.
4. No person shall erect, or place, any type of ramp designed for use with
skateboards, roller skates, scooters, bicycles, or any other human
powered vehicles on the streets, sidewalks and trafficways in the
Township of Logan.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 305
1:517
§ 305. Enforcement and Penalty. [Ord. 3-29-90; as amended by Ord.
9-19-96; and by Ord. 2-13-97]
1. Enforcement. Any police officer and/or other person authorized by the
Board of Supervisors may enforce the provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000 plus the cost of prosecution, and/or be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense which shall be subject to the aforesaid penalties.
§ 305 LOGAN CODE § 305
1:518
Part 4
DITCHES, CULVERTS AND/OR OTHER WATER CHANNELS
§ 401. Befouling of Ditches, Culverts and/or Other Water Channels.
[Ord. 5-7-98A]
It shall be unlawful to scatter, spill, dump or drop and/or otherwise place or
permit to be scattered, spilled, dumped or dropped and/or otherwise place
any leaves, soil, sand, stone, dirt, debris, refuse, litter or other substance
of any kind, including liquids and chemicals, organic and/or inorganic in
nature (except storm water) into and/or upon any ditches, culverts and/or
other water channels owned and/or maintained by the Township of Logan.
§ 402. Penalties. [Ord. 5-7-98A]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than
$600, and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
30 days.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:519

Part 5
SIDEWALKS
§ 501. Duty of Property Owners. [Added by Ord. 11-10-05]
It shall be the duty of owners of property abutting any public street to
repair, and keep free from obstruction any sidewalks along such property
which are regularly available for the use of the public, whether such
sidewalks are located on the owner's property or within the boundaries of
the streets abutting such property.
§ 502. (Reserved) [Added by Ord. 11-10-05]
§ 503. Notice to Repair Sidewalk. [Added by Ord. 11-10-05]
Whenever it shall be determined proper and necessary by the Township
Engineer that sidewalks shall be repaved, recurbed, and repaired in any
public street of the Township or adjacent to any public street of the
Township, the Manager shall serve written notices upon the owners of
property abutting on said public streets, requiring them to repave, recurb,
or repair such sidewalks within 90 days from the date of such notice unless
it is determined by the Township Manager that such condition constitutes
an emergency, in which case 30 days' notice shall be given. The notice shall
specify the width of the sidewalk, whether the sidewalk is to be constructed
within the public right-of-way or adjacent to the public right-of-way, the
character of the same, whether of concrete, brick or other material, and the
nature of the surface thereof.
§ 504. Township May Do Work Upon Default of Property Owner.
[Added by Ord. 11-10-05]
Upon failure of any owner of property abutting on said streets to do and
perform any work required by the notice provided for in § 502 and/or
§ 503 of this part within the time specified in such notice, the Board of
Supervisors shall cause the same to be done and collect the cost of the work
and material from the abutting property owners on a foot front basis, plus a
penalty of 10% in the manner provided by law.
§ 505. Specifications. [Added by Ord. 11-10-05]
Whenever any sidewalk is constructed or delineated in a public street of
the Township or adjacent to any public street of the Township, either by
voluntary action of an abutting property owner or pursuant to notice under
§ 502 and/or § 503 of this Part, the said sidewalk shall be constructed or
delineated in conformity with the sidewalk construction detail adopted by
the Board. All such sidewalk pavements shall be constructed or delineated
in the location, to the width and of the material specified in the notice
received by the property owner, or in case the said sidewalk is constructed
without notice the same shall be constructed or delineated in the location,
to the width and of the materials in accordance with specifications
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 505
1:521
submitted by the Township Engineer upon application to said Engineer,
and said sidewalks shall conform to the established grade of the street on
which the same are laid, or to such grade as shall be fixed by the Township
Engineer or Manager.
§ 506. Permit Required for Work on Sidewalk. [Added by Ord.
11-10-05]
It shall be unlawful for any person to tear up, destroy, remove, deface or
excavate, or otherwise damage any sidewalk or curb in the public streets
of the Township, or adjacent to any public street in the Township, except
in accordance with permit duly issued by the Township upon written
application to said Township.
§ 507. Obstruction of Sidewalk Prohibited. [Added by Ord.
11-10-05]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any dirt, glass, rubbish,
garbage or refuse matter upon any of the sidewalks in the public streets
of the Township, or adjacent to any public street of the Township. The
sidewalks shall be kept open and unobstructed at all times for use of the
public, and the owner of the abutting property shall keep the sidewalk areas
free from weeds, hedges and other similar obstructions at all times.
§ 508. Snow Removal from Sidewalk. [Added by Ord. 11-10-05]
1. Responsibility for Removal of Snow and Ice. It shall be the duty of the
owners and occupiers of properties as hereinafter provided, and the
owners of unoccupied lots along whose premises sidewalks have been
laid, or may hereafter be laid under the authority of the Township, to
cause said sidewalks along their respective properties to be cleared to
the width of said sidewalk of snow or ice within 24 hours after the same
shall have ceased to fall, in the case of snow, or shall have occurred, in
the case of ice; provided the owner shall be responsible for conforming
to the provisions of this section in the case of unoccupied property, or
property occupied by him or a property containing more than one
dwelling or business unit; the occupant shall be responsible therefore in
the case of property containing a single dwelling or business unit.
2. Responsibility of Owners of Multiple-Family Dwellings and Apartments.
It shall be the duty of all owners of multiple-family dwellings or
apartments to cause sidewalks leading from the said buildings to the
street, parking lots, or other sidewalks located along the respective
property to be cleared of snow or ice within 24 hours after the same
shall have ceased to fall, in the case of snow, or shall have occurred, in
the case of ice.
3. Responsibility for Dedicated Streets Prior to Acceptance. It shall be the
duty of all owners of properties containing apartments or multiple
family dwellings to cause dedicated paved streets along the respective
properties to be cleared of snow or ice within 24 hours after the same
§ 505 LOGAN CODE § 508
1:522
§ 509. Removal of Obstruction by Township. [Added by Ord.
11-10-05]
In the case of vacant or unoccupied property owners residing outside of
the Township, the Board of Supervisors may cause any dirt, glass, garbage,
snow, rubbish, weeds, hedges, or other obstructions to be removed from
said sidewalks without notice and collect the cost of the removal thereof
from such non-resident owner or owners.
§ 510. Continuation of Existing Regulations. [Added by Ord.
11-10-05]
The provisions of this Part shall not affect any act done, liability incurred or
right accrued or vested, or affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted, to enforce any right or penalty or punish any offense under the
authority of any ordinance or part thereof repealed in this Part.
§ 511. Penalty. [Added by Ord. 11-10-05]
shall have ceased to fall, in the case of snow, or shall have occurred, in
the case of ice, which duty shall continue until said streets shall have
been accepted as a public right-of-way of the Township.
1. Violation of Part 5, Sidewalks (Excepting Snow Removal from
Sidewalks). Except as provided in § 511(2), with regard to penalty for
snow removal from sidewalks, any person, firm, or corporation, who
shall violate any provision of this Part or this code shall, upon conviction
thereof in a proceeding commenced before a district justice pursuant to
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedures, be sentenced to a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be
deemed a separate offense.
2. Violation of Part 5, § 508, Snow Removal from Sidewalks. Any person,
partnership, firm, association or corporation violating any provision of
§ 508, "Snow Removal from Sidewalk," shall, for each and every
violation, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine in
accordance with the Township's Adopted Fee Schedule. Provided, the
enforcement personnel of the Township of Logan shall, within five days
of violation, issue a warning notice either by personal delivery, or by
posting on the property. In each case, the notice shall contain the
Section violated, the location where the violation took place, the
name(s) of the property owners, and any other facts that might pertain
to the circumstances attending the violation. The warning notice shall
also contain instructions to the person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation responsible for such violation that if the violation is not
corrected within 24 hours of the time on the warning notice, the
Enforcement Officer will issue a notice of violation directing that the
§ 508 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 511
1:523
violation be corrected within 24 hours of receipt of the notice, with the
appropriate penalty noted on the notice. Failure to correct the violation
within 24 hours of the receipt of the violation notice will result in
appropriate fines for each violation as noted above.
§ 511 LOGAN CODE § 511
1:524
Chapter 22
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
§ 511 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 511
1:525

Part 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND DISCLAIMER
§ 101. Title. [Ord. 5-17-79]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Logan Township
Subdivision and Land Development Chapter."
§ 102. Purpose. [Ord. 5-17-79; as amended by Ord. 10-12-00]
The purpose of this chapter is to assure the orderly growth and
development within Logan Township in the following manner:
§ 103. Liability Disclaimer. [Ord. 10-12-00]
1. To assist orderly, efficient and integrated subdivision and land
development.
2. To provide for the coordination of existing streets and the uniform
regulation of the construction, opening and dedication for public use
and travel of streets.
3. To provide for efficient and orderly extension of community services
and facilities at minimum cost and maximum convenience.
4. To insure conformance of land development with the Logan Township
Zoning Chapter.
5. To promote thereby the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of Logan Township.
6. To secure equitable handling of all subdivision and land development
plans by providing uniform procedures and standards.
7. To insure that provision shall be made for drainage, water, sewerage,
streets and other needed improvements.
8. To assure safe management of stormwater runoff resulting from land
alteration and disturbance activities in accordance with watershed
stormwater management plans adopted pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Storm Water Management Act (Act 167 of 1978, as amended).
9. To utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems and to
preserve the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
10. To encourage natural infiltration of rainfall to preserve groundwater
supplies and stream flows.
11. To provide for adequate maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management structures in the Township.
1. Neither the granting nor the denial of any approval nor the compliance
with the provisions of this Part or with any condition imposed by the
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:527
Township, its officials, employees, or designated representatives
thereunder, shall relieve any person from any responsibility for damage
to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by
law, nor impose any liability upon Township officials, employees or its
designated representatives to the maximum extent permitted by law.
2. Neither the granting nor the denial of any permit which includes any
stormwater management requirements shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by the Township, the
Township officials, employees, or designated representatives thereof of
the practicability or safety of any stormwater structure or facility, use
or other plan proposed, and shall create no liability or cause of action
upon any Township official, employee, or designated representative
thereof for any damage that may result pursuant thereto to the
maximum extent permitted by law.
§ 103 LOGAN CODE § 103
1:528
Part 2
DEFINITIONS
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 5-17-79; as amended by Ord. 7-23-81; by
Ord. 1-23-92A; by Ord. 1-23-94; by Ord. 7-7-94; by Ord. 10-12-00; by
Ord. 6-27-02; by Ord. 07-08-04A; and by Ord. 12-14-06]
As used in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the following words or phrases have the meaning indicated
below:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of human activities and the natural processes, at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
ACT — The Storm Water Management Act (Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864,
No. 167; 32 P.S. §§ 680.1-680.17, as amended by Act of May 24, 1984, No.
63).
AGRICULTURE SUBDIVISION — The division of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more the 10 acres, and not involving any new street
or easement of access.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final required to be filed and approved prior to start of
construction or development including, but not limited to, an application for
a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan or for the
approval of a development plan.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts to meet State
Water Quality Requirements, to promote groundwater recharge, and to
otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
CHANNEL — A perceptible natural or artificial waterway which periodically
or continuously contains moving water or which forms a connecting link
between two bodies of water. It has a definite bed and banks which confine
the water.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Blair County Conservation District.
COUNTY — Blair County, Pennsylvania.
CULVERT — A closed conduit for the free passage of surface drainage under
a highway, railroad, canal or other embankment.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 201
1:529
DESIGN CRITERIA —
DESIGN STORM — See "storm frequency."
DETENTION — The slowing, dampening or attenuating of runoff flows
entering the natural drainage pattern or storm drainage system by
temporarily holding water on a surface area in a detention basin or within
the drainage system.
DETENTION POND OR BASIN — A basin or reservoir, usually small,
constructed to impound or retard surface runoff temporarily.
DEVELOPER — The person, persons, or any corporation, partnership,
association, or other entity or any responsible person therein or agent
therefor that undertakes the activities associated with changes in land use.
The term "developer" is intended to include but not necessarily be limited
to the term "subdivider", "owner," and "builder" even though the individuals
involved in successive stages of a project may vary.
DEVELOPMENT — Any activity, construction, alteration, change in land use
or practice that affects stormwater runoff characteristics.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, a plat of
subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location of all buildings and other
structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and
parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase
"provisions of development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the
written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DISCHARGE — The flow or rate of flow from a canal, conduit, channel or
other hydraulic structure.
DRAINAGE —
DRAINAGE AREA —
ENCROACHMENT — Any structure or activity which in any manner
changes, expands or diminishes, the course, current or cross section of any
watercourse, floodway or body of water.
EROSION — Wearing away of the lands by running water, glaciers, winds
and waves.
A. Engineering guidelines specifying construction details and materials.
Objectives, results, or limits which must be met by a facility, structure,
or process in performance of its intended functions.
B.
In general, the removal of surface water from a given area. Commonly
applied to surface water and ground water.
A.
The area of a drainage basin or watershed, expressed in acres, square
miles, or other unit of area. Also called catchment area, watershed,
river basin.
A.
The area served by a sewer system receiving storm and surface water,
or by a watercourse.
B.
§ 201 LOGAN CODE § 201
1:530
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project site
which identifies BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EROSION CONTROL — The application of measures to reduce erosion of
land surfaces.
FRONTAGE — The horizontal or curvilinear distance along the public street
line upon which a lot abuts. Vehicular access shall be provided along the
frontage.
GROUND COVER — Materials covering the ground surface.
GROUND WATER — Subsurface water occupying the saturation zone, from
which wells and springs are fed.
GROUND WATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of ground water naturally
by precipitation or runoff or artificially by spreading or injection.
IMPERVIOUS — Not allowing or allowing only with great difficulty the
movement of water, impermeable.
IMPROVEMENT(S)/PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT(S) — Any street, road,
walkway, curb, gutter, streetlight fire hydrant, shade tree, water main,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, paved parking area intended for use by
members of the public, retention/detention facility, buffer area, screening
of obtrusive use, designated open and/or recreational area and/or any other
similar type of structure, area, or item as may be designated by the
Township.
INFILTRATION —
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The flow or movement of water through the interstices or pores of a soil
or other porous medium.
A.
B. The absorption of liquid by the soil.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential building(s),
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure.
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
Development in accordance with Section 503 (1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
(3)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 201
1:531
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the changing, grading,
transportation, fill and any other activity which causes land to be exposed
to the danger of erosion.
LAND OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a tenant if authorized under the
lease to exercise the rights of the land owner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a land owner for the
purposes of this chapter.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
MAINTENANCE — The upkeep necessary for efficient operation of physical
properties.
MINOR SUBDIVISION —
Any activity, construction, alteration, change in land use or practice
that affects stormwater runoff characteristics.
C.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single family detached dwelling or
single family semidetached dwelling when such units are intended
to be a condominium, however, all Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources sewage facilities planning requirements
shall apply to such dwellings.
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined
as a tract or area used principally as the location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
D.
A subdivision consisting of not more than two lots, tracts, parcels or
other divisions of land, each of which fronts a minimum of 75 feet upon
a public street.
A.
The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two such lots, tracts, or
parcels of land wherein each such lot, tract, or parcel of land fronts a
minimum of 15 feet upon a public street and extending back therefrom
continuously a minimum width of 15 feet to tract or parcel of land with
access, which is used solely and exclusively for ingress, egress and
regress from such lot, tract or parcel of land to such public street.
B.
§ 201 LOGAN CODE § 201
1:532
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used with or without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land (which shall also conform to the
Township Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27] in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipalities
Authority Act of 1955."
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER/TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer
licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed by the
Township of Logan.
NATURAL STORMWATER RUNOFF REGIME — A watershed where natural
surface configurations, runoff characteristics and defined drainage
conveyances have attained the conditions of equilibrium.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the Federal
Government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,
which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
Subdivision of a two-family dwelling as defined in the Township's
Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27].
C.
Minor Subdivision approval shall not be granted for any lot if such lot
requested to be so divided shall have been in any way the subject of
a subdivision within two years prior to the application for such minor
subdivision.
D.
A Minor Subdivision shall conform to DEP sewage facilities planning
requirements and storm water management requirements of the
Township.
E.
A Minor Subdivision shall not involve the extension of any public
facilities including:
(1) New streets.
(2) Paving or other improvements.
(3) New or improved storm drainage.
(4) New or improved public facilities or services.
F.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 201
1:533
OUTFALL —
OUTLET CONTROL STRUCTURE — The means of controlling the
relationship between the headwater elevation and the discharge, placed at
the outlet or downstream end of any structure through which water may
flow.
PEAK FLOW — Maximum flow.
PENNDOT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PENNSYLVANIA DEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A standard which establishes an end result
or outcome which is to be achieved but does not prescribe specific means
for achieving it.
PERSON — Any natural individual, corporation or other entity.
PLAN OF LOTS — A document containing, but not limited to, the description
of a lot, size, metes and bounds, rights-of-way, easements (both existing and
to be built) and building restriction lines.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final as follows:
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Board of Supervisors or Planning Commission, intended to inform
and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this
chapter.
The point, location or structure where drainage discharges from a
sewer, drain or other conduit.
A.
B. The conduit leading to the ultimate discharge point.
PRELIMINARY — A proposed plan indicating the layout of a subdivision
prepared by the developer for submission to the Board of Supervisors
of Logan Township for its consideration.
A.
FINAL — A complete and exact plan of a subdivision which is presented
to the Board of Supervisors of Logan Township for approval and which,
if approved, the Plan of Lots will be submitted by the developer to the
Recorder of Deeds of Blair County for recording in accordance with the
law.
B.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas.
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 201 LOGAN CODE § 201
1:534
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 53 P.S. § 271 et seq.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC STREET — Any and all streets owned and maintained by any local,
state or federal government.
RELEASE RATE PERCENTAGE — The watershed factor determined by
comparing the maximum rate of runoff from a subbasin to the contributing
rate of runoff to the watershed peak rate at specific points of interest.
RETENTION POND — A basin, usually enclosed by artificial dikes, that
is used to retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and
releasing it at a predetermined rate.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event of a
given magnitude can be expected to recur.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
RUNOFF CHARACTERISTICS — The surface components of any watershed
which affect the rate, amount, and direction of stormwater runoff. These
may include but are not limited to: vegetation, soils, slopes and man-made
landscape alterations.
SCS — U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service.
SEDIMENT — Mineral or organic solid material that is being transported or
has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or ice and has come to
rest.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving water, wind or gravity.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations-protection of designated and existing uses (See 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 93 and 96).
STORAGE FACILITY — See "detention pond and retention pond."
STORM FREQUENCY — The average interval in years over which a storm
event of a given precipitation volume can be expected to occur.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries intercepted surface runoff, street
water and other drainage but excludes domestic sewage and industrial
waste.
STORMWATER — That portion of precipitation which runs over the land.
STORMWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM — Natural or man-made structures
that collect and transport stormwater through or from a drainage area to
the point of final outlet including, but not limited to, any of the following:
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 201
1:535
conduits and appurtenant features, canals, channels, ditches, streams,
culverts, streets, and pumping stations.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff adopted by Blair County as required by the Storm Water
Management Act.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land, not
including pavement for driveways, or accesses, and associated curbing and
stormwater management facilities.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development: Provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where in the judgment of the Township
engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter) of those improvements required as a condition for final approval
have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURFACE WATER OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the Commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TOWNSHIP/MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Logan.
TOWNSHIP PLANNING COMMISSION — The Township of Logan Planning
Commission.
TOWNSHIP STREET — A street laid out and opened as a public street by the
adoption of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Logan
Township in accordance with the provisions of the Second Class Township
Code.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel for conveyance of surface water having
a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
§ 201 LOGAN CODE § 201
1:536
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other body
of water whether natural or artificial. A "designated watershed" is an area
delineated by the Pennsylvania DEP and approved by the Environmental
Quality Board for which counties are required to develop watershed
stormwater management plans.
WATERSHED STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for
managing stormwater runoff throughout a designated watershed adopted
by Blair County as required by the Pennsylvania Storm Water Management
Act.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface-water resources within the Township.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 201
1:537

Part 3
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
§ 301. Regulation of Land Development, Subdivision and
Stormwater Management. [Ord. 5-17-79; as amended by Ord.
9-13-84; by Ord. 1-23-92A; by Ord. 7-7-94; by Ord. 10-12-00; and by
Ord. 6-27-02]
1. No Land Development or Subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot
lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of
ownership or building or lot development, (except in an agricultural
subdivision), no street or road, sanitary sewer, storm sewer (including
storm water drainage ditches), water line or other utility, or easement
therefor, no construction of new or additional impervious or surfaces
with reduced permeability (driveways, parking lots, etc.), no diversion
or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel, no installation,
replacement or substantial repair of storm water systems or
appurtenances, shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for
public use or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings or
properties abutting thereon except in strict accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
2. All lots not existing upon the effective date of the Township of Logan
Zoning Ordinance as originally enacted must have frontage upon a
public street. No lot in a Subdivision may be sold, no permit to erect any
building upon land in a Subdivision and/or a Land Development may be
issued; no construction, cuts, grades or fills shall be permitted for any
street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer (including storm drainage ditches)
or water line unless and until a plan has been approved and recorded in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and until all
improvements required by this chapter have been constructed or
guaranteed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
3. To the contrary notwithstanding, a lot which does not front upon a
Township street or a street owned and maintained by the County, State,
or Federal government, may be sold to the owner of the adjoining lot
which does front upon a Township street subject to the following
conditions:
A. The deed or other instrument conveying said lot to the owner of the
adjoining lot fronting upon the Township street shall contain a
covenant restricting the transfer of said lot and the construction or
placement of a building or other structure upon said lot
substantially in the following form: "The hereinbefore described lot
or parcel of ground may not be transferred or conveyed without a
transfer and conveyance to the same grantee of the adjoining lot
which fronts upon a Township street; nor may any building or
structure be erected upon said lot or parcel of ground other than a
private garage and storage shed incidental to the dwelling house
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:539
§ 302. Plans and Procedures for Land Development, Subdivisions
and Stormwater Management. [Ord. 5-17-79; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88; by Ord. 1/23/92A; by Ord. 7-7-94; by Ord. 10-12-00; by
Ord. 6-27-02; and by Ord. 07-08-04A]
unless and until such lot or parcel of ground is brought into
conformance with the provisions of The Logan Township
Subdivision and Land Development Chapter"; and
B. Such lot shall not be transferred or conveyed by such owner
without a transfer or conveyance to the same transferee of the
adjoining lot which fronts upon a Township street unless and until
such lot or parcel of ground is brought into conformance with the
provisions of this chapter; and
C. Until said lot shall be brought into conformance with the provisions
of this chapter said lot shall not be transferred or conveyed by such
owner without a transfer or conveyance to the same transferee of
the adjoining lot which does front upon a Township street.
4. No building, sewer and/or other permits for other on-site construction
activity may be issued/commenced until the public improvements
proposed within Subdivision or Land Development are completed to
satisfaction of the Township.
A. Land Development and Subdivision.
(1) Any person desiring to make a Subdivision and/or Land
Development shall file with the Township an application for
development permit on a form provided by the Township, together
with a filing fee as established from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors, which shall be accompanied by five copies of a
preliminary plan of the subdivision or Land Development prepared
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Professional Engineer
Registration Law. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of
the review fees, the applicant shall, within 14 days of the
applicant's receipt of the bill, notify Logan Township that such fees
are disputed, in which case Logan Township shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application due to
the applicant's request over disputed fees. Upon filing of the said
plans, the Township shall provide at least one copy of the said plan
to the Township Planning Commission for review and comment as
set forth herein.
(2) Four complete copies of DEP sewage facilities planning modules
shall be submitted with said application.
(3) The five copies of the preliminary plan shall be submitted and
accompanied by: Erosion Sedimentation and Control Plans; Storm
Water Management Plan; off-site easement/right-of-way plats;
Engineer's Estimate for cost of construction of public
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 302
1:540
improvements; a certificate of title and affidavit or other
documentation approved by the Township, indicating that the
person desiring the Subdivision and/or Land Development is the
owner of record of the real estate comprising the Subdivision and/
or Land Development, including but not limited to, the lots and
streets, as well as the real estate abutting both sides of any street
depicted on the plat and/or plan if said street is not a public street
owned and maintained by any local, State or Federal government.
If any person requesting Land Development and/or Subdivision is
not the owner of the real estate which is the subject of the Land
Development and/or Subdivision, the owner of said real estate shall
sign an affidavit indicating that said person joins in the request for
Subdivision and shall be jointly and severally liable with the person
requesting the Land Development and/or Subdivision with regard
to the requirements of this chapter.
(4) The preliminary plan shall include the exact nature of the work to
be performed, plans and profiles of all streets, the lot layout and
shall show thereon all existing streets adjacent to, abutting or
leading into said Land Development and/or Subdivision, the course,
structure and capacity of all drains, ditches, streams, water
courses and drainage facilities, the method of draining from water
and utility lines, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
location of easements including off-site easements, and any other
necessary information and details that may be required under
ordinances, including sewer ordinances, rules and regulations
prescribed by the Township, as well as any applicable State and
Federal law.
(5) Water Supply. If water is to be provided by means other than
private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of
lots within the subdivision or development, applicants shall present
evidence to the Board of Supervisors that the Subdivision is to be
supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative
association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority
or utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such
certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or
agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate,
shall be acceptable.
(6) Township Planning Commission review of preliminary plan and
recommendation shall be as follows:
(a) The Township Planning Commission shall consider the
preliminary plan to determine if it meets the standards set
forth in this chapter and any other applicable Township
Ordinance or Commonwealth statute.
(b) The Township Planning Commission shall make its
recommendation on the preliminary plan within 60 days of the
§ 302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:541
official filing date, which date shall be 60 days following the
date of the regular meeting of the said Planning Commission
next following the date that a complete application is filed,
or after a final order of a court remanding an application,
provided that should the next regular meeting occur more
than 30 days following the filing of a complete application
or the final order of a court, said sixty-day period shall be
measured from the thirtieth day following the day the complete
application was filed or after a final order of the court
remanding an application.
(c) The Township Planning commission shall recommend whether
the preliminary plan shall be approved, approved with
conditions, or disapproved, and shall notify the Board of
Supervisors in writing thereof, including if disapproval is
recommended, a statement of reasons for such action.
(d) In making its recommendation, the Township Planning
Commission shall consider the recommendation of the Director
of Planning and Zoning, Township Engineer, Township staff,
the Sewage Enforcement Officer, the Blair County Planning
Commission, interested residents, and the recommendations of
any agency or agencies from which a review was requested or
which have jurisdiction over the said subdivision.
(7) Approval/Disapproval of the preliminary plan by the Board of
Supervisors shall be as follows:
(a) Action on a Preliminary Plan shall be taken by the Board of
Supervisors not later than 90 days following the date of the
regular meeting of the Township Planning Commission next
following the date that a complete application is filed. Should
the next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following
the filing of the application or the final order of the court, said
ninety-day period shall be measured from the thirtieth day
following the day the application was filed or after a final order
of the court remanding an application. In their review, the
Board of Supervisors shall consider the reports and
recommendations of the Township Planning Commission and
various individuals or agencies to whom the plan was sent for
review and comment. As a result of their review, the Board of
Supervisors may require or recommend such changes and
modifications, as they shall deem necessary or advisable in the
public interest. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall
be in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant
personally or mailed to him at his known address not later than
15 days following the decision. If plan is denied, this decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe
the requirements which have not been met and shall, in each
case, cite the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied
upon.
§ 302 LOGAN CODE § 302
1:542
(b) The decision of the Board of Supervisors to approve or approve
with conditions shall be in writing and shall be communicated
to the Developer personally or mailed to him at his known
address not later than 15 days following the decision.
(8) If approved, a copy of the preliminary plan shall be returned to the
developer with a notation thereon that the preliminary plan has
received preliminary approval and that a final plan may be
submitted. Approval of the preliminary plan shall constitute
approval of the subdivision or land development as to the character
and intensity of development, the arrangement and approximate
dimensions of streets, lots, and other planned features. The
approval binds the subdivider or Developer to the general scheme
of the subdivision shown, unless a revised preliminary plan is
submitted, and permits the subdivider or Developer to proceed
with final detailed design of improvements, to arrange for
guarantee to cover installation of the improvements, and to
prepare the final plan. Approval of the preliminary plan does not
authorize the sale of lots nor the recording of the preliminary plan.
(9) The final plan, prepared in accordance with Pennsylvania
Professional Engineer Registration Law shall have incorporated all
changes required by the Board of Supervisors.
(10) The final Plan of Lots shall contain thereon: a dedication clause
dedicating all rights of way, easements, parks or open space, in a
form that is acceptable to the Township and that has been approved
by the Township Solicitor; and developer shall perpetually operate
and maintain the storm water management facilities.
(11) Five copies of the final plan and other exhibits required for
approval shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors after the
plan has received preliminary approval together with the following:
signature of adjoining Landowners for road takeover, if required;
all off-site easements duly executed and notarized; approval by
Blair County Conservation District and any other local, state and/or
government agency having jurisdiction of erosion and
sedimentation control plan; PennDOT and Federal occupancy
permits if required; general permit approval from DEP if required;
DEP planning module approval; DEP Part I and/or Part II Water
Quality Management Permit; and any other applicable approvals
and/or permits.
(12) Township Planning Commission review of final plan and
recommendation shall be as follows:
(a) The Township Planning Commission shall review the final plan
and requisite materials for compliance with the approved
preliminary plan and for conformance to the requirements of
this chapter.
§ 302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:543
(b) The Township Planning Commission shall make its
recommendation on the final plan within 60 days of the official
filing date, which date shall be 60 days following the date of
the regular meeting of the said Planning Commission next
following the date that a complete application is filed, or after a
final order of a court remanding an application, provided that
should the next regular meeting occur more than 30 days
following the filing of a complete application or the final order
of a court, said sixty-day period shall be measured from the
thirtieth day following the day the complete application was
filed or after a final order of the court remanding an
application.
(c) The Township Planning Commission shall recommend whether
the final plan shall be approved, approved with conditions, or
disapproved, and shall notify the Board of Supervisors in
writing thereof, including, if approved with conditions or
disapproved, a statement of reasons for such recommendation.
(d) In making its recommendation, the said Planning Commission
shall consider the recommendations of the Township Engineer,
the Blair County Planning Commission, the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer, the Township staff and the
recommendations of any agency or agencies from which a
review was requested or which may have jurisdiction over the
said subdivision.
(13) Board of Supervisors review and approval/disapproval shall be as
follows:
(a) The Board of Supervisors shall act upon the application for
approval of a final plan and render its decision and
communicate to the applicant not later than 90 days following
the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission
next following the date the application is filed, or after a final
order of a court remanding an application, provided that
should the said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days
following the filing of the application, or the final order of a
court, the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the
thirtieth day following the day the application has been filed. In
its review, the Board of Supervisors shall consider the reports
and recommendations of the Township Planning Commission
and the various individuals or agencies to whom the plan was
sent for review and comment. As a result of their review, the
Board of Supervisors may require or recommend such changes
and modifications, as they shall deem necessary or advisable in
the public interest.
(b) The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and
shall be communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to
§ 302 LOGAN CODE § 302
1:544
the applicant's last known address not later than 15 days
following the decision.
(c) If the final plan is approved with conditions (the same to be set
forth by the Township in the written notice and shall specify
which conditions must be met and/or the defects found in the
plan, and the requirement which have not been met, including
specific reference to provisions of any statute, this or any other
ordinance which have not been fulfilled), the same must be
accepted in writing by the Developer within 30 days of the
decision, and if not so accepted, the final plan shall be deemed
to be rejected.
(d) When the application is not approved in terms as filed the
decision shall specify the defects found in the application and
describe the requirements with have not been met and shall, in
each case, cite to the provisions of the statute, the provisions of
this chapter and any other ordinance relied upon.
(14) Upon final approval by the Board of Supervisors, the proper
signatures of the Board of Supervisors shall be imprinted on the
final plan together with the date of approval subject to all
conditions of this chapter 22 being fulfilled.
(15) At the time of final approval by the Board of Supervisors, the Board
of Supervisors shall fix a period of time within which all
improvements shall be completed by the developer.
(16) Before acting on any Land Development and/or Subdivision plan,
the Board of Supervisors may hold a public hearing thereon after
public notice.
(17) The final plat or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until
all requirements of local, state and federal laws, rules and
regulations affecting the Development have been satisfied by
Developer as determined by the Township, and an agreement
drafted by the Township is executed by and between the Township
and the developer (hereinafter "Developer's Agreement") setting
forth the understanding of the parties as to construction
requirements, liability of the parties and such other conditions as
may be deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors to protect
the health, safety and welfare of Township residents, including, but
not limited to, limiting the number of building permits issued until
all public improvements are completed in compliance with this
chapter and the Developer's Agreement.
B. Plans and Procedures for Minor Subdivision.
(1) Any person desiring minor subdivision approval for any parcel of
real estate shall provide to the Township:
§ 302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:545
(a) A plat containing the entire parcel in question, proposed
subdivision lines, existing and proposed easements and/or
rights-of-way; building restriction lines; and the public
street(s) involved.
(b) Said Plat shall be accompanied with:
[1] Fully completed DEP sewage facilities planning module
form or letter from DEP stating form is not required.
[2] PennDOT and Federal occupancy permits.
[3] Storm water management Plan.
[4] Soil erosion, sedimentation and control plan with letter of
approval from the Blair County Conservation District or
other state and/or federal agency having jurisdiction
including supporting documentation and calculations.
[5] All Pennsylvania DEP permits.
[6] All other applicable permits and/or approvals.
(2) Minor subdivision of plans shall be submitted for review in
accordance with the procedures and standards of § 302A herein.
C. Stormwater Management Standards.
(1) All proposed stormwater control measures shall be evaluated
according to the following performance standard:
(a) Any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or
development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures as are
reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or
other property. Such measures shall include such actions as
are required:
[1] To assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff
after development is no greater than 75% of the maximum
rate of runoff prior to development activities or that
amount of runoff permitted pursuant to the County's
Stormwater Management Plan affecting the areas in
question if the County's said Plan is deemed by law to
supersede the Township's regulations with regard to the
issue of stormwater runoff; or have performed an
engineering study completed by a licensed professional
engineer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which
demonstrates that no detention is required, and such plan
is reviewed and recommended by the Logan Township
Engineer for approval by the Logan Township Board of
Supervisors.
§ 302 LOGAN CODE § 302
1:546
[2] The 75% release rate is applicable only in areas of the
Township not located in the Beaverdam Branch
Watershed. Within the Beaverdam Branch watershed, the
Act 167 plan requirements govern. If a licensed
Professional Engineer conducts a study that demonstrates,
by appropriate scientific and engineering concepts, that
the landowner/developer can effectively manage the
quantity, velocity and direction of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects
the health and property from possible injury, the plan
requirements will be met.
[3] The stormwater management plan for the development
site shall consider all the stormwater runoff flowing over
the site.
[4] No discharge of toxic materials shall be permitted into any
stormwater management system. Where required by
federal and state regulation, the landowner or developer
shall be responsible for obtaining any required (such as
NPDES permit) permit for stormwater discharges.
[5] All land disturbance activities shall be conducted in such a
way as to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
Measures to control erosion shall at a minimum meet the
standards of the County Conservation District and the
rules and regulation of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
D. Mobile Home Parks. The subdivision and land development plan
submission and review procedures and the general design standards
and the specifications for Improvements set forth in the Township's
Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to Chapter 22 thereof,
shall apply to the regulation of mobile home parks within the Township.
The mobile home park construction shall also conform to the
procedures and requirements contained within Chapter 8,
"Floodplains," of the said Code of Ordinances.
E. Plans and Procedures for the Submittal of Sketch Plans. Prior to the
submission of a Preliminary Plan and application for a subdivision and
land development plan, developers are encouraged to submit a sketch
plan to Logan Township. This will enable Logan Township to review the
proposal for the factors that may affect the development. Discussions
on sketch plans are intended as purely advisory and shall not exempt
the developer from any additional requirements of this or any other
ordinances affecting the development. Logan Township may, at its
discretion when requested by the applicant, submit the Sketch Plan to
the Township Engineer or Solicitor for review and comment in order to
provide the developer with more specific written directive.
§ 302 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:547
§ 303. Specifications. [Ord. 5-17-79; as amended by Ord. 6-30-83; by
Ord. 9-13-84; by Ord. 7-7-94; and by Ord. 10-12-00]
Specifications for Improvement(s)/Public Improvement(s) and for any other
structure, use, area and/or item subject to the provisions of Chapter 22,
shall be in accordance with the specifications attached hereto and being
specifically incorporated herein and adopted hereby to be hereinafter set
forth as Part 4, entitled "Specifications," as the same may be hereinafter
amended from time to time by the Board of Supervisors of the Township by
resolution.
§ 304. Inspections. [Ord. 5-17-79; as amended by Ord. 7-7-94]
No public improvements shall be taken over or accepted by the Board
of Supervisors unless the Township or its authorized agent or inspector
has inspected and given written approval of the construction of the public
improvements.
§ 305. Improvements Remain Private Until Accepted. [Ord. 5/17/79;
as amended by Ord. 7-7-94]
Although all public improvements shall be deemed to be an offer of
dedication to the Township upon appearance on and submission with the
final plan, every such public improvement including, but not limited to,
If the Logan Township Engineer or Logan Township Solicitor reviews
the Sketch Plan, the applicant shall provide Logan Township with a
deposit in accordance with the fee schedule to cover the cost of such
review. A sketch plan should contain the following information at a
minimum:
(1) Location map.
(2) General information concerning any community facilities and/or
any other man-made or natural features that will affect the
proposal.
(3) Property boundary taken from deeds, tax maps, or other surveys.
(4) A sketch of the proposed development drawn at a scale no smaller
than one inch equals 100 feet showing the proposed layout of
streets and lots, and other features of the subdivision or
development. The Sketch Plan may also indicate the tentative
layout of any proposed utilities or drainage structures.
(5) Contours from USGS Quadrangle map or other source.
(6) Soil boundaries as taken from the Blair County soil survey manual.
(7) Flood plain as taken from the flood insurance rate map for Logan
Township.
(8) A statement indicating the zoning district.
§ 302 LOGAN CODE § 305
1:548
streets, gutters, water mains, sanitary sewers and/or other such
improvements shown on a subdivision plan shall be deemed to be a private
improvement until such time as formally accepted by the Township or
condemned by the Township in the manner provided by law.
§ 306. Completion of Improvements or Guarantee Thereof
Prerequisite to Final Plat Approval and Stormwater Maintenance
Fund. [Ord. 5-17-79; as amended by Ord. 1-23-92A; by Ord.
10-12-00; and by Ord. 6-27-02]
A. Improvements/Guarantee - Final Plat Approval.
(1) No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such
plat have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
passable condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by
this chapter and any walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire
hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers
and other improvements as may be required by this chapter have
been installed in accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the
completion of any improvements required as a condition for the
final approval of a plat, including improvements or fees otherwise
required by this chapter, the developer may deposit with the
Township financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the
costs of such improvements or common amenities including basins
and other related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open
space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which may be
required. The applicant shall not be required to provide financial
security for the costs of any improvements for which financial
security is required by and provided to the Department of
Transportation in connection with the issuance of a highway
occupancy permit pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1,
1945 (P.L. 1242, No. 428) known as the "State Highway Law."
(2) When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing,
the Board of Supervisors, shall furnish the developer with a signed
copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent
upon the developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The
final plat or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the
financial improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or
letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be
revoked if the financial security agreement is not executed within
90 days unless a written extension is granted by the Board of
Supervisors; such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld
and shall be placed in writing at the request of the developer.
(3) Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Township may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, Federal or Commonwealth chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in
such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial
security for the purposes of this section.
§ 305 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 306
1:549
(4) Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
Federal or Commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by
the party posting the financial security, provided said bonding
company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such
business within the Commonwealth.
(5) Such bond, or other security shall provide for, and secure to the
public, the completion of any improvements which may be required
on or before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or
accompanying agreement for completion of the improvements.
(6) The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer. Annually, the Township may adjust the
amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost
for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the
expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled
for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to
said adjustment, the Township may require the developer to post
additional security in order to assure that the financial security
equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by the
developer in accordance with this subsection.
(7) The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a
professional engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and
certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of
such cost. The Township, upon the recommendation of the
Township engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good
cause shown. If the applicant or developer and the Township are
unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be
recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer
licensed as such in this Commonwealth and chosen mutually by the
Township and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified by
the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so
chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally
by the Township and the applicant or developer.
(8) If the party posting the financial security requires more than one
year from the date of posting of the financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of financial security may
be increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond
the first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an
amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
§ 306 LOGAN CODE § 306
1:550
(9) In the case where development is projected over a period of years,
the Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of final plats by
sections or stages of development subject to such requirements or
guarantees as to improvements in future sections or stages of
development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally
approved section of the development.
(10) As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release or authorize the release, from time to time,
of such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to
the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such
requests shall be in writing addressed to the Board of Supervisors,
and the Board of Supervisors shall have 45 days from receipt of
such request within which to allow the Township engineer to
certify, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors that such portion of
the work upon the improvements has been completed in
accordance with the approved plat. Upon such certification the
Board of Supervisors shall authorize release by the bonding
company or lending institution of an amount as estimated by the
Township engineer fairly representing the value of the
improvements completed or, if the Board of Supervisors fails to act
within said forty-five-day period, the Board of Supervisors shall be
deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The
Board of Supervisors may, prior to final release at the time of
completion and certification by its engineer, require retention of
10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
(11) Where the Board of Supervisors accepts dedication of all or some of
the required improvements following completion, the Board of
Supervisors may require the posting of financial security to secure
structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning
of said improvements in accordance with the design and
specifications as depicted on the final plat for a term not to exceed
18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial
security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in this
section with regard to installation of such improvements, and the
amount of the financial security shall not exceed 15% of the actual
cost of installation of said improvements.
(12) If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with
apparatus or facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the
jurisdiction and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public
utility or municipal authority separate and distinct from the
Township, financial security to assure proper completion and
maintenance thereof shall be posted in accordance with the
regulations of the controlling public utility or municipal authority
and shall not be included within the financial security as otherwise
required by this section.
§ 306 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 306
1:551
(13) If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a
plat as set forth in this section, the Township shall not condition the
issuance of building, grading or other permits relating to the
erection or placement of improvements, including buildings, upon
the lots or land as depicted upon the final plat upon actual
completion of the improvements depicted upon the approved final
plat. Moreover, if said financial security has been provided,
occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected shall
not be withheld following the improvement of the streets providing
access to and from existing public roads to such building or
buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, as well as the completion-of all other improvements as
depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or
beyond the lot or lots in question if such improvements are
necessary for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or
buildings.
B. Stormwater Maintenance Fund.
(1) Person installing stormwater storage facilities shall be required to
pay a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance
Fund to help defray costs of periodic inspections and maintenance
expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be determined as
follows:
(a) If the storage facility is to be privately owned and maintained,
the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections
performed by the Township for a period of 10 years, as
estimated by the Municipal Engineer. After that period of time,
inspections will be performed at the expense of the Township.
(b) If the storage facility is to be owned and maintained by the
Township, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The municipal
engineer will establish the estimated costs utilizing
information submitted by the applicant.
(c) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to
present worth of the annual series values. The municipal
engineer shall determine the present worth equivalents which
shall be subject to the approval of the governing body.
(2) If a storage facility is proposed that also serves as a recreational
facility (e.g., ball field, lake), the Township may reduce or waive the
amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of
the land for public recreation purposes.
(3) If in the future a storage facility (whether publicly or privately
owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or
other storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund
deposit will be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and
§ 306 LOGAN CODE § 306
1:552
§ 307. Release from Improvement Bond. [Ord. 5-17-79; as amended
by Ord. 1-23-92A; and by Ord. 7-7-94]
connecting to the storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount
of the deposit remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid
will be returned to the depositor.
1. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Board of Supervisors, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township
engineer. The Board of Supervisors shall, within 10 days after receipt of
such notice, direct and authorize the Township engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The Township engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report in writing, with the Board of Supervisors, and shall
promptly mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or
registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days
after receipt by the Township engineer of the aforesaid authorization
from the Board of Supervisors; said report shall be detailed and shall
indicate approval or rejection of said improvements, either in whole or
in part, and if said improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be
approved or shall be rejected by the Township engineer, said report
shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
2. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the developer, within 15 days of
receipt of the engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered
mail of the action of said Board of Supervisors with relation thereto.
3. If the Board of Supervisors or the Township engineer fails to comply
with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements
will be deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be
released from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or
other security agreement.
4. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
5. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Board of Supervisors or the
Township engineer.
6. Where herein reference is made to the Township engineer, he shall be
as a consultant thereto.
7. The applicant or developer shall pay the Township Engineer for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of
improvements according to a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors as from time to time amended and in
§ 306 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 307
1:553
§ 308. Review Fees. [Ord. 1-23-92A; as amended by Ord. 7-7-94]
§ 309. Exemptions. [Ord. 1-23-92A; as amended by Ord. 7-7-94]
The following are exempt or partially exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
furtherance thereof shall enter into an appropriate agreement with
said Township Engineer. Such expense shall be reasonable and in
accordance with the ordinary and customary fees charged by the
Township engineer or consultant for work performed for similar
services in the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate
or cost charged by the engineer or consultant to the Township when
fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
1. Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by the
Township's professional consultants or engineer for review and report
to the Township, and shall be set by resolution. Such review fees shall
be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary
charges by the Township engineer or consultant for similar service in
the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost
charged by the engineer or consultant to the Township when fees are
not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
2. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fees,
the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify the
Township that such fees are disputed, in which case the Township shall
not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development application
due to the applicant's request over disputed fees.
3. In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the
amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the
fees shall be recalculated and recertified by another professional
engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and chosen mutually
by the Township and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified
by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen,
fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid as provided in
§ 307(7)(E) herein.
4. Review fees for administrative and legal services necessary for cost
including, but not limited to, processing of the plans, preparation of the
Developer's Agreement and review of financial security documents
shall be paid solely by the developer prior to final approval of the plans.
Said costs shall be submitted to the developer, in written form deemed
appropriate by the Township and shall be paid in full prior to approval
of the final plan.
A. The conversion of an existing single family detached dwelling or single
family semidetached dwelling when such units are intended to be a
§ 307 LOGAN CODE § 309
1:554
§ 310. Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements. [Ord.
5-17-79; as amended by Ord. 1-23-92A]
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final
plat the Board of Supervisors is hereby granted the power to enforce
any corporate bond, or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies. If the proceeds of such bond, or other security are insufficient
to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Board of Supervisors may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision
or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action
to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both,
shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security, and not for any other Township purpose.
§ 311. Modifications. [Ord. 1-23-92A; as amended by Ord. 6-27-02]
condominium with the exception of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources sewage facilities planning requirements.
B. The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on a lot
or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
C. The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of
an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the
purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined as a tract or
area used principally as a location for permanent amusement
structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired
acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area
have been approved by proper authorities.
D. (Reserved).
1. The Board of Supervisors may grant a modification of the requirements
of one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is
observed. When the literal compliance with mandatory provisions is
shown to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors to be
unreasonable, to cause undue hardship, or when an alternative
standard can be demonstrated to provide equal or better results, the
Board of Supervisors may grant a modification of those requirements.
2. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
§ 309 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 311
1:555
§ 312. Preventive Remedies. [Ord. 1-23-92A]
§ 313. Recording Plats and Deeds. [Ord. 5-17-79; as amended by
Ord. 1-23-92A; by Ord. 7-7-94; and by Ord. 6-27-02]
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
3. The request for modification may be referred to the Blair County
Planning Commission for advisory comments.
4. The Board of Supervisors shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
1. In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
2. The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
A. The owner of record at the time of such violation.
B. The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
C. The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
D. The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
3. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Township may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
§ 311 LOGAN CODE § 313
1:556
§ 314. Enforcement Remedies. [Ord. 5/17/1979; as amended by Ord.
1-23-92A]
§ 315. Right of Entry/Notification. [Ord. 10-12-00]
1. Upon the approval of a final plat, the developer shall within 90 days of
such final approval record such plat in the office of the recorder of
deeds of Blair County. The recorder of deeds shall not accept any plat
for recording unless such plat officially notes the approval of the Board
of Supervisors, or 90 days after the date of delivery of an approved plat
signed by the governing body, following completion of conditions
imposed for such approval, whichever is later.
2. The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for assessment
increases until such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed
on the land included within the subject plat.
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the district justice determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership, or corporation violating this chapter to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the district
justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
2. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
3. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought
under this section.
1. Right of Entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times upon
any property to investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject
property in regard to an aspect regulated by this Part.
2. Notification. In the event that the applicant, developer, owner or his/her
agent fails to comply with the requirements of this Part or fails to
conform to the requirements of any permit, a written notice of violation
§ 313 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 315
1:557
§ 316. Additional Remedies. [Ord. 10-12-00]
In addition to the above recitals, the Township may also seek remedies and
penalties under applicable Pennsylvania statutes, or regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, including but not limited to the Storm Water Management
Act (32 P.S. § 693.1-693.27) and the Erosion and Sedimentation Regulations
(25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102). Any activity conducted in violation
of this Part which involves stormwater management or any Pennsylvania
approved watershed stormwater management plan is declared a public
nuisance by the Township and abatable as such.
shall be issued. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the
violation(s) and establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s).
Upon failure to comply within the time specified, unless otherwise
extended by the Township, the applicant, developer, owner or his/her
agent shall be subject to the enforcement remedies of this Part.
§ 315 LOGAN CODE § 316
1:558
Part 4
SPECIFICATIONS
§ 401. Plan Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 6-27-02]
Subdivision and Land Development Plans shall conform to and include the
following:
1. Plans shall conform to the provisions and requirements of Chapter 22 of
the Township of Logan Code of Ordinances. Terms used in these
Specifications which are defined in Part 2, "Definitions," of said Chapter
22 shall have the same meanings indicated in said Chapter 22.
2. A Plan of Lots suitable for recording at the Blair County Courthouse,
including a space for acknowledgment of receipt and recording of the
plan by the Blair County Recorder of Deeds Office shall be provided.
The Plan of Lots shall contain a statement of acknowledgment in legal
form, executed by a Notary Public, stating that the Developer is the
Owner, equitable Owner or has the written permission of the Owner of
record as reflected in the Record of Deed Office in and for Blair County
of the property as shown on the Plan of Lots including all property
needed for ingress, egress and regress and/or has written easements
for same together with any and all easements for utilities and
stormwater management, that the subdivision/land development as
shown on the Plan of Lots is the act and deed of the Developer and that
the Developer desire the same to be recorded as such, according to law.
3. The Plan of Lots shall contain tax map parcel numbers for all parcels
included in the subdivision/land development and all parcels adjoining
the subdivision/land development.
4. The Plan of Lots shall contain the name and deed references of all
owners of property included in the subdivision/land development and
all owners of property adjoining the subdivision/land development.
5. The Plan of Lots shall contain the zoning designations of all parcels
included in the subdivision/land development and of all parcels
adjoining the subdivision/land development.
6. Five sets of preliminary and final subdivision/land development plans
and supporting information shall be provided. Preliminary and final
plans shall be at a scale of not more than 50 feet to an inch. Plans shall
be submitted on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches, unless previously
approved by Logan Township. Plans intended for recording purposes
shall not be larger 16 inches by 22 inches.
7. The following information regarding proposed public improvements:
A. Design of proposed roadways including a profile of existing ground
surface along the center line of roadways; proposed center-line
grade of roadways with percent of grade on tangents and
elevations at intervals of 50 feet, including grades at intersections
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 401
1:559
and control points; vertical curve data of roadways, including chord
lengths and elevations and sight distances as required by the
Township Engineer; typical cross section and proposed contours.
Details of storm sewers, curbing, inlets and other facilities involved
in roadway construction. If applicable, provide copies of all
required permits and/or approval letters from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
B. Design of the proposed sanitary sewage collection and treatment
facilities, if applicable, including plans showing the location of the
sanitary sewage collection and treatment facilities, size of sanitary
sewer lines with stations corresponding to the profile, profiles
showing existing and proposed ground surface along the center
line of sanitary sewer lines, grades between manholes, elevation of
flow line and top of each manhole, design engineer's report for the
treatment facilities, details and other information required by the
Township. If applicable, provide a letter from the provider of the
public sanitary sewerage service approving the design of the
proposed public sanitary sewerage facilities. The Developer shall
provide a Land Development Planning Module (or planning
exemption request) and a letter of approval of the module or
exemption from the Pennsylvania DEP. If applicable, provide copies
of all required permits from the Pennsylvania DEP and any other
governmental agencies having jurisdiction.
C. If on-lot sewage treatment and disposal facilities are proposed,
show soil types, location of soil probes and percolation test sites
and suitable primary absorption bed areas on each lot with
provisions for their protection and reservation and all other
information required by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer
(SEO) and the Pennsylvania DEP. The following statement shall
appear on the Plan of Lots and Plan Cover Sheet:
"Approval of this plan by The Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Logan does not guarantee that a sewage permit will or will not
be issued for any lot or parcel. The Township Sewage Enforcement
Officer (SEO) must be contacted to conduct any further tests, if
necessary, or design review to determine if a sewage permit will be
issued."
D. Design of the proposed stormwater management controls in
accordance with the provisions of these Specifications. Proposed
contouring shall be provided for all detention/retention areas. The
requirements for preparation of the stormwater plan are presented
in § 405, "Stormwater Plan Requirements," of these Specifications.
E. Design of the proposed water supply facilities, if applicable,
including a plan showing location and size of waterlines and
appurtenances with stations corresponding to the profile, profiles
showing existing and proposed ground surface along the center
line of the waterlines, details and other information required by the
§ 401 LOGAN CODE § 401
1:560
purveyor providing the water service and the Pennsylvania DEP. If
applicable, provide a letter from the provider of the water service
approving the design of the proposed water supply facilities. If
applicable, provide copies of all required permits from the
Pennsylvania DEP and any other governmental agencies having
jurisdiction. With the exception of Minor Subdivisions, if individual
wells are proposed for each lot, the Developer shall prepare a
hydrogeological study of the development site. For Minor
Subdivisions, the Township may direct the Developer to prepare a
hydrogeological study of the development site.
F. Location and details of the soil erosion and sedimentation controls.
An erosion and sedimentation control plan that meets the
requirements of the Pennsylvania DEP Chapter 102 (Erosion
Control) Rules and Regulations along with a letter from the County
Conservation District approving said plan shall be provided. The
Developer shall provide copies of the appropriate National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit for Storm
Water Discharges from Construction Activities and, if applicable,
the earth disturbance permit for sites involving five or more acres.
G. Applicable permits issued by the Pennsylvania DEP and/or the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers for waterway obstructions and stream or
wetland encroachments. If applicable, the Developer shall provide
copies of the report prepared for the Developer regarding the
delineation of wetlands and waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
H. The Developer shall submit the plans to the Blair County Planning
Commission and shall provide the Blair County Planning
Commission's review letter regarding the plans.
8. Each plan sheet shall include a north arrow, graphic scale, and date of
original plan sheet along with date and description of each revision to
plan sheet.
9. Each plan sheet shall include a title block with name, address,
registration seal and signature of the Registered Professional Engineer,
Surveyor or Architect responsible for the plans.
10. Approval Signatures and Date. A place shall appear on the Plan of Lots
and Plan Cover Sheet for the date of approval and signatures of the
Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary-Treasurer of the Board of Supervisors.
11. The following stormwater management statement shall appear on the
Plan of Lots and Plan Cover Sheet:
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 401
1:561
"On this_____ day of __________, 20_____ the Developer is responsible
for the perpetual operation and maintenance of the stormwater
management system. Furthermore, Developer acknowledges the
stormwater management system to be a permanent fixture which can
be altered or removed only after approval of the a revised stormwater
plan by the Township."
(Individual)
(President, Vice-President)
(Partner)
(Secretary, Asst. Secretary)
(Partner)
If Corporation,
Affix Corporate Seal
12. The following Engineer's Certificate shall appear on the Plan of Lots
and Plan Cover Sheet:
"I, ____________________________, have reviewed the plans and
specifications and hereby certify that the stormwater plan meets all
design standards and criteria of all Federal and Commonwealth
statutes and regulations and Chapter 22 of the Township of Logan Code
of Ordinances."
13. Roadway name and addresses for all lots proposed shall appear on the
Plan of Lots. Roadway names and addresses shall be coordinated with
the Blair County Emergency Management Agency (Blair County 911)
and shall be assigned by the Township. In some cases the Township may
allow the Developer to suggest the roadway names. If the subdivision/
land development is to be constructed in phases, all lots in each phase
must be contiguous to one another. No checkerboard phasing shall be
permitted.
14. Lot descriptions including area, easements, rights-of-way and building
restriction lines shall appear on the Plan of Lots. Subdivision/land
development plans shall show building locations and parking areas in
addition to the above information. As a minimum, each lot which abuts
another lot shall have a ten-foot utility and drainage casement in the
favor of the Township and for which the Township may assign around all
sides of the lot not fronting a roadway, said easement being for the
purpose of installing and maintaining utilities and to provide for surface
or subsurface stormwater drainage systems. Lots not abutting another
lot having a like utility and drainage easement on the abutting line shall
have a twenty-foot utility and drainage easement on the side(s) of the
lot which has no abutting utility and drainage easement.
15. All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way on and adjacent
to the proposed subdivision/land development including location, width
§ 401 LOGAN CODE § 401
1:562
and purpose for which the easements and rights-of-way have been
established shall appear on the plans.
16. Natural waterways, wetlands, flood plains, geologic, tree masses and
other significant natural features on or adjacent to the subdivision/land
development shall appear on the plans.
17. Ground elevations indicated by contours at intervals of two feet for land
with an average natural slope of 10% or less and at five-foot intervals
for land with an average natural slope greater than 10%, and the
location and elevation of the benchmark(s) and the datum used shall
appear on the plans.
18. The plans shall show existing man-made features on and adjacent to the
proposed subdivision/land development including structures, railroads,
bridges, and driveways.
19. If applicable, the number of parking spaces provided shall appear on
the plans.
20. List of utility companies on the Plan Cover Sheet in accordance with
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Act 187, as amended, shall appear on
the plans.
21. The plans shall show all existing utilities on and adjacent to the
property including location, type, size, and invert elevation of sanitary
and storm sewers; location, type and depth of water mains, valves and
fire hydrants; and location, type and depth of gas lines (natural and
petroleum), oil and similar transmission fines, electric lines, telephone
lines, television cable lines and utility poles.
22. A Legend shall be included on the Plan Cover Sheet describing symbols
used on the plans.
23. Location map showing the proposed subdivision/land development in
relation to municipal boundaries, public roads, streams and adjoining
areas shall appear on the plans.
24. All existing roadways on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision/land
development including name, location of right-of-way, right-of-way
widths, pavement widths, shoulder widths, type of surfacing, elevation
of surfacing, driveway cuts, and approximate grades shall appear on
the plans.
25. If a preliminary plan is proposed to proceed to construction, with a final
plan submitted for approval after completion of the required
improvements, the following statement shall be shown on the Plan
Cover Sheet:
"Approval of preliminary plan authorizes construction of facilities
depicted on the plans, but does not authorize sales of lots or use of
facilities."
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:563
§ 402. Zoning Requirements.
Subdivision/land development shall conform in all respects to the provisions
of Chapter 27, "Zoning", of the Township of Logan Code of Ordinances
including, but not limited to, zoning requirements, completion of a traffic
study, installation of buffer areas and off-street parking requirements.
§ 402.1. Residential Blocks. [Added by Ord. 6-27-02]
§ 403. Roadway and Drainage Improvements. [Amended by Ord.
6-27-02; and by Ord. 12-08-05A]
1. General. The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be determined
with due regard for:
A. The provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
B. Topography.
C. Any other codes, plans and ordinances.
D. Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, including the reduction of intersections with major
streets.
2. Block Length.
A. Blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,600 feet and a minimum
length of 500 feet, provided that the Township Supervisors may
increase the maximum and/or decrease the minimum length of
blocks if, in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors, the topography
of the land in question and/or surface water drainage condition
warrant such a change.
B. In the design of blocks longer than 1,000 feet, special consideration
shall be § 402.1, Residential Blocks.
1. General.
A. Proposed public and private streets shall be coordinated and
aligned with existing or proposed Federal, Commonwealth, County
and Township roadways in adjoining subdivisions/land
developments.
B. With the exception of Minor Subdivisions, nonresidential land
developments of less than three acres, or residential land
developments proposing no more than 10 single-family detached
dwellings, there shall be at least two accesses for ingress, egress
and regress from and to the land to be developed or subdivided to a
Federal, Commonwealth, County or Township roadway. When
permitted by this section, developments proposing Single Access
Streets should be designed as specified in § 403.1.1 of this chapter.
§ 402 LOGAN CODE § 403
1:564
C. Access shall be given to all lots and undeveloped portions of the
tract in the subdivision/land development and to adjacent tracts of
land unless the topography clearly indicates that such connection is
not feasible. All roadways giving such access for egress, ingress
and regress from and to subdivision/land development shall be
improved to the limits of the subdivision/land development and
shall be improved to the Township specifications.
D. The roadway and drainage construction standards contained
herein are minimum standards and requirements for the promotion
of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. In no case
shall a proposed design provide for less than these standards.
Except as modified herein, all roadway improvements, public and
private, shall conform to the design criteria set forth in PennDOT
Bureau of Design, Publication 13, Design Manual, Part 2, Highway
Design, latest edition. Except as modified herein, all roadway
improvements, public and private, shall conform to the
construction specifications of the PennDOT Publication 408
Specifications, latest edition, and Standards for Roadway
Construction, RC 0-100, latest edition. Except as modified herein,
all drainage facility construction shall also conform to these
PennDOT construction specifications. Where a subdivision/land
development abuts or contains an existing roadway of improper
width or alignment, the Township shall require the dedication of
land sufficient to widen the roadway and correct the alignment.
E. The source of all materials used in the construction of the roadways
and drainage improvements shall be approved by the Township
before delivery to the subdivision/land development is started.
2. Traffic Impact Study. As set forth in Chapter 27, "Zoning" of the
Township of Logan Code of Ordinances, the Township may direct the
Developer to complete a traffic study.
3. Traffic Control Plan. A traffic control plan shall be submitted for all
work on Township roads whenever it will be necessary to either close
any portion of a travel lane during hours of darkness without work in
progress or detour traffic in order to perform the permitted work. All
plans shall comply with Section 6123 of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code and the applicable provisions of 67 Pa. Code,
Chapter 203. The Township may require the Developer to bond existing
roadways.
4. Burning. Burning shall conform in all respects to the provisions of Part
1 of Chapter 7, "Fire Prevention and Fire Protection," of the Township
of Logan Code of Ordinances.
5. Roadway Design.
A. The roadway right-of-way width shall be at least 40 feet in width
and not greater than 120 feet in width.
§ 403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 403
1:565
B. The cartway (paved portion of the roadway) shall be at least 24 feet
in width, 12 feet each side of the roadway center line. The cross
slope of the cartway shall be 2% in tangent sections and 6% in
super-elevated sections.
C. Each roadway shall have plain cement concrete curb on both sides.
The Township may approve the use of plain concrete mountable
curb or plain cement concrete curb gutter in lieu of plain cement
concrete curb. If plain cement concrete curb gutter is proposed the
cartway width may be reduced by the width of the gutter. Concrete
curb, mountable curb and curb gutter shall conform to PennDOT
Publication 408 Specifications, Section 630, Section 633 and
Section 641, respectively.
Adequate measures shall be provided to fully drain the subbase by
placement of pavement base drain in accordance with the latest
edition of PennDOT Publication 408, Section 610, and PennDOT
Publication 72. Pavement base drains must be outletted at all low
points and at maximum intervals of 100 feet.
D. The maximum roadway grade shall be 10%. The minimum roadway
grade shall be 0.75%.
E. The entire roadway right-of-way shall be cleared. Each roadway
and shoulder shall be cut out and graded to the above dimensions
and shall be constructed as follows:
(1) Subbase: Six inches, compacted thickness, of PennDOT 2A
coarse aggregate placed in accordance with PennDOT
Publication 408 Specifications, Section 350. Subbase
stabilization, including the installation of geotextile material
and/or AASHTO No. 1 coarse aggregate, shall be required
when unsuitable subgrade conditions are encountered.
(2) Base Course: 4 1/2 inches, compacted thickness, of PennDOT
bituminous concrete base course placed in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 408 Specifications, Section 305.
(3) Wearing Course: 1 1/2 inches, compacted thickness, of
PennDOT bituminous wearing course, ID-2, placed in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 408 Specifications,
Section 420.
F. Traffic lines, double yellow center line and single white outside
edges of pavement lines, shall be placed in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 408 Specifications, Section 952.
G. All roadways shall have adequate stormwater drainage systems.
The stormwater drainage systems shall be designed in accordance
with Section 404 of these Specifications, PennDOT Standards for
Highway Construction and the following sections of PennDOT
Publication 408 Specifications, except as modified herein:
§ 403 LOGAN CODE § 403
1:566
(1) 201 Clearing and Grubbing.
(2) 203 Excavation.
(3) 212 Geotextiles.
(4) 601 Pipe Culverts.
(5) 604 Combination Storm Sewer and Underdrain.
(6) 605 Endwalls, Inlets, Manholes, and Spring Boxes.
(7) 610 Pipe Underdrain.
(8) 612 Subgrade Drains.
(9) 616 End Sections and Slope Pipe Fittings.
(10) 626 Gabions.
H. Culs-de-sac shall be constructed at the terminus points of
roadways. Culs-de-sac shall be constructed as follows:
(1) The right-of-way radius shall be at least 50 feet.
(2) The outside edge of the shoulder shall be at least 40 feet.
(3) The outside edge of the cartway shall be at least 36 feet.
(4) The entire cul-de-sac, including the center, shall be
constructed as specified under Subsection 5E of § 403 of these
Specifications.
I. Single Access Streets. Single Access Streets are a type of public
street and shall be subject to the design requirements as specified
under Subsection 5E of § 403 of these specifications in addition to
the following:
(1) No single access street shall be the sole means of vehicular
access to more than 10 residential units.
(2) No single access street shall have a total cartway length in
excess of 500 feet, as measured along the center line from the
curbline of the intersected street to the far curb of the
turnaround area. Where a single access street has a branched
configuration, the total length of all "branches" added to the
length of the main "stem" shall not exceed 500 feet.
(3) Single access streets shall have a minimum length of 250 feet,
as measured along the center line from the curb line of the
intersected street to the far curb of the turnaround area.
(4) All developments proposing single access streets shall be
reviewed by the Logan Township Fire Administrator and the
§ 403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 403
1:567
Logan Township Chief of Police for fire and public safety
concerns.
(5) All non-through streets shall be provided with an authorized
sign stating that no outlet exists.
(6) PENNDOT "one-way" directional signs shall be placed at the
beginning and end of the cul-de-sac circle.
(7) Where, in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors, the future
extension of a proposed single access street to an adjoining
tract is feasible, the full width of the right-of-way of such street
shall be extended to the property line, and a paved turnaround
area shall be provided.
(8) Turnaround areas.
(a) No single access street shall be designed as a dead-end
street; that is, a street lacking a turnaround area.
(b) Single access streets shall be provided with a paved
turnaround area:
[1] When designed as a circular cul-de-sac, such
turnaround shall have a minimum paved radius of 50
feet and a minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet.
Such area shall be clear of all obstructions.
[2] Alternative turnaround designs may be permitted if
design proves to be an equal of better alternative, and
is approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(c) The grade of the turnaround area shall not exceed 5% in
any direction.
(d) The maximum number of lots permitted to have frontage
on a turnaround is two.
(e) On-street parking is to be prohibited within turnaround
areas; as such "No Parking" signs shall be placed every
100 feet along the circumference of the paved area.
(f) Single Access Streets may not provide access to more than
two Flag Lots.
(9) Reserve Strips. Controlling access to streets by reserve strips
is prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in
the Township under control approved by the Township. A
reserve strip is a parcel of ground in separate ownership
separating a street from other adjacent properties or from
another street.
J. The following standards shall apply to all roadway intersections:
§ 403 LOGAN CODE § 403
1:568
§ 404. Stormwater Management. [Amended by Ord. 6-27-02; and by
Ord. 12-14-06]
(1) Roadways shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles.
No roadway shall intersect another at an angle less than 75° or
more than 105°.
(2) No more than two roadways shall intersect at the same point.
(3) Roadways intersecting another roadway shall either intersect
directly opposite to each other or shall be separated by at least
125 feet between center lines measured along the center line
of the roadway being intersected.
K. Minimum site distance shall be provided at all roadway
intersections in accordance with the Pennsylvania Code, Title 67,
Section 8(h). Sight distance measurements shall be made from a
point 10 feet from the edge of the cartway, 3 1/2 feet high to a point
4 1/4 feet above the cartway surface.
L. Guide rails shall be provided where directed by the Township.
Guide rail materials and installation shall conform to PennDOT
Publication 408 Specifications, Section 620.
M. The Township may require the Developer to provide rights-of-way
to permit future roadway extensions into adjoining tracts.
6. Testing:
A. Subsurface: Prior to the final approval of the subdivision/land
development, the Township may direct the Developer to complete
core borings and/or inspection pits excavations along the proposed
roadway center lines to determine the condition of the subgrade
material. If the Township Engineer determines that the existing
subgrade material will not support the construction of the proposed
roadway, the plans shall include provisions for mitigating the
unsuitable subgrade conditions.
B. Compaction: During construction of the roadways, the Township
may direct the Developer to employ an independent testing
laboratory, approved by the Township Engineer, to conduct soil
and/or soil compaction tests of the roadway subgrade. Said
laboratory shall present a certification to the Township that states
that the fill in every portion of the roadway has been constructed in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 408 Specifications, Section
210.3, as amended and supplemented to date.
7. Traffic Control and Roadway Identification Signs: Traffic control and
roadway signs shall be constructed and lettered in accordance with
PennDOT and Township standards. Signs shall be placed at all locations
as directed by the Township. The signs shall be paid for by the
Developer and installed by the Township.
§ 403 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:569
1. General Provisions. The following applies to all areas of the Township,
unless more stringent criteria has been approved for specific areas that
are part of a DEP-approved Act 167 Plan or the like.
A. Any Developer, and each person, corporation, or other entity that
creates more than 5,000 square feet of impervious area shall be
required to prepare and submit a stormwater plan for review and
acceptance by the Township. Impervious areas shall include, but
not be limited to, any roof, parking, or driveway areas, and any new
roadways and sidewalks. Any areas designed to initially be gravel
or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious for the
purposes of these Specifications. These criteria shall apply to the
total development even if the development is to take place in
phases.
B. All proposed stormwater control measures shall be evaluated by
the Township according to the following performance standard:
(1) Any Developer, and each person, corporation, or other entity
engaged in the alternation or development of land which may
affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to
health, safety or other property. Such measures shall include
such actions as are required:
(a) To assure that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff
after development is no greater the 75% of the maximum
rate of stormwater runoff prior to development activities
or that amount of runoff permitted pursuant to the
County's Stormwater Management Plan affecting the
areas in question if the County's said plan is deemed by
law to supersede the Township's regulations with regard
to the issue of stormwater runoff, and
(b) To manage the quantity, velocity and direction of resulting
stormwater runoff in a manner that otherwise adequately
protects health and property from possible injury.
C. The stormwater plan for the development site shall consider all of
the stormwater runoff flowing over the site.
D. All land disturbance activities shall be conducted in such a way as
to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation. Measures to
control erosion shall at a minimum meet the standards of the
County Conservation District and the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania DEP.
E. No Developer or person, corporation, or other entity shall block,
impede the flow of, alter, construct any structure, or deposit any
material or thing, or commit any act which will affect normal or
flood flow in any communal stream or natural watercourse without
§ 404 LOGAN CODE § 404
1:570
having prior approval from the Township and/or the Pennsylvania
DEP, whichever is applicable.
F. Where a development site is traversed by a natural watercourse,
there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-of-way
conforming substantially to the line of such natural watercourse
and of such width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage.
The terms of the easement or right-of-way shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that
may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of
the easement or right-of-way. Also maintenance, including mowing
of vegetation within the easement or right-of-way shall be required,
except as approved by the appropriate governing authority. If
applicable, the Developer shall obtain drainage easements or
rights-of-way from downstream property owners.
G. Financial security. All stormwater management facilities and
natural waterway management facilities must be included in the
financial security as required in Section 306 of Chapter 22 of the
Township of Logan Code of Ordinances.
2. Stormwater Runoff Quantity Control Standards.
A. Runoff Rates. The maximum rate of stormwater runoff discharge
from any activity covered by Chapter 22 of the Township of Logan
Code of Ordinances following completion of the activity (postdevelopment
conditions) shall not exceed 75% of the maximum rate
of stormwater runoff discharge that would have occurred from the
land prior to the activity (pre-development conditions) or that
amount of runoff permitted pursuant to the County's Stormwater
Management Plan affecting the areas in question if the County's
said Plan is deemed by law to supersede the Township's regulations
with regard to the issue of stormwater runoff. This criterion shall
apply to the total activity even if the activity is to take place in
stages. More stringent criteria may be required in sensitive areas
where stormwater problems presently exist. These requirements
may be modified based on a detailed engineering study completed
by a licensed professional engineer of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, on behalf of the developer, which demonstrates that
modification of these requirements is justified, and such plan is
reviewed and recommended by the Logan Township Engineer for
approval by the Logan Township Board of Supervisors.
(1) Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development site
are not subject to this control standard when determining
allowable peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage
facilities shall be designed to safely convey off-site flows
through the development site.
(2) Where the site area to be impacted through a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site
§ 404 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:571
area (less than 10%), only the proposed impact area shall be
subject to the runoff criteria.
B. Storm Frequencies. Stormwater management facilities proposed
for all development sites shall control the peak stormwater
discharge for the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and one-hundred-year
storm frequencies. The USDA NARCS twenty-four-hour, Type H
Rainfall Distribution shall be used for analyzing stormwater runoff
for both pre- and post-development conditions. The twenty-fourhour
total rainfall for these storm frequencies in the watershed are:
Storm Frequency
Rainfall Depth
(inches)
2-year 2.6
10-year 3.8
25-year 4.6
100-year 6.1
C. Calculation Methods.
(1) Development Sites. For the purpose of computing peak flow
rates and runoff hydro graphs from development sites,
calculations shall be performed using one of the following:
USDA NARCS publications, Technical Release (TR) 55 or 20,
HEC I or Penn State Runoff Model (PERM.) or Modified
Rational Method. Under special circumstances other
computation methods may be used subject to the approval of
the Township Engineer.
(2) Stormwater Collection/Conveyance Facilities. For the purposes
of designing storm sewers and other stormwater runoff
collection and conveyance facilities, Rational Method or other
method as approved by the Township Engineer may be applied.
Rainfall intensities for design shall be obtained from the
PennDOT, Storm Intensity-Duration-Frequency Charts, as
amended to date.
(3) Routing of hydrographs through detention/retention facilities
for the purpose of designing those facilities shall be
accomplished using the Modified-Pulls Method or other
recognized reservoir routing method subject to the approval of
the Township Engineer.
(4) Predevelopment Conditions: Predevelopment conditions shall
be assumed to be those that exist on any site prior to
commencing any development activities. SCS runoff curve
numbers selected for use in the calculations shall accurately
reflect existing conditions subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer. The hydroponic conditions for all areas
§ 404 LOGAN CODE § 404
1:572
with pervious cover (i.e., fields, woods, lawn areas, pastures,
cropland, etc.) shall be assumed to be in "good" condition and
the lowest recommended SCS runoff curve number (CN) shall
be applied for all pervious land uses within the respective
range for each land use and hydroponic soil group. Impervious
cover shall include, but not be limited to, any roof, parking,
or driveway areas, and any new roadways and sidewalks. Any
areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be
assumed to be impervious for the purposes of these criteria.
The computed existing runoff rates shall be reconciled with
field observations and conditions. If the designer of the
stormwater management facilities can substantiate through
actual physical calibration that more appropriate runoff values
should be used at a particular development site, then
appropriate variations may be made upon review and approval
of the Township Engineer. Calibration shall require detailed
gauge and rainfall data for the particular development site in
question.
3. Stormwater Quality Management Requirements.
A. Applicability. In addition to the performance standards and design
criteria requirements of these Specifications, the Developer shall
implement the following water quality requirements unless
otherwise exempted by the provisions of these Specifications.
B. Water Quality Requirements.
(1) No regulated activities within the Township shall commence
until approval by the Township of a plan that demonstrates
compliance with State Water Quality Requirements after
construction is complete.
(2) Stormwater BMPs must be designed, implemented, and
maintained to meet State Water Quality Requirements, and any
other more stringent requirements as determined by the
Township.
(3) To control post-construction stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, State Water Quality Requirements can be
met by BMPs, including site design, which provide for
replication of pre-construction stormwater infiltration and
runoff conditions, so that post-construction discharges do not
degrade the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of
the receiving waters. This may be achieved by the following:
(a) Infiltration. Replication of pre-construction stormwater
infiltration conditions;
(b) Treatment. Use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure
removal of the chemical and physical pollutants from the
stormwater runoff, and
§ 404 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:573
(c) Streambank and Streambed Protection. Management of
volume and rate of post-construction stormwater
discharges to prevent physical degradation of receiving
waters (e.g., from scouring).
[1] Provisions for the assurance of long-term operations
and maintenance of BMPs must be provided in
accordance with this chapter.
[2] Acceptable stormwater management BMPs must be
provided to manage the net increase in stormwater
runoff volume from the land development activities
from a two-year, twenty-four-hour frequency storm.
This equates to 2.6 inches of rainfall occurring over a
twenty-four-hour period.
[3] Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for earth
disturbance activities from the appropriate PA DEP
regional office must be provided to the Township.
C. BMP Selection Criteria.
(1) BMP selection and application shall be in accordance with
guidance provided in the BMP handbooks and design manuals
published by PA DEP. In selecting the appropriate BMP's or
combinations thereof, the land developer shall consider the
following:
(a) Total contributing area.
(b) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(c) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(d) Seasonal high water table.
(e) Proximity to building foundations and well heads.
(f) Erodibility of soils.
(g) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(2) The following additional factors should be considered when
evaluating the suitability of the BMP's used to control water
quality at a given development site.
(a) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(b) Streambank erosion.
(c) Efficiency of the BMP's to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(d) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
§ 404 LOGAN CODE § 404
1:574
(e) The nature of the pollutant(s) being removed.
(f) Maintenance requirements.
(g) Recreation value.
(h) Enhancement of aesthetics and property values.
4. Design Requirements for Stormwater Management Controls.
A. General Criteria.
(1) The Developer may select runoff control techniques, or a
combination of techniques, which are most suitable to control
runoff from the development site. All controls shall be subject
to the approval of the Township Engineer. The Township
Engineer may request specific information on design and/or
operating features of the proposed stormwater management
controls in order to determine their suitability and adequacy in
terms of the standards of these Specifications.
(2) The Developer must consider the effect of the proposed
stormwater management techniques on any special soil
conditions or geological hazards that may exist on the
development site. In the event such conditions are identified on
the site, the Township Engineer may require in-depth studies
by a competent geotechnical engineer. Not all stormwater
methods may be allowable at a particular development site.
(3) In developing a stormwater plan for a particular site,
stormwater controls shall be selected according to the
following order of preference:
(a) Infiltration of runoff on-site, such as underground
perforated pipe with clean coarse aggregate backfill
wrapped with geotextile material.
(b) Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and
natural depressions.
(c) Construction of stormwater detention/retention
structures.
(4) Infiltration practices shall be used to the extent practicable to
reduce volume increases and promote groundwater recharge.
A combination of successive practices may be used to achieve
the applicable minimum control requirements. The Developer
shall provide justification for rejecting each of the preferred
practices based upon actual site conditions.
B. Design Criteria for Infiltration Systems.
(1) Infiltration systems shall be sized and designed based upon
local soil and ground water conditions.
§ 404 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:575
(2) All infiltration systems shall be located at least 10 feet from
basement walls.
(3) Infiltration systems shall not be used to handle runoff from
commercial or industrial working or parking areas. This
prohibition does not extend to roof areas that are
demonstrated to be suitably protected from the effects of the
commercial/industrial activities.
(4) Infiltration systems may not receive runoff until the entire
drainage area tributary to the system has received final
stabilization.
(5) The stormwater infiltration facility design shall provide an
overflow system with measures to provide a nonerosive
velocity of flow along its length and at the outfall.
(6) Roof drain infiltration facilities shall provide an effective
volume of at least one cubic foot for every two square feet of
roof surface.
(7) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase,
so as to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
C. Design Criteria for Flow Attenuation Facilities.
(1) If flow attenuation facilities are employed to assist in the
control of peak flows of discharge, their effects must be
quantified using SCS Technical Release (TR) 55, Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds or other method approved by
the Township Engineer. The effects of flow attenuation
facilities on travel time should be reflected in the calculations.
(2) Flow attenuation facilities such as swales and natural
depressions should be properly graded to ensure positive
drainage and avoid prolonged pending of water.
(3) Swales shall be properly vegetatively stabilized or otherwise
lined to prevent erosion.
(4) Swales shall be designed according to the recommendations
contained in the latest edition of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual latest edition.
D. Design Criteria for Stormwater Detention Facilities.
(1) If detention facilities are utilized for the development site, the
facility(ies) shall be designed such that post-development peak
runoff rates from the developed site are controlled to those
rates defined by this Part.
§ 404 LOGAN CODE § 404
1:576
(2) Shared-storage facilities that provide detention of runoff for
more than one development within a single subarea are
encouraged wherever feasible and provided such facilities
meet the criteria contained in these Specifications. In addition,
runoff from the developments involved shall be conveyed to the
facility in a manner that avoids adverse impacts (such as
flooding or erosion) to channels and properties located
between the development and the shared-storage facility.
(3) Where detention/retention facilities will be utilized, multiple
use facilities (such as wetlands, lakes, ballfields or similar
recreational/open space uses) are encouraged wherever
feasible, subject to the approval of the Township Engineer and
compliance with the Pennsylvania DEP's Chapter 105
regulations.
(4) Construction of the detention/retention facilities shall conform
to the construction specifications of the PennDOT Publication
408 Specifications, latest edition, and Standards for Roadway
Construction, RC 0- 100, latest edition.
(5) Design of the detention/retention facilities shall include the
following:
(a) Inflow and outflow structures shall be designed and
installed to prevent erosion to the side slopes. Inflow and
outflow structures, pumping stations and other structures
shall be designed to minimize safety hazards.
(b) Bottoms of stormwater detention/retention basins shall be
graded with sufficient slope to provide positive surface
drainage. Bottoms of storage facilities shall be protected
from erosion. A sub-drainage system may be required
depending upon the location of the pond bottom relative to
groundwater levels.
(c) Stormwater detention/retention basins shall have an
emergency spillway. The emergency spillway shall have
capacity to handle a one-hundred-year storm with at least
one foot of freeboard. The Township may require more
stringent criteria in sensitive areas where stormwater
problems presently exist. Erosion protection shall be
provided for the emergency spillway compatible with the
computed maximum discharge velocity. The minimum size
of rock lining shall be PennDOT Class R-4.
(d) If the fill height for a stormwater detention/retention
facility exceeds five feet, a compaction study must be
performed. Fill must be place in compacted lifts. Where
the fill height exceeds five feet, compaction testing shall
be performed during construction and the Developer shall
provide the Township with documentation that the fill was
§ 404 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:577
compacted to a density of at least 95% of the Standard
Proctor (ASTM Specification D698).
(e) Side slopes of the stormwater detention/retention basins
shall not exceed a ratio of 2 1/2:1 horizontal to vertical
dimension. This requirement may be modified based on a
detailed engineering study completed by a licensed
professional engineer of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, on behalf of the developer, which
demonstrates that modification of these requirements is
justified, and such plan is reviewed and recommended by
the Logan Township Engineer for approval by the Logan
Township Board of Supervisors.
(f) Landscaping shall be provided for the stormwater
detention/retention facility that harmonizes with the
surrounding area. Vegetative cover shall be provided for
all areas disturbed by the construction of the storage
facilities, including the interior side slopes.
(g) Control and removal of debris both in stormwater
detention/retention structure and in all inlet and outlet
devices shall be a design consideration.
(h) Stormwater detention/retention facilities shall be located
to facilitate maintenance taking into consideration the
frequency and type of equipment that will be required.
(i) The perimeter of all detention/retention facilities shall be
completely fenced with a fence having a minimum height
of six feet. Said fence shall be constructed of chain link or
other similar material as may be approved by the
Township. A double gate having a minimum width of 12
feet shall be installed in the fence to provide access to the
stormwater storage facilities. The Developer shall furnish
a gate lock. To facilitate maintenance and inspection, all
stormwater storage facilities shall be provided with a
stabilized access road of a type subject to the approval of
the Township Engineer. When located on undedicated
land, the access road shall be placed within an easement
not less than 20 feet wide, as approved by the Township
Engineer, who may require additional width of easement
as circumstances warrant.
(j) Upon completion of the stormwater detention/retention
facilities, the Developer shall provide to the Township a
certification from an engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, certifying that said
facilities were constructed in accordance with these
Specifications and the plans approved by the Township.
§ 404 LOGAN CODE § 404
1:578
E. Design Criteria for Storm Drainage Collection/Conveyance
Facilities.
(1) All stormwater runoff collection and conveyance facilities shall
be designed in accordance with the following basic standards.
(a) Any property(ies) or water course(s) receiving stormwater
from a site shall contain an easement from the property
owner(s) granting permission to convey stormwater over
the property or water course. The existing points of
concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent
properties shall not be altered without a notarized
statement of approval from the adjacent property owner
(or downstream property owners if required by the
Municipal Engineer), accepting the revisions to the
concentrated flow. All such statements shall be recorded in
the County Recorder's office. Areas of existing diffused
drainage discharge onto adjacent properties shall be
managed such that, at minimum, the peak diffused flow
does not increase in the general direction of discharge,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. If diffused
flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the developer must document that there
are adequate downstream conveyance facilities to safely
transport the concentrated discharge or otherwise prove
that no harm will result from the concentrated discharge.
Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be
subject to any applicable release rate criteria in the
general direction of existing discharge whether they are
proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused
drainage areas. The Developer must submit to the
Township a statement, properly acknowledged and
notarized, from the adjacent property owner (or
downstream property owners if required by the Municipal
Engineer), accepting the altered flow. All such statements
shall be recorded in the County Recorder's office at the
sole cost of the person obtaining the same.
(b) In order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of runoff, roof drains shall not be connected to
roadways or storm sewers unless permitted on a case-bycase
basis by the Township. Lots located on the high side
of roadways shall extend footer drains to the curb line
storm sewer, if applicable. Low side lots shall extend footer
drains to a stormwater collection/conveyance/control
system or natural watercourse in accordance with the
approved stormwater plan for the development site. If
applicable, stabilized outlets shall be provided for all roof
drains and footer drains.
§ 404 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:579
(c) Collection/conveyance facilities shall not be installed
parallel and close to the top or bottom of a major
embankment to avoid the possibility of failing or causing
the embankment to fail.
(d) All stormwater drainage collection/conveyance facilities
shall be designed to convey the twenty-five-year storm
peak flow rate from the contributing drainage area and to
carry it to the nearest suitable outlet such as a stormwater
control facility, curbed roadway, storm sewer or natural
watercourse without damage to the drainage structure or
roadway. All stormwater drainage collection/conveyance
facilities shall be designed to convey the runoff from the
twenty-five-year design storm. Roadway crossings located
within designated floodplain area must be able to convey
runoff from the one-hundred-year design storm with a
minimum of 1.0 foot freeboard measured below the lowest
point along the top of the roadway. Stormwater drainage
collection/conveyance facilities must also be designed to
convey the one-hundred-year storm event to any
stormwater detention facilities so as not to endanger life
or seriously damage property.
(e) Stormwater drainage shall not be permitted to cross over
intersections or the crown of the road. Trench drains shall
be used to control drainage from entrances (driveways,
business accesses) to a road.
(f) When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions,
natural drainage ways on the development site cannot
adequately provide for drainage, open channels may be
constructed conforming substantially to the line and grade
of such natural drainage ways. Work within natural
drainage ways shall be subject to the approval of the
Pennsylvania DEP through the Joint Permit Application
process, or, where deemed appropriate by the
Pennsylvania DEP, through the General Permit process.
(g) Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, to drain all
low points along roadways and to intercept stormwater
runoff along roadways at intervals reasonably related to
the extent and grade of the area drained.
(h) Existing points of concentrated stormwater drainage that
discharge from the development site onto adjacent
property shall not be altered without the permission of the
altered property owner(s) and shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria specified in these
Specifications.
§ 404 LOGAN CODE § 404
1:580
(i) Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be
subject to any applicable discharge criteria in the general
direction of the existing discharge, whether proposed to
be concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas,
except as otherwise provided by these Specifications. If
diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and
discharged onto adjacent property, the Developer must
document that adequate downstream conveyance facilities
exist to safely transport the concentrated discharge, or
otherwise prove that not erosion, sedimentation, flooding,
or other harm will result from the concentrated discharge.
(j) Any stormwater management facilities regulated by these
Specifications that would be located in or adjacent to
waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or wetlands
shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania DEP
through the Joint Permit Application process, or, when
deemed appropriate by the Pennsylvania DEP, through the
General Permit process. When there is a question whether
wetlands may be involved, it shall be the responsibility of
Developer to show that the land in question cannot be
classified as wetlands, otherwise approval to work in the
area in question must be obtained from the Pennsylvania
DEP.
(k) Any stormwater management facilities regulated by these
Specifications that would be located within the right-ofway
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be subject
to approval by the PennDOT.
(l) All spring and sump pump discharges shall be collected so
as not to flow onto any roadway. Stabilized outlets shall be
provided for all spring and sump pump discharges.
(2) Storm sewers shall comply with the following criteria.
(a) Where practical, the storm sewers shall be designed to
traverse under seeded and planted areas. If constructed
within 10 feet of road paving, walks or other surfaced
areas, storm sewers shall have a narrow trench and
maximum compaction of backfill to prevent settlement of
the superimposed surface or development.
(b) Storm sewers shall be installed after excavating and filling
in the area to be traversed is completed, unless, the storm
sewer is installed in the original ground with a minimum of
three feet of cover and adequate protection is provided
during the fill construction.
(c) Storm sewers shall be designed with concrete cradle when
traversing fill area and/or with concrete anchors when
grades exceed 20%.
§ 404 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:581
(d) Storm sewers shall be backfilled with PennDOT 2RC or
PennDOT 2B coarse aggregate when traversing under
paved areas and shoulder areas.
(e) Storm sewers shall be designed to adequately handle the
anticipated stormwater flow. Pipe within a Township rightof-
way shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches, unless
the Township approves a smaller diameter.
(f) Storm sewers shall be constructed of one of the materials
specified in PennDOT Publication 408 Specifications,
Sections 601, 602 and 603. All corrugated polyethylene
pipe shall be Type S.
(g) Trenching, bedding and backfilling requirements and
materials shall conform to the requirements of PennDOT
Publications 408 Specifications, as supplemented and
amended by these Specifications.
(h) Storm inlets and structures shall be designed to be
adequate, safe, self-cleaning and unobtrusive and
consistent with PennDOT and Township standards. The
maximum spacing of inlets shall not exceed 600 feet. Inlets
shall be PennDOT Type C or M with cast-in-place
reinforced concrete or precast concrete tops.
(i) The appropriate type grates shall be provided for all storm
inlets, structures and other entrance appurtenances.
(j) Manholes shall be designed so that the top shall be at
finished grade and sloped to conform to the slope of the
finished grade. Top castings of structures located in roads
or parking areas shall be machined or installed to preclude
"clanking".
(k) Where a proposed storm sewer connects with an existing
storm sewer system, the Developer shall demonstrate that
sufficient capacity exists in the downstream storm sewer
system to the handle the additional flow. The Developer
shall provide a letter from the purveyor providing the
existing storm sewer service approving the connection of
the proposed storm sewer system.
(l) Storm sewer outcall shall be provided with either
reinforced concrete headwalls or pipe end sections and
energy dissipation devices to prevent erosion and conform
to the applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania DEP for
stream encroachment (Chapter 105 of the Pennsylvania
DEP Rules and Regulations).
(m) Storm sewers shall be placed in front of the curb or curb
line when located in a roadway right-of-way. When storm
§ 404 LOGAN CODE § 404
1:582
sewers are located in undedicated land, storm sewers shall
be placed within an easement not less than 20 feet wide
as approved by the Township Engineer, who may require
additional width of easement as circumstances warrant.
F. Maintenance of Stormwater Management Controls.
(1) Maintenance Responsibilities.
(a) The Developer shall prepare a maintenance plan for
stormwater management facilities located on the
development site. The plan shall establish responsibilities
for the continuing operation and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the
following principles:
[1] If a development consists of structures or lots that are
to be separately owned and in which roadways, storm
sewers and other public improvements are to be
dedicated to the Township, stormwater collection/
conveyance facilities shall be dedicated to and
maintained by the Township. The ownership and
operation/maintenance of stormwater infiltration
systems, flow attenuation facilities and stormwater
detention/retention facilities shall be responsibility of
the Developer or private management entity in
perpetuity.
[2] If a development site is to be maintained in single
ownership or if storm sewers and other public
improvements are to be privately owned and
maintained, then the ownership and operation/
maintenance of any and all stormwater control
facilities shall be the responsibility of the Developer or
private management entity in perpetuity.
(b) The Township, upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer, shall make the final determination on the
continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to final
approval of the stormwater plan. The Township reserves
the right to accept the ownership and operation/
maintenance responsibilities for any and all of the
stormwater management controls and to determine the
terms and conditions under which the Township will
accept ownership and operation/maintenance
responsibilities.
(2) Agreement for Privately Owned Stormwater Facilities.
(a) Prior to final approval of the stormwater plan for a
subdivision/land development site the Developer and
Township shall execute an agreement covering all
§ 404 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 404
1:583
§ 405. Stormwater Plan Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 12-14-06]
stormwater control facilities that are to be privately
owned. The agreement shall be recorded with the final
subdivision/land development plan for the development
site. The agreement shall stipulate that:
[1] All facilities shall be maintained in accordance with
the approved maintenance schedule and in a safe and
attractive manner.
[2] Easements and/or rights-of-way shall be conveyed to
the Township to assure access for periodic inspections
by the Township and maintenance if required.
[3] The name, address and telephone number of the
person or company responsible for maintenance
activities shall be filed with the Township. In the event
of a change, new information will be submitted to the
Township within 10 days of the change.
[4] If the Developer fails to maintain the stormwater
control facilities, the Township may perform the
necessary maintenance work or corrective work
following due notice by the Township to the
stormwater control facilities owner to correct the
problem(s). The facilities owner shall reimburse the
Township for all costs within 30 days of the date of the
Township's cost statement and, where appropriate,
municipal liens shall be imposed on any assets within
the subdivision/land development.
(b) Other items shall be included in the agreement where
determined by the Township to be necessary to guarantee
the satisfactory maintenance of all stormwater control
facilities.
1. General Requirements.
A. No final subdivision/land development plan shall be approved, no
permit authorizing construction issued, or any clearing and
grubbing, or earth moving or land disturbance activity initiated
until the final stormwater plan for the subdivision/land
development site is approved in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 22 of the Township of Logan Code of Ordinances.
2. Exemptions.
A. The following activities are exempt from the stormwater plan
preparation provisions of these Specifications. Exemption shall not
relieve the Developer from providing adequate stormwater
§ 404 LOGAN CODE § 405
1:584
management to meet the purpose of Chapter 22 of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances.
(1) Any regulated activity that would create 5,000 square feet or
less of impervious area. This criterion shall apply to the total
development even if development is to take place in phases.
(2) Land disturbance associated with existing one and two family
dwellings.
(3) Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(4) Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation
plan or erosion and sediment pollution control plan approved
by the County Conservation District. The agricultural activities
such as growing crops, rotating crops, filling of soil and
grazing animals and other such activities are specifically
exempt from complying with the stormwater plan
requirements of Chapter 22 of the Township of Logan Code of
Ordinances when such activities are conducted in accordance
with a conservation plan prepared by the County Conservation
District. The construction of buildings, parking lots or any
activity that may result in impervious surface which increases
the rate and volume of stormwater runoff shall comply with the
stormwater management requirements of Chapter 22 of the
Township of Logan Code of Ordinances.
(5) Forest management operations which are following the
Pennsylvania DEP's management practices contained in the
latest edition of its publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Guidelines for Forestry" and are operating under an
erosion and sedimentation control plan.
3. Stormwater Plan Contents.
A. General Format. The stormwater plan shall be drawn on sheets 24
inches by 36 inches with a graphic scale of not less than one inch
equals 200 feet. Plans intended for recording purposes shall not be
larger than 16 inches by 22 inches. All plan sheets shall contain a
title block with: Name and address of the Developer and engineer,
graphic scale, north arrow, legend, date of original preparation and
date and description of each revision to the plan sheet.
B. Existing and Proposed Features. The plan shall show the following
under both pre-development and post-development conditions:
(1) Watershed Location. Provide a key map showing the location of
the development site within the watershed(s) and watershed
subarea(s). On all site drawings, show the boundaries of the
watershed(s) and watershed subarea(s) as they are located on
the development site and identify watershed name(s) and
watershed subarea number(s).
§ 405 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 405
1:585
(2) Floodplain Boundaries. Identify one-hundred-year Floodplain
on the development site (as appropriate) based upon the
Township Flood Insurance Study maps.
(3) Natural Features. Show all bodies of water (natural or
artificial), watercourses (permanent and intermittent), swales,
wetlands and other natural drainage courses on the
development site, or which will be affected by runoff from the
development site.
(4) Soils. Provide an overlay showing all soil types and boundaries
within the development site (consult the County Conservation
District, SCS and U.S. Geological Survey for information).
(5) Contours. Show existing and final contours at intervals of two
feet. In areas with slopes greater that 15%, five-foot intervals
may be used.
(6) Land Cover. Show existing and final land cover classifications
as necessary to support and illustrate the runoff calculations
performed.
(7) Drainage Area Delineation. Show the boundaries of the
drainage areas employed in the runoff calculations performed.
(8) Stormwater Management Controls. Show any existing
stormwater management or drainage controls and/or
structures, such as storm sewers, swales, culverts, etc. which
are located on the development site, or which are located offsite
but will be affected by runoff from the development site.
C. Professional Certification. The stormwater plan (including all
calculations) shall be prepared and sealed by a engineer, surveyor
or landscape architect licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and with training and expertise in hydrology and
hydraulics. The Township may require documentation of such
qualifications.
D. Runoff Calculations. Calculations for determining pre- and postdevelopment
discharge rates and for designing stormwater control
facilities must be submitted with the stormwater plan. All
calculations shall be prepared using the methods and data
prescribed by these Specifications.
E. Stormwater Controls. All proposed stormwater runoff control
measures must be shown on the drawings including methods for
collecting, conveying and storing stormwater runoff on-site which
are to be used both during and after construction. Erosion and
sedimentation controls shall be shown in accordance with § 407,
"Erosion and Sedimentation Control," of these Specifications. The
plan shall provide information on the exact type, location, sizing,
design and construction of all proposed facilities and relationship
§ 405 LOGAN CODE § 405
1:586
to the existing watershed drainage system. The plan shall include
technical specifications for materials and methods to be used in the
construction of the stormwater management facilities.
(1) If the development is to be constructed in phases, the
Developer must demonstrate that all stormwater facilities will
be installed to manage stormwater runoff safely during each
stage of development.
(2) A schedule for the installation of all temporary and permanent
stormwater control measures and devices shall be submitted.
(3) If appropriate, a justification shall be submitted as to why any
preferred stormwater management techniques, as listed in
these Specifications, are proposed for use.
F. Easements, Rights-of-Way, Deed Restrictions. All existing and
proposed easements and rights-of-way for drainage and/or access
to stormwater control facilities shall be shown along with any areas
subject to special deed restrictions relative to or affecting
stormwater management on the development site.
G. Other Permits/Approvals. A list of any approvals/permits relative to
stormwater management that will be required from other
governmental agencies (Pennsylvania DEP Chapters 105 and 106
permits and/or NPDES permit) and anticipated dates of
submission/receipt shall be included with the stormwater plan
submission. Copies of permit applications shall be furnished to the
Township.
H. Maintenance Program. The proposed maintenance plan for all
stormwater control facilities shall be submitted with the
stormwater plan and shall:
(1) Identify the proposed ownership entity (e.g., Township,
property owner, private corporation, homeowner's association
or other entity).
(2) Identify the type of maintenance, probable frequencies,
personnel and equipment requirements and estimated annual
maintenance costs.
(3) Identify method of financing continuing operation and
maintenance if the facilities are to be owned by other than the
Township.
(4) Include copies of any legal agreements required to implement
the maintenance program and, if applicable, copies of the
maintenance agreement required by these Specifications.
I. Financial Guarantees. Submit financial guarantees in accordance
with the provisions of § 306 of Chapter 22 of the Township of Logan
Code of Ordinances.
§ 405 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 405
1:587
J. Evidence of Notification of Downstream Municipality. The
developer shall notify (by certified mail) the municipality
immediately downstream of the municipality within which the
development is proposed that a stormwater control plan has been
prepared and submitted. This letter should identify the location of
the proposed development site and the name of the affected
stream. The developer shall submit a copy of this letter and a copy
of the certified mail return receipt.
4. Plan Review Procedures.
A. Pre-Application Phase.
(1) Before submitting the stormwater plan, the Developer is urged
to consult with the Township on the applicable regulations and
techniques for safety managing runoff from the development
site. The Township may also be helpful in providing necessary
data for the stormwater plan.
(2) The Developer is encouraged to submit a sketch plan with a
narrative description of the proposed stormwater management
controls for general guidance and discussion with the
Township.
(3) The pre-application phase is not mandatory; any review
comments provided by the Township are advisory only and do
not constitute any legally binding action on the part of the
Township.
B. Stormwater Plan Reviews.
(1) Submission of Plans. The stormwater plan shall be submitted
with the preliminary and final subdivision/land development
submission.
(2) Notification of Affected Municipalities. The Township shall
notify municipalities adjacent to the subdivision/land
development site that may be affected by the stormwater
runoff and proposed controls for the site. Copies of plan shall
be made available to such municipalities upon request. The
Township Engineer in its review will consider comments
received from any affected municipalities.
(3) Township Engineer's Review. The Township Engineer shall
recommend approval or disapproval of the stormwater plan
based upon the requirements of the applicable Township
Ordinances, the standards and criteria of these Specifications
and good engineering practices. The Township Engineer's
review of the subdivision/land development plan shall include a
written report to the Township, along with supporting
documentation, stating the reasons for recommending
approval or disapproval.
§ 405 LOGAN CODE § 405
1:588
(4) Permits Required from Other Governmental Agencies. Where
the proposed development requires an obstruction permit from
the Pennsylvania DEP or an erosion/sedimentation permit from
the County Conservation District, final stormwater plan
approval shall not be granted until receipt of such permits. No
building permit shall be issued, nor construction started, until
such permits are received and copies filed with the Township.
C. Status of the Stormwater Plan After Final Approval.
(1) Upon final stormwater plan approval, receipt of all necessary
permits, execution of the Developer's Agreement and posting
of the necessary financial security, the Developer may
commence to install or implement the approved stormwater
plan.
(2) If the site development or building construction does not begin
within two years of the date of final approval of the stormwater
plan, then before doing so, the Developer shall resubmit the
stormwater plan to verify that no condition has changed within
the watershed that would affect the feasibility or effectiveness
of the previously approved stormwater management controls.
Further, if for any reason development activities are suspended
for two years of more, then the same requirement for
resubmission of the stormwater plan shall apply.
D. Stormwater Plan Modifications.
(1) If the request for a plan modification is initiated before
construction begins, the stormwater plan must be resubmitted
and reviewed according to the procedures contained herein.
(2) If the request for a plan modification is initiated after
construction is underway, the Township Engineer shall
recommend approval or disapproval of the modification based
upon field inspection provided:
(a) The requested changes in stormwater controls do not
result in any modifications to other approved Township
land use/development requirements (e.g., building
setbacks, yards, buffer zones, etc.); and
(b) The performance standards set forth in these
Specifications are met. Notification of the Township
Engineer's action shall be sent to the governing body
which may issue a stay of the plan modification within five
days and require the Developer to resubmit the plan
modification for full stormwater plan review.
E. Inspections of Stormwater Management Controls.
§ 405 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 405
1:589
(1) The Township Engineer or a designated representative shall
inspect the construction of the temporary and permanent
stormwater management system for the development site. The
Developer shall notify the Township Engineer at least 48 hours
in advance of the completion of the following key development
phases:
(a) At the completion of preliminary site preparation including
stripping of vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil and
construction of temporary stormwater management and
erosion control facilities.
(b) At the completion of rough grading but prior to placing of
topsoil, permanent drainage or other site development
improvements and ground covers.
(c) During construction of the permanent stormwater
facilities at such times as specified by the Township
Engineer.
(d) Completion of permanent stormwater management
facilities including established ground covers and
plantings.
(e) Completion of final grading, vegetative control measures
or other site restoration work done in accordance with the
approved plan and permits.
(2) No work shall commence on any subsequent phase until the
preceding phase has been inspected and approved by the
Township. If there are deficiencies in any phase, the Township
Engineer shall issue a written description of the required
corrections and stipulate the time by which the corrections
must be made.
(3) If during construction, the Developer or the Developer's
contractor identifies any site conditions, such as subsurface
soil conditions, alterations in surface or subsurface drainage
which could affect the feasibility of the approved stormwater
management facilities, the Developer shall notify the Township
Engineer within 24 hours of the discovery of such condition
and request a field inspection. The Township Engineer shall
determine if the condition requires a stormwater plan
modification.
(4) In cases where stormwater control facilities are to be installed
in areas of landslide-prone soils or other special site conditions
exist, the Township Engineer, at its sole discretion, may require
special precautions such as soil tests and core borings, fulltime
inspectors and/or similar measures. All costs of any such
measures shall be borne solely of the Developer.
§ 405 LOGAN CODE § 405
1:590
F. Financial Guarantees and Dedication of Public Improvements:
Financial security and dedication of public improvements shall
conform to applicable provisions of Chapter 22 of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances.
5. Prohibited Discharges.
A. No person in the municipality shall allow, or cause to allow,
stormwater discharges into the Township separate storm sewer
system which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except
(1) As provided in Subsection B below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
B. Discharges which may be allowed, based on a finding by the
Township that the discharges do not significantly contribute to
pollution to surface waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
are:
(1) Discharges from fire fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and
fire hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(5) Air conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Water from crawl space pumps.
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill
material has been removed) and where detergents are not
used.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(13) Springs.
C. In the event that the Township determines that any of the
discharged identified herein significantly contribute to pollution of
waters of the Commonwealth, or is so notified by PA DEP, the
Township will notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
§ 405 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 405
1:591
§ 406. Lot Grading. [Amended by Ord. 6-27-02]
D. Upon notice provided by the Township under Subsection C, the
discharge will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
Township, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities
under state law.
6. Prohibited Connections.
A. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided
herein above:
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows any non-stormwater discharge
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to
enter the separate storm sewer system, and any connections to
the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, and
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system which
has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent
records, and approved by the Township.
7. Roof Drains.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm
sewers or roadside ditches except as provided in Subsection 7B
below.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or
storm sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside
ditches may be permitted to the Township.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMP's
to the maximum extent practicable.
8. Alternation of BMP's.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, unless it is part of an approved maintenance
program without the written approval of the Township.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation
into a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement, which
would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP without the written
approval of the Township.
1. Blocks and lots shall be graded to provide proper drainage away from
buildings and to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools.
Minimum 2% slopes away from buildings shall be required.
§ 405 LOGAN CODE § 406
1:592
§ 407. Erosion and Sedimentation Control.
2. Lot grading shall be of such design as to carry surface water to the
nearest practical roadway storm drain or natural watercourse. Where
drainage swales are used to deliver surface waters away from
buildings, their grade shall not be less than 1%. These swales shall be
sodded, planted or lined in accordance with the latest edition of the
Pennsylvania DEP's Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual or as required by the Township.
3. No final grading shall be permitted which creates any exposed surface,
cut face or fill, steeper in slope than three horizontal to one vertical
unless the Developer provides a retaining wall designed in accordance
to sound engineering standards for which plans are submitted to the
Township Engineer for review and acceptance. This requirement may
be modified based on a detailed engineering study completed by a
licensed professional engineer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
on behalf of the developer, which demonstrates that modification of this
requirement is justified, and such plan is reviewed and recommended
by the Logan Township Engineer for approval by the Logan Township
Board of Supervisors.
4. All fills shall be located so that settlement, sliding or erosion will not
result in property damage or be hazardous to adjoining property,
roadways or buildings.
5. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum of three feet from
property lines or right-of-way lines of roadways in order to permit the
normal rounding of the edge without encroaching upon the abutting
property. All property lines, where walls or slopes are steeper than one
horizontal to one vertical and five feet or more in height, shall be
protected by a protective fence or suitable barrier no less than four feet
in height and accepted by the Township Engineer.
6. All lots must be kept free of any debris or nuisances.
1. The Developer, and each person, corporation, or other entity which
engages in earthmoving activities within the Township shall design,
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control measures
and facilities that effectively prevent accelerated erosion
sedimentation. These control measures and facilities shall be contained
in an erosion and sedimentation control plan that meets the
requirements of the Pennsylvania DEP Chapter 102 (Erosion Control)
Rules and Regulations and has been approved by the Township. The
erosion and sedimentation control plan must be available at all times at
the site of the activity. No final subdivision/land development plan shall
be approved, no permit authorizing construction issued, or any clearing
and grubbing, or earthmoving or land disturbance initiated until the
final erosion and sedimentation control plan for the subdivision/land
development is approved by the Township.
§ 406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 407
1:593
2. Prior to approval of a subdivision/land development plan proposing any
earthmoving activity in excess of 5,000 square feet within the
Township, an erosion and sedimentation control plan must be submitted
to and approved by the County Conservation District and the Township.
For sites involving five or more acres, the appropriate National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit for
Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activities or earth
disturbance permit must be obtained from the County Conservation
District or the Pennsylvania DEP.
3. The erosion and sedimentation control plan must include erosion and
sedimentation control measures and activities for individual building
lots within a subdivision/land development.
4. Financial security for erosion and sedimentation control measures and
facilities must be included in the financial security as required in § 306
of Chapter 22 of the Township of Logan Code of Ordinances.
5. If applicable, persons undertaking any earthmoving activity shall pay
all fees for the review of the erosion and sedimentation control plan
directly to the County Conservation District. Any person requiring the
complete explanation of the County Conservation District's charges for
plan reviews shall contact the County Conservation District.
6. Persons undertaking any earthmoving activity must notify the County
Conservation District and the Township by telephone or certified mail at
least seven days prior to the start of construction. Persons undertaking
any earthmoving activity must attend a pre-construction conference
with the County Conservation District and the Township prior to the
start of construction.
7. Township and the County Conservation District are authorized to
conduct both routine and emergency site inspections of ongoing
earthmoving operations, without prior notification within the municipal
boundaries of the Township to establish compliance with the approved
erosion and sedimentation control plan.
8. All violations of the requirements of these Specifications regarding
erosion and sedimentation control determined during a site inspection
shall be listed on an inspection report that itemizes the following items
for each violation:
A. Specific type of violation, including location and scope.
B. A period of time for correction of the violations without the
assessment of any penalties.
9. The Township's inspector and the person responsible for the
earthmoving activity (or a designed representative) must sign the
inspection report and a copy provided to the latter party.
§ 407 LOGAN CODE § 408
1:594
§ 408. Water Obstructions and Encroachments.
The Developer must apply for and obtain a Pennsylvania DEP General
Permit and/or a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Joint Permit for construction
across or within a waterway or wetland. The design and construction of this
work must meet the requirements of the Pennsylvania DEP and/or the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers.
§ 409. Flood Plains.
Development upon property that is partially or entirely within an identified
flood plain shall conform to the procedures and requirements contained
within Chapter 8, "Floodplains," of the Township of Logan Code of
Ordinances. The minimum first floor elevations shall be provided on the
plans for all building lots located within the identified one-hundred-year
flood plain.
§ 410. Utilities. [Amended by Ord. 6-27-02; and by Ord. 12-11-08]
1. General.
A. Telephone, electric, television cable, water, sanitary sewer, storm
drainage, natural gas and such other utilities shall be installed
underground and shall be provided within the roadway right-of-way
or easements to be dedicated for such utilities, and in accordance
with the plans approved by the Township and the applicable utility
company. This requirement may be modified if the developer
demonstrates that there are certain physical constraints pertaining
to the land to be developed that proves that a modification of this
requirement is justified, and a plan has been developed which will
propose the most minimal modification necessary to overcome such
constraint, and such plan is reviewed and recommended by the
Logan Township Engineer for approval by the Logan Township
Board of Supervisors. Underground installation of the utility
distribution and service lines must be completed prior to placement
of the roadway pavement structure. All such utilities must have at
least four feet of cover.
B. Except for service connections, utilities shall not be placed under
the roadway cartway.
C. Sanitary sewer system manholes shall not be placed within the
roadway cartway.
D. All utility lines crossing the roadway cartway and/or shoulder, or
installed within the roadway shoulder must be completely
backfilled with properly compacted PennDOT No. 2RC coarse
aggregate or No. 2B coarse aggregate.
E. Off-site utility extensions within Township roadway right-of-way
shall be installed as follows:
§ 408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 410
1:595
(1) Saw cut the existing pavement surface to the bottom of the
base course to a neat, straight edge.
(2) Completely backfill the utility trench with properly compacted
PennDOT No. 2RC coarse aggregate or No. 2B coarse
aggregate.
(3) Back-cut or over-cut the utility trench a minimum of one-foot
on each side of the trench.
(4) Install the pavement structure in accordance with the
standards as set forth in Section 403, "Roadway and Drainage
Improvements", of these Specifications.
(5) Pour hot bitumastic joint sealant on all pavement joints in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 408, Section 469.
2. Sanitary Sewers and Sewage Disposal.
A. The Township shall determine the method of sanitary sewage
disposal in a proposed subdivision/land development.
B. Public Sanitary Sewerage System. Where a public sanitary
sewerage system is within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision/
land development, and the capacity exists to serve the proposed
subdivision/land development, the Developer shall provide the
subdivision/land development with a complete sanitary sewerage
system to be connected to the existing public sanitary sewerage
system. An engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall design the system. The design and construction
of the public sanitary sewerage system shall conform to the
minimum standards as set forth in Chapter 18, "Sewers and
Sewage Disposal", of the Township of Logan Code of Ordinances
which includes the Township's "Specifications for Sanitary
Sewerage System Construction." The Developer shall provide
copies of all required permits from the Pennsylvania DEP for the
proposed sanitary sewerage system.
C. On-Site Sewerage System. Where it is determined by the Township
that a subdivision/land development may rely upon on-site
sewerage systems for sanitary sewage disposal, the on-site
system(s) shall comply with the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania DEP and the requirements of the Township's Sewage
Enforcement Officer.
3. Water.
A. Public Water Supply System. Where a public water supply system is
within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision/land development,
and the capacity exists to serve the proposed subdivision/land
development, the Developer shall provide the subdivision/land
development with a complete water supply system to be connected
§ 410 LOGAN CODE § 410
1:596
to the existing public water supply system. An engineer registered
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall design the system. The
design and construction of the water supply system shall conform
to the specifications of provider of water service and/or the
Pennsylvania DEP. The Developer shall provide copies of all
required permits from the Pennsylvania DEP for the proposed
water supply system. All water supply system components installed
within a Township roadway right-of-way shall be backfilled and the
pavement structure replaced as set forth in this § 408 of these
Specifications.
B. Private Water Supply System. If water is to be provided by a
privately owned and operated water supply system, the water
supply system shall comply with the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania DEP and, if applicable, the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission. The Developer shall provide copies of all required
permits from the Pennsylvania DEP for the proposed water supply
system. All water supply system components installed within a
Township roadway right-of-way shall be backfilled and the
pavement structure replaced as set forth in this § 408 of these
Specifications.
C. Individual Wells. With the exception of Minor Subdivisions, if
individual wells are proposed for each lot, the Developer shall
prepare a hydrogeological study of the development site. For Minor
Subdivisions, the Township may direct the Developer to prepare a
hydrogeological study of the development site. When a water
supply facilities feasibility report is required, the Township may
approve the use of on-lot water supply systems (wells) when:
(1) This report indicates that justification of the project
necessitates consideration of this type of water supply.
(2) The anticipated water supply yield is adequate for the type of
development proposed.
(3) The installation of such systems will not endanger or decrease
the groundwater supplies to adjacent properties.
(4) The Water Supply Facilities Feasibility Report shall contain
information relative to the above items and may be required for
any development regardless of size. The information contained
in the report shall be prepared by an Engineer licensed in the
state of Pennsylvania or a qualified Hydrogeologist. The
Township may require certification of yield projections and
groundwater supplies by the Engineer retained by the
developer.
(5) This report shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for
review. Following review of report when determined to be
necessary by the Township Engineer the developer may be
required to provide at least one test well for each 10 lots. Such
§ 410 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 410
1:597
wells should be drilled, cased, and grout sealed into bed rock
at least 50 feet deep, having a production capacity of at least
five gallons per minute of safe potable drinking water as
certified by the developer's Engineer through laboratory
testing; all findings shall be submitted to the Township. For
institutional, commercial, industrial or other large scale land
development, the Township Engineer shall specify specific
criteria and tests to be provided of on-site water supply
systems on a case by case basis.
(6) If individual wells are used for water service, the following
minimum specifications shall be used for construction of the
wells:
(a) All wells shall be constructed with a grouted well casing.
The well casing shall be installed in a rock socket that
allows the grout cubing to have a thickness of at least 1 1/2
inches (i.e., a six-inch diameter well casing shall be
installed in a ten-inch nominal diameter borehole).
(b) The grout shall be placed with a grout pump and Tremie
pipe system.
(c) Well casings shall be installed to a minimum depth of 40
feet.
(d) The land surface surrounding the well site shall be graded
so that surface water runs away from the wellhead in all
directions.
(e) A minimum isolation distance of 50 feet shall be
maintained between the wellhead and the following
features:
[1] Stormwater detention/retention basins.
[2] Roof drain sumps and other stormwater infiltration
systems.
[3] Sanitary and storm sewer lines.
[4] Natural watercourses and springs.
[5] Above and below ground heating oil tanks.
(f) The following minimum isolation distances shall be
maintained between the wellhead and the following
features:
[1] Property lines: 10 feet.
4. Other Utilities. The design and construction of other utilities shall
conform to the specifications of the provider of such utilities. All
components of such utilities installed within a Township roadway right-
§ 410 LOGAN CODE § 410
1:598
§ 411. Mobile Home Parks.
of-way shall be backfilled and the pavement structure replaced as set
forth in this § 408 of these Specifications.
1. General Requirements. The subdivision/land development plan
submission and review procedures and the general design standards
and required improvements of these Specifications and Chapter 22 of
the Township of Logan Code of Ordinances shall apply to mobile home
parks even though roadways and other public improvements may not be
offered for dedication to the Township. The mobile home park
construction shall conform to the procedures and requirements
contained within Chapter 8, "Floodplains," of the Township of Logan
Code of Ordinances.
2. Design Standards:
A. General.
(1) A mobile home park shall be located on land having a
reasonably flat terrain having an average slope of 8% or less.
(2) A site area of not less than five acres shall be provided.
(3) The minimum floor area of each mobile home shall conform to
the provisions of Chapter 27, "Zoning," of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances.
(4) The length of each mobile home shall be parallel with the
contour of the land so that no end of the mobile home is
elevated higher than the other from the ground.
(5) Each mobile home shall have skirting around the base between
the bottom of the exterior of the home and the ground.
(6) The mobile home park shall be provided with a usable
recreation area of 5,000 square feet plus 500 square feet for
each home exceeding 10. The recreation area(s) shall be
centrally located so it is easily accessible to all homes in the
park. The recreation area(s) shall be appropriately developed
with recreation facilities. The type and sizes of such facilities
shall be shown on the plans. The recreation area(s) shall be
maintained by the mobile home park owner, unless the
Township agrees to maintain the recreation area(s).
(7) Buffer areas in accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of Chapter 27,
"Zoning," of the Township of Logan Code of Ordinances shall
be provided along the entire perimeter of any mobile home
park. The buffer areas shall be at least 50 feet in depth,
measured at right angles to the property boundary lines.
(8) The mobile home park shall provide a private garbage and
refuse hauling service for the park residents. If centralized
§ 410 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 411
1:599
garbage and refuse containers are provided, the containers
shall be screened in accordance with Part 10, § 1016, of
Chapter 27, "Zoning," of the Township of Logan Code of
Ordinances.
B. Mobile Home Lots.
(1) Each mobile home lot shall be marked off by the placement of
permanent monuments as set forth in § 412, "Monuments," of
these Specifications. Mobile home lot lines shall not extend
beyond right-of-way lines of internal roadways. Lot area,
dimensions and setbacks shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area with public sewerage: 9,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot area without public sewerage: 20,000 square
feet.
(c) Minimum lot width with public sewerage: 75 feet.
(d) Minimum lot width without public sewerage: 100 feet.
(e) Minimum setback from front lot line: 30 feet.
(f) Minimum setback from rear lot line: 30 feet.
(g) Minimum setback from side lot lines: 12 feet.
(2) Each mobile home lot must be consecutively numbered, said
number to be shown on a permanent marker on the lot. When
lots front on both sides of a street, one side shall bear odd
numbers and the other side shall bear even numbers.
(3) A mobile home pad, properly graded, placed and compacted so
as to be durable and adequate for support of the maximum
anticipated loads during all seasons, shall be provided on each
mobile home lot within the park. Each pad shall be provided
with an anchoring system designed to resist the flotation,
collapse and lateral mobile movement of mobile homes.
(4) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a poured-in-place
reinforced cement concrete outdoor patio having a surface
area of at least 200 square feet and a depth of at least one-foot.
The outdoor patio shall be located at the main entrance to the
mobile home.
(5) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with an outdoor
storage building with a capacity of at least 560 cubic feet.
Centrally located storage lockers will not be permitted.
(6) All lawns at each mobile home lot and mobile home park open
spaces must be graded and seeded. The ground surface of the
§ 411 LOGAN CODE § 411
1:600
park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in
a safe, efficient manner.
C. Access.
(1) Each mobile home park shall be directly accessible from an
existing Federal, Commonwealth, County or Township
roadway. No individual mobile home lot shall take direct access
from such roadway.
(2) There shall be at least two accesses from the mobile home park
to a Federal, Commonwealth, County or Township roadway.
However, there shall be no more than two points of ingress and
egress for any mobile home park on the same roadway.
(a) Points of ingress and egress shall be located with a
minimum distance of 150 feet between them.
(b) All entrances and exits shall be at right angles to the
existing roadway.
(c) Plans for mobile home parks shall meet the requirements
for access contained in § 403, "Roadway and Drainage
Improvements," of these Specifications.
(3) All mobile home lots shall front on an internal roadway within
the mobile home park.
(4) All internal roadways within a mobile home park shall be
posted at least every 200 feet with 15 miles per hour speed
limit signs.
(5) All access roads and internal roadways shall be named and
shown by roadway identification signs approved by the
Township.
D. Internal Roadways and Parking.
(1) All internal roadways within the mobile home park shall be
designed to the minimum design standards set forth in § 403 of
these Specifications.
(2) Off-roadway parking areas shall be provided in accordance
with Part 10, § 1017, entitled "Off-Street Parking
Requirements," of Chapter 27, "Zoning," of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances. A mobile home shall be defined as a
residential dwelling.
(3) There shall be established and maintained within a mobile
home park an off-street parking area(s) for the use of guests.
The number of spaces shall be equal to one space for every
four mobile home sites.
§ 411 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 411
1:601
§ 412. Monuments. [Ord. 10-12-00]
The Developer is responsible for the placement of permanent monuments
at all property corners of lots and all points where lot lines intersect
curves, either front or rear, and at all points of curve tangency on all
roadway right-of-way and property lines. The monument must be an iron
pipe, steel bar or copperweld marker at least 36 inches long and not
less than 3/4 inches in diameter. Monument shall be set under the direct
supervision of a professional land surveyor registered in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. Permanent monuments shall be set after the completion of
all site-grading activities.
§ 413. Sidewalks.
(4) Traffic control and roadway identification signs shall conform
to PennDOT and Township standards. Signs shall be placed at
all locations as directed by the Township. The signs shall be
paid for by the Developer and installed by the Township.
E. Utilities and Park Facilities.
(1) All necessary utility hook-ups serving each mobile home lot
shall be placed underground in accordance with the
requirements of the respective utility owners. Each mobile
home lot within the park shall be served by public water and
sewerage systems or approved private water and sewerage
systems as well as with electric, telephone and other utilities. If
applicable, the Developer of the mobile home park shall secure
all permits required by the Pennsylvania DEP for the
construction of water and sewerage systems or furnish
approval letters from the provider of the water and sewerage
systems.
1. Sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all streets on all new
preliminary and final subdivision plans with six lots or more when the
development is being served with on-lot sewer, and all land
development plans, in all zoning districts, as required below:
A. When a development is proposed to be constructed in phases, the
number of lots shall be the total for all phases.
B. Sidewalks shall be constructed according to Township
specifications and shall be located along all property lines which
abut paved streets. (See sidewalk detail set forth hereinafter).
C. Curb ramps shall be provided at all intersections and crosswalks in
accordance with current ADA requirements.
D. Surety must be posted for all sidewalks not constructed upon final
plan approval.
§ 411 LOGAN CODE § 413
1:602
E. In the event the developer chooses to have the sidewalks
constructed by the individual property owners, surety shall be
posted by the developer until such time the sidewalk is
constructed. When 75% of the lots in a phase have been sold, it
shall be the responsibility of the developer to construct sidewalks
on the lots that have not been sold.
F. Sidewalks shall be constructed within the public right-of-way,
unless the Board of Supervisors authorizes sidewalks to be
constructed on private property immediately adjacent to the public
right-of-way. In such case, the developer shall enter into an
easement agreement in a form acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors. The grant of easement shall be recorded
contemporaneously with the recording of the final subdivision plan
and/or land development plan. Said plan shall include a note
referencing the existence of and recording information concerning
the grant of easement.
G. When a sidewalk is being constructed and there is a sidewalk on
the adjacent property, the sidewalk being constructed should
connect with the existing sidewalk.
H. Any modification to this section must be approved by the Board of
Supervisors upon review and recommendation from the Planning
Commission. In order for the Planning Commission to make a
recommendation, the developer shall submit a letter to the
Commission stating the request for modification and the reasons
why the sidewalk(s) should not be constructed. In making their
determination, the Planning Commission will take into
consideration: zoning, topography, roadway traffic, proximity to
schools or other public places, proximity to other sidewalks,
likeliness that other land will be developed with sidewalks, location
and any other factors that would impact the decision to recommend
the construction of sidewalks.
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
§ 413 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 414
1:603
§ 414. Street Trees.
1. Street trees shall be planted by the subdivider, in a variety approved on
the Township's official list of trees, within the right-of-way of all new
streets built in a subdivision. In addition, street trees shall be planted
within the right-of-way of all public streets which abut a land
development plan.
2. Trees shall be planted on both sides of the street, spaced according to
the following:
Height of Tree at Maturity
(feet)
Distance Between Trees
(feet)
30 or under 30 to 40
31 to 50 41 to 50
Over 50 51 to 70
3. No tree may be planted within 25 feet from the intersection of two
street right-of-way lines or within five feet of proposed driveway
entrances, or two feet from the cartway or shoulder edge. Trees may
vary by a maximum of 10 feet in distance either way to accommodate
driveways, fire hydrants and other features such as these.
4. In the event the developer chooses to have the street trees planted by
the individual property owners, surety shall be posted by the developer
until such time the tree is planted. When 75% of the lots in a phase have
been sold, it shall be the responsibility of the developer to plant the
trees on the lots that have not been sold.
5. When overhead lines are present, trees with a mature height of 30 feet
or less shall be planted.
6. (Reserved)
7. Trees shall be planted in the grass strip midway between the sidewalk
and the curb or edge of pavement. If sidewalk is not required the trees
shall be planted a minimum of three feet off the edge of the curb or
roadway.
8. Existing trees within the proposed right-of-way may be retained and
counted toward fulfillment of the requirements specified above,
provided the location requirements specified above are not violated.
9. An official list of trees shall be established by the Township by
Resolution and amended from time to time.
10. All new trees shall be true variety, selected cultivars, symmetrical in
growth and free of pests and disease.
11. Tree trunks shall have a caliper of at least two inches, measured six
inches above ground level at planting.
§ 414 LOGAN CODE § 414
1:604
12. Trees shall have a single straight trunk up to at least seven feet and
unlimbed up to at least five feet.
13. Trees shall be planted and protected in accordance with procedures
specified in the Township's Street Tree Planting Detail, made part of
this chapter. This detail shall be part of the approved subdivision plans.
14. Trees shall not be planted until final construction and grading within
the right-of-way is completed.
15. Upon dedication of the right-of-way to the Township, an eighteen-month
maintenance bond for the street trees shall be provided to the
Township. This maintenance bond is in addition to any other required
maintenance bonds.
16. Upon dedication of the right-of-way to the Township, all trees within
such right-of-way shall revert to Township ownership. It shall be illegal
for anyone to prune, spray, plant, remove, cut, burn, injure, or fasten
wire, rope, signs or other items to such trees, or deposit on or onto the
soil about the base of such trees any chemical deleterious to tree life
without first obtaining permission from Logan Township.
§ 414 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 414
1:605
§ 415. Streetlights. [Ord. 12-08-05A]
1. One street light shall be installed by the developer of a subdivision at
the intersection of any new streets and the intersection of any new
streets with existing streets.
2. Although only one street light per intersection is required, the
developer may install street lights in accordance with the regulations
along all new or existing streets.
§ 414 LOGAN CODE § 415
1:606
3. Street lights shall be located in the public right-of-way or in an
easement acquired for such a purpose.
4. Street lights in residential developments will be installed as follows:
A. Option 1. Street lights are installed and maintained by Penelec and
a flat rate fee for each light is billed to the street light district.
(1) A colonial fixture with a 100 watt high pressure sodium light
will be used or as approved by the Board.
(2) The mounting height of the street light will not exceed 16 feet.
(3) The electrical feeds for the lighting standards will be run
underground and not overhead.
(4) A light district will be created.
B. Option 2: Street lights are installed by the developer, maintained by
the developer or homeowners association, and the metered electric
is paid for by the developer or homeowners association.
(1) Street lights must be of a period or architectural style.
Cobrahead lights will not be permitted.
(2) The maximum wattage of the fixture may not exceed 100 watts.
(3) The mounting height of the fixture may not exceed 16 feet.
(4) The bulb must be high pressure sodium or metal halide.
(5) The light fixture shall be full cutoff. This means that there will
be no upward transmission of light.
(6) The electrical feeds for lighting standards shall be run
underground, not overhead. If a developer chooses this option,
all details must be specifically approved by the Board of
Supervisors in the developers agreement, including, but not
limited to insurance provisions.
5. Lighting in commercial, industrial and institutional developments will
be installed as follows:
A. All luminaries employed in outdoor area and roadway lighting
installations shall be the cut-off luminaire type.
(1) The requirement for the use of cutoff luminaire types shall
include, but is not limited to, the following outdoor area and
roadway lighting configurations:
(a) Pole mounted luminaries.
(b) Luminaries mounted on the exterior of buildings and
structures.
§ 415 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 415
1:607
(c) Luminaries mounted on or within exterior canopies of
buildings and structures.
(d) Pedestal or bollard mounted luminaries.
B. Cutoff luminaries shall be mounted plumb and level in accordance
with the intended application of their design. For the purposes of
this requirement, the photometric nadir of the luminaire (zero
degree vertical angle of 90°) above nadir (horizontal) shall be
oriented level. Cutoff luminaries shall not be installed in a canted or
tilted position which permits candlepower distribution above the
horizontal.
C. Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues or any other objects
mounted on a pole, pedestal or platform, shall use a narrow cone
beam of light that will not extend beyond the illuminated object.
D. Other upward directed architectural, landscape or decorative
direct light emissions shall have at least 90% of their total
distribution pattern within the profile of the illuminated structure.
E. Recreational and sports facility lighting shall be shielded whenever
possible. Such lighting shall have directional and glare control
devices.
F. Externally illuminated signs including commercial billboard,
building identification or other similar illuminated signs, shall
comply with the following:
(1) Top mounted light fixtures shall be shielded and are preferred.
(2) When top mounted light fixtures are not feasible, illumination
from other positioned light fixtures shall be restricted to the
sign area. Visors or other directional control devices shall be
used to keep spill light to an absolute minimum.
G. Foundations supporting lighting poles not installed four feet behind
the curb shall not be less than 24 inches above ground.
H. Exception. Luminaries which do not meet the strict definition for
cutoff luminaries, yet employ advanced or alternative technology
which causes the photometric performance to approach that of
cutoff luminaries, may be approved by Logan Township on a case by
case basis. Such luminaries include, but are not limited to, periodstyle
luminaries with refractive globes and internal cutoff
reflectors. Walpaks are not included in this exception.
I. Exception. Luminaries with a total initial lumen output of 10,000
lumens or less shall be permitted for decorative, accent, or
supplementary lighting applications provided that glare shields are
incorporated which cutoff the candlepower distribution at and
above the horizontal level.
§ 415 LOGAN CODE § 415
1:608
J. With the exception of outdoor sports and recreational lighting, no
pole-mounted luminaire shall exceed a maximum height of 30 feet.
6. The Township reserves the right to conduct a post-installation
nighttime inspection to verify compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, and if appropriate, to require remedial action at no expense to
the Township.
§ 415 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 415
1:609
Chapter 23
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 415 LOGAN CODE § 415
1:610
Part 1
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 101. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BARRIER — A fence, a wall, a building wall, the wall of an aboveground
swimming pool or a combination thereof, which completely surrounds the
swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.
SWIMMING POOL or POOL — An outdoor swimming pool above or in
ground used or intended to be used solely by the owner of a residential
property, the said owner's family, or lessee thereof and lessee's family, and
by guests invited to use it without the payment of any fee having a depth of
24 inches (610 mm) or more at any one point and/or having a surface area
of 250 square feet (23.25m2) or greater.
§ 102. Construction Permit and Approval.
Before any work is commenced on the construction of a swimming pool
or on any alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement to a
swimming pool, an application for a permit for construction, together with
a sketch plan executed by the applicant pertinent to the construction, shall
be submitted to the Township. No part of the work shall be commenced
until approval has been granted to the applicant by a written permit. All
swimming pools shall be subject to the building permit and building permit
fee schedules of the Township.
§ 103. Location on the Property.
A swimming pool shall be located at the rear of a dwelling or along the
side of the dwelling where practical (existing swimming pools are excluded
from this section). All swimming pools must comply with yard set back
requirements. For purposes of yard set back requirements, the wall of a
swimming pool shall not be located less than 10 feet from any rear, side and/
or any street property line.
No swimming pool shall be so located as to interfere with the operation of
a well or on-site septic system, or to be located where there is potential
danger of a septic system discharging into the pool or onto the adjacent
area around the pool or be located over a sanitary sewer lateral or main or
any electrical service.
§ 104. Design and Construction Requirements.
No permit to construct new swimming pools including aboveground pools
(with the exception of Subsection 8 of this section, existing pools are
excluded from this section) shall be issued unless and until the following
design and construction requirements are observed.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 104
1:611
1. Wall Slopes. To a depth of up to two feet nine inches (838 mm) from the
top, the wall slope shall not be more than one unit horizontal in five
units vertical (1:5).
2. Floor Slopes. The slope of the floor on the shallow side of the transition
point shall not exceed one unit vertical to seven units horizontal. The
transition point between shallow and deep water shall not be more than
five feet (1,524 mm) deep.
3. Surface Cleaning. All swimming pools shall be provided with a
recirculating skimming device or overflow gutters to remove scum and
foreign matter from the surface of the water. Where skimmers are used
for pools, there shall be at least one skimming device for each 1,000
square feet (93 m2) of surface area or fraction thereof. Overflow gutters
shall not be less than three inches (76 mm) deep and shall be pitched to
a slope of one unit vertical to 48 units horizontal (1:48) toward drains,
and constructed so that such gutters are safe, cleanable and that
matter entering the gutters will not be washed out by a sudden surge of
entering water.
4. Walkways. Curbs or sidewalks around any swimming pool shall have a
slip-resistant surface for a width of not less than one foot (305 mm) at
the edge of the pool, and shall be so arranged as to prevent return of
surface water to the pool.
5. Steps and Ladders. At least one means of egress shall be provided from
pools. Treads of steps and ladders shall have slip-resistant surfaces and
handrails on both sides, except that handrails are not required where
there are not more than four steps or where the steps extend the full
width of the side or end of the pool. Treads and risers of the pool steps
shall conform to the following:
A. Step treads shall have a minimum unobstructed horizontal depth of
10 inches (254 mm) and a maximum unobstructed surface area of
240 square inches (0.15 m2).
B. Risers shall have a maximum uniform height of 12 inches (305 mm)
as measured at the center line of the tread. The height of the
bottom riser shall not vary more than plus or minus two inches (51
mm) from the uniform riser height.
6. Water Supply. All swimming pools shall be provided with a potable
water supply, free of cross connections with the pool or its equipment.
A. Water Treatment. Swimming pools shall be designed and installed
so that there is a pool water turnover at least once every 18 hours.
Filters shall not filter water at a rate in excess of five gallons per
minute per square foot (205 L/min/m2) of surface area. The pool
owner shall be instructed in the care and maintenance of the pool
by the supplier or builder, including treatment with high-test
calcium hypochlorite (dry chlorine), sodium hypochlorite (liquid
§ 104 LOGAN CODE § 104
1:612
chlorine) or equally effective germicide and algicide, and the
importance of proper pH (alkalinity and acidity control).
B. Drainage Systems. The swimming pool and equipment shall be
equipped to be emptied completely of water and the discharged
water shall be disposed of in an approved manner that will not
create a nuisance to adjoining property.
7. Equipment Installations. Construction and drainage shall be arranged
to avoid the entrance and accumulation of water in the vicinity of
electrical equipment.
8. Enclosures for Swimming Pools. Swimming pools shall be enclosed as
follows:
A. Swimming Pool. A swimming pool shall be provided with a barrier
which shall comply with the following:
(1) The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1,219 mm)
above finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier
which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum
vertical clearance between finished ground level and the
barrier shall be two inches (51 mm) measured on the side of
the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. Where
the top of the pool structure is above finished ground level,
such as an aboveground pool, the barrier shall be at finished
ground level, such as the pool structure, or shall be mounted
on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on
the pool structure, the opening between the top surface of the
pool structure, the opening between the top surface of the pool
frame and the bottom of the barrier shall not allow passage of a
four-inch (102 mm) diameter sphere.
(2) Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a four-inch
(102 mm) diameter sphere.
(3) Solid barriers shall not contain indentations or protrusions
except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry
joints.
(4) Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical
members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal
members is less than 45 inches (1143 mm), the horizontal
members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the
fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1 3/
4 inches (44 mm) in width. Decorative cutouts shall not exceed
1 3/4 inches (44 mm) in width.
(5) Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical
members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal
members is 45 inches (1,143 mm) or more, spacing between
vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches (102 mm).
§ 104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 104
1:613
§ 105. Electrical Connections.
All electrical installations shall conform to the specifications of the National
Electrical Code. No electric wires or conductors shall cross, either overhead
or underground, on any part of a swimming pool, nor shall any electric
wiring be installed parallel to any pool wall closer than five feet, if
underground, unless enclosed in a rigid conduit, or within five feet, if
overhead (existing pools are excluded from this section).
Decorative cutouts shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches (44 mm) in
width.
(6) Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 1 1/4-inch
(32 mm) square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened
at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to not more
than 1 3/4 inches (44 mm).
(7) Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a
lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal
members shall be not more than 1 3/4 inches (44 mm).
(8) Access gates shall comply with the requirements of items 1
through 7 of this subsection, and shall be equipped to
accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall
open outwards away from the pool and shall be self-closing and
have a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access
gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release
mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54
inches (1372 mm) from the bottom of the gate:
(a) The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of
the gate at least three inches (76 mm) below the top of the
gate; and
(b) The gate and barrier shall not have an opening greater
than 1/2 inch (13 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the
release mechanism.
(9) Where an aboveground pool structure is used as a barrier or
where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and
the means of access is a fixed or removable ladder or steps, the
ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets
the requirements of Subsection 8A(1) through (8) of this
section. A removable ladder shall not constitute an acceptable
alternative to enclosure requirements; however, an access
ladder which may be raised and locked in a near vertical
position when the pool is unattended does suffice.
B. Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit
permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being
used to climb the barriers.
§ 104 LOGAN CODE § 105
1:614
All underwater lights must be watertight, self-contained units with ground
connections running from a waterproof junction box to a proper grounding
facility or medium. All underground electric wires supplying current to said
lights within a distance of five feet of the pool wall or walls shall be enclosed
in rigid conduits. All metal fences, enclosures or railings, near or adjacent
to a swimming pool, which might become electrically charged as a result of
contact with broken overhead conductors, or from any other cause, shall be
effectively grounded.
§ 106. Notices and Orders.
1. Notice to owner or to person or persons responsible. Whenever the
code official determines that there has been a violation of this Part or
has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be
given to the owner or the person or persons responsible therefore in the
following described manner:
A. Be in writing;
B. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
C. Include a statement of the reason or reasons why the notice is
being issued; and
D. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for the
repairs and improvements required to bring the premises into
compliance with the provisions of this Part.
2. Method of Service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if
a copy thereof is delivered to the owner personally or sent by certified
or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address
with return receipt requested. If the certified or registered letter is
returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall
be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the premises affected by
such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the
owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the premises shall
constitute service of notice upon the owner.
3. Transfer of Ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
premises who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice
of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of the premises in which said premises is located to
another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of
violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first
furnish the prospective grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true
copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code
official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized
statement from the said prospective grantee, transferee, mortgagee or
lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of
violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for
§ 105 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 106
1:615
§ 107. Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not less than $50
and not more than $600, and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this Part continues
shall constitute a separate offense. Notwithstanding any other provision
herein to the contrary and in addition to any penalty imposed herein, in the
event any person shall fail or refuse to comply with any notice within the
period of time stated therein, the Township may remove any and/or correct
said violation. The Township is hereby authorized to collect the cost of such
removal or correction from the person responsible in the manner provided
for the collection of municipal claims or by an action of assumpsit without
the filing of a claim and/or by whatever other legal proceeding the Township
may choose to institute. Nothing herein shall prevent the Township from
also enforcing violation of this Part in criminal summary proceedings as
provided herein.
§ 108. Statewide Building Code. [Ord. 05-11-00]
This Part (with the exception of any requirement imposed upon existing
pools found in this Part), shall be completely superseded by the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act (hereinafter "Act") upon said Act's
effective date wherein swimming pools within the Township are regulated
by said Act.
making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation.
§ 106 LOGAN CODE § 108
1:616
Chapter 24
TAXATION, SPECIAL
§ 108 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 108
1:617

Part 1
REALTY TRANSFER TAX
§ 101. Short Title. [Ord. 8-6-87]
This Part 1 shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of Logan
Township."
§ 102. Authority. [Ord. 8-6-87]
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within Logan
Township, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are
made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 103. Definitions. [Ord. 8-6-87; as amended by Ord. 2-9-89A]
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust,
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
Commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as deeds of trust or other instruments
of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of release thereof
to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not pass to the
grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has been
paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable over
a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under this
Part 1.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
1.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
2.
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:619
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
ORDINARY TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust or a living
trust, which takes effect during the lifetime of the settlor and for which
the trustees of the trust take title to property primarily for the purpose
of protecting, managing or conserving it until distribution to the named
beneficiaries of the trust. An ordinary trust does not include a trust that
has an objective to carry on business and divide gains, nor does it either
expressly or impliedly have any of the following features: the treatment of
beneficiaries as associates, the treatment of the interests in the trust as
personal property, the free transferability of beneficial interests in the trust,
centralized management by the trustee or the beneficiaries, or continuity of
life.[Added by Ord. 05-22-14]
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both. The term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which meets any
of the following:[Amended by Ord. 05-22-14]
3. Fur farming;
4. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
5. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Township of Logan,
including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees, and other improvements, immovables or interests
which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
1.
2. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in any cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
3.
Is primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real
estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or
fewer persons and which:
1.
§ 103 LOGAN CODE § 103
1:620
TAX COLLECTOR — The various tax collectors designated by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Logan to collect the taxes and enforce the
provisions of this Part.
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the
ownership or disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of
the value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible
assets which are freely transferable and actively traded on an
established market.
B.
Ninety percent or more of the ownership interest in the corporation
or association is held by 35 or fewer persons, and the corporation
or association owns, as 90% or more of the fair market value of its
assets, a direct or indirect interest in a real estate company. An indirect
ownership interest is an interest in a corporation or association, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons
whose purpose is the ownership of a real estate company.
2.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate, or
perpetual leasehold; or
1.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
2.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate: Provided, That where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
1.
§ 103 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:621
§ 104. Imposition of Tax; Interest. [Ord. 8-6-87; as amended by Ord.
09-14-06]
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
2.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection 1 or 2, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
3.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
4.
1. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
2. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
3. It is the intent of this Part 1 that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein and a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer then the tax levied by the Township of Logan under the
authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and
such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of
the Township of Logan provided, however, that the Township of Logan
and any other political subdivision which imposes such tax on the same
§ 103 LOGAN CODE § 104
1:622
§ 105. Exempt Parties. [Ord. 8-6-87]
The United States, the Commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment or the tax
imposed by this Part. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall not,
however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 106. Excluded Transactions. [Ord. 8-6-87]
The tax imposed by § 104 shall not be imposed upon:
person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective
rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively
different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the minimum rate
permitted under "The Local Tax Enabling Act."
4. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest shall accrue as
prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the Act of
May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.), as amended,
known as "The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The interest rate
shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
Commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9,
1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as "The
Fiscal Code", or the maximum interest rate permitted under the
Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
1. A transfer to the Commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies, or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the
property condemned to the owner of record at the time of
condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year from
the date of condemnation.
2. A document which the Township of Logan is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
3. A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school district or
county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau
sale.
4. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or
limit existing record legal title or interest.
5. A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of
property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value
than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
§ 104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 106
1:623
6. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided
the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired
by the husband and wife or husband and wife prior to the granting of
the final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of
such child, between brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister
and brother or sister of the spouse of a brother or sister, and between a
grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except
that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be
subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
7. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by
testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
8. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt
if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the
recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of the trust instrument that
clearly identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
9. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
10. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
11. A transfer: for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party where, if
the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed
under this Part. Where the document by which title is acquired by a
grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was
acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal, there is
a rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of the
grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption
from taxation under this Subsection.
12. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a
corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except
where the department reasonably determines that the primary intent
for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax
imposed by this Part.
13. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record
in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the
association has been held by the grantee for more than two years.
§ 106 LOGAN CODE § 106
1:624
14. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a transfer to a
nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
15. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
A. The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conservation, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and
B. The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real
estate transferred.
16. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage,
unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
17. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons
holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being
or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
18. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)], and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
19. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly
owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
20. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
21. A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
22. Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true,
full and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement
of value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement
of Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil,
natural gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an
explanation of the reason such document is not subject to tax under
this Part 1.
§ 106 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 107
1:625
§ 107. Documents Relating to Associations or Corporations and
Members, Partners, Stockholders or Shareholders Thereof. [Ord.
8-6-87]
Except as otherwise provided herein, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purpose of this Part, corporations and
associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 108. Acquired Company. [Ord. 8-6-87]
§ 109. Credits Against Tax. [Ord. 8-6-87]
1. A real estate company is an acquired company under a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however, effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
2. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this Part 1.
3. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
1. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purpose of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
2. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
§ 107 LOGAN CODE § 109
1:626
§ 110. Extension of Lease. [Ord. 8-6-87]
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 111. Proceeds of Judicial Sale. [Ord. 8-6-87]
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 112. Administration. [Ord. 8-6-87; as amended by Ord. 09-14-06]
3. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
4. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
5. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
1. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the recorder of deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, provided, that if the correct amount of the tax
is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Township
of Logan, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971
(72 P.S. § 8102-D), as amended from time to time, authorizes and directs
the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and penalties.
2. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
3. On or before the tenth of each month, the recorder shall pay over to the
Township of Logan all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for
use of the county, together with a report containing the information as
§ 109 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 112
1:627
§ 113. Statement of Value. [Ord. 8-6-87]
Every document lodged with or presented to the recorder of deeds for
recording, shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reasons, if any, why such document is not subject to tax
under this Part. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this Part 1.
§ 114. Civil Penalties. [Ord. 8-6-87]
is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission
shall be paid to the county.
4. (Reserved)
5. 72 Pa. Stat. Ann. § 8105-C covering documentary stamps, is hereby
incorporated herein by reference thereto; provided however,
"Ordinance" shall be substituted for "Article" and "Township of Logan"
shall be substituted for "Department."
6. 72 Pa. Stat. Ann. § 8106-C, Furnishing Stamps, is hereby incorporated
herein by reference thereto except (b) and (c) are deleted in their
entirety. Furthermore, "Ordinance" shall be substituted for "Article"
and "Township of Logan" shall be substituted for "Department".
7. 72 Pa. Stat. Ann. § 8108-C, Failure to Affix Stamps, is hereby
incorporated herein by reference thereto; provided however,
"Ordinance" shall be substituted for "Article."
1. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this Part is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
2. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this Part on
the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is due
to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the amount of
such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an additional
5% for each additional month of fraction thereof during which such
failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 112 LOGAN CODE § 115
1:628
§ 115. Lien. [Ord. 8-6-87]
The tax imposed by this Part 1 shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Township of Logan, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments, or interest therein, are described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this Part 1, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this Part 1 is due and payable, and continue until
discharged by payments, or in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of
Blair County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claim and
Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements, and amendments.
§ 116. Refunds. [Ord. 8-6-87]
§ 117. Enforcement. [Ord. 8-6-87]
All taxes imposed by this Part 1 together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 118. Regulations. [Ord. 8-6-87]
The tax collector of the Township of Logan is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made part of this Part 1.
1. Whenever the amount due upon determination, redetermination or
review is less than the amount paid to the Township of Logan on
account thereof, the Township of Logan shall enter a credit in the
amount of such difference to the account of the person who paid the
tax.
2. Where there has been no determination of unpaid tax, the Township of
Logan shall have the power, and its duty shall be, to hear and decide
any application for refund and, upon the allowance of such application,
to enter a credit in the amount of the overpayment to the account of the
person who paid the tax. Such application must be filed within two
years after the date of payment.
§ 115 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 118
1:629

Part 2
AMUSEMENT TAX
§ 201. Title. [Ord. 12-30A-86]
This Part 2 shall be known and may be cited as "Logan Township
Amusement Tax Ordinance."
§ 202. Definitions. [Ord. 12-30A-86]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part 2 shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section unless otherwise expressly stated.
AMUSEMENT — All manner and forms of entertainment including among
other, theatrical or operatic performances, concerts, moving picture shows,
sound motion pictures, vaudeville, circus, carnival shows, side shows, all
forms of entertainment at fair grounds and amusements parks and parking
lots, athletic contests, including wrestling matches, boxing and sparring
exhibitions, football, basketball, baseball games, skating, golfing, tennis,
hockey, bathing, dancing, racing, billiards, bowling, and all other forms
of diversion, sports, recreation, or pastime, show exhibitions, contests,
displays, and games and all other methods of obtaining admission charges,
donations, contributions or monetary charges of any character, from the
general public, or a limited or selected number thereof, directly or
indirectly, in return for other than tangible property or specific personal or
professional charges.
Provided that "amusement" shall not include any form of entertainment
accompanying or incidental to the serving of food or drink or the sale of
merchandise, where the charge for admission is wholly included in the price
paid for refreshments or merchandise.
Provided further that "amusement" shall not include amusement provided
for the sole and exclusive benefit of a nonprofit organization, organized for
charitable, religious or educational purposes.
ESTABLISHED PRICE — Regular monetary charges of any character
whatever, including donations, contributions, and dues, or membership fees
(periodical or otherwise), fixed or exacted, or in any manner received by
producers, as herein defined, from the general public, or a limited or
selected number thereof, directly or indirectly, for the privilege to attend or
engage in amusement as herein defined.
PERSON — Every natural person, co-partnership, association or
corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, or both, the term "Person" as applied to co-partnership or
associations, shall mean the partners, or members thereof, and as applied
to corporations, the officers thereof. The singular shall include the plural.
The masculine shall include the feminine.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place, indoors or outdoors, within Logan
Township, where the general public, or a limited or selected number
thereof, may, upon payment of an established price, attend or engage in
any amusement as herein defined, including among others, theaters, opera
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:631
houses, moving picture houses, stadiums, arenas, baseball parks, skating
rinks, circus or carnival tents or grounds, fair grounds, social, sporting,
athletic, riding, gun, and country clubs, golf courses, bathing and other
swimming places, dance halls, tennis courts, rifle or shotgun ranges, and
other like places.
PRODUCER — Any person, as herein defined, conducting any place of
amusement, as herein defined, where the general public or a limited or
selected number thereof, may, upon the payment of an established price,
attend or engage in any amusement.
TAX COLLECTOR — The various tax collectors designated by the Township
of Logan to collect the taxes and enforce the provisions of this Part.
TAXPAYER — A person whether an individual, co-partnership, association,
or other entity, required hereinafter to file a return for amusement tax.
§ 203. Imposition and Rate of Tax. [Ord. 12-30A-86]
§ 204. Permits. [Ord. 12-30A-86]
1. With the effective date of this Part 2, a tax is hereby imposed upon the
admission fee or privilege to attend or engage in any amusement within
the Township of Logan, at the rate of $0.01 for each $0.20 or major
fraction thereof of the established price charged the general public or a
limited or selected group thereof, by any producer for such privilege,
which shall be paid by the person acquiring such privilege.
2. In the case of persons admitted free or at reduced rates to any place of
amusement, at a time when and under circumstances under which an
established price is charged to other persons, the tax imposed by this
Part shall be computed on the established price charged to such other
persons of the same class for the same or similar accommodations to be
paid by the person so admitted; provided, however, that such tax shall
not be imposed for bona fide employees of a producer.
1. On or after the effective date of this Part 2, it shall be unlawful for any
producer to continue to conduct, or thereafter to begin to conduct, any
form of amusement at any permanent or temporary place of
amusement, or any itinerant form of amusement, within the Township
of Logan unless an amusement permit or permits have been issued to
him as hereinafter specified.
2. Every producer desiring to continue to conduct or hereafter to begin to
conduct any amusement within the Township of Logan shall file an
application for a permanent, temporary or itinerant amusement permit
or permits as the case may be with the Logan Township Tax Collector.
Every application for such permit or permits shall be made upon a form
prescribed, prepared and furnished by the Township Tax Collector, and
shall set forth the name under which the applicant conducts or intends
to conduct a permanent or temporary amusement place, or an itinerant
form of amusement, the location of the permanent or temporary place
§ 202 LOGAN CODE § 204
1:632
of amusement, whether the applicant is a holder of a business privilege
or mercantile license in effect when the application is made, and if so,
the number of such license and such other information as the Township
Tax Collector may require. If the applicant has or intends to have
more than one place of amusement within the Township of Logan, the
application shall state the location of each place of amusement, and
in the case of itinerant form of amusement, the date and length of
time such amusement is to be conducted at each place. In the case
of an application for a permit for a temporary place of amusement,
the application shall state the name and address of the owner, lessee,
or custodian of the premises upon which the amusement is to be
conducted.
If the applicant is an association or corporation, the names and
addresses and title of the principal officers thereof and any other
information prescribed shall be stated on the application. The
application shall be signed by the producer if a natural person, and in
the case of an association by a member or a partner thereof, and in the
case of a corporation, by an officer thereof.
3. The permits hereby required shall be issued without charge or fee.
Upon approval of the application, the Township Tax Collector shall
grant and issue to each applicant an amusement permit for each place
of amusement within the Township of Logan, set forth in his application.
4. Amusement permits shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for
the person in whose name issued, and for the conduct of amusement at
the places designated therein, and shall at all times be conspicuously
displayed at the place for which issued. The producers of an itinerant
form of amusement shall notify the Township Tax Collector promptly of
any change in the originally contemplated itinerary, either as to date or
time of conduct of the amusement at each place.
5. The Township Tax Collector may suspend or after a hearing revoke an
amusement permit whenever he finds that the holder thereof has failed
to comply with any of the provisions of this Part 2. Upon suspending or
revoking any amusement Permit, the Township Tax Collector shall
request the holder thereof to surrender to him immediately all permits
or duplicates thereof issued to him and the holder shall surrender
promptly all such permits to the Township Tax Collector as requested.
Whenever the Tax Collector suspends an amusement permit, he shall
give notice to the holder immediately and shall furnish a blank notice of
intention to appeal, which must be filed with the Township Tax Collector
by the holder within 15 days.
6. The Board of Township Supervisors of Logan Township shall constitute
the Board of Appeals for hearing appeals from suspensions of the
Township Tax Collector and their action shall be final. It shall be the
duty of the Township Tax Collector to be present at all meetings of the
said Board of Appeals and the Township Solicitor, if requested by the
§ 204 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 204
1:633
§ 205. Payment of the Tax. [Ord. 12-30A-86]
§ 206. Powers and Duties of the Tax Collector. [Ord. 12-30A-86]
Board of Supervisors and they shall furnish such information as is
within their possession.
1. Producers shall collect the tax imposed by this Part 2 and shall be liable
to the Township of Logan as taxpayers for the payment of the same to
the Tax Collector as hereinafter provided by this Part 2.
2. Where permits are obtained for conducting temporary amusements by
persons who are not the owners, lessees, or custodians of the places
where the amusements are to be conducted, or where the amusement is
permitted by the owner, lessee, or custodian of any place without the
procurement of a permit or permits required by this Part, the tax
imposed by this Part shall be paid by the owner, lessee, or custodian or
such place where such temporary amusement is held or conducted,
unless paid by the producer conducting the amusement.
3. For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax payable by producers
to the Township of Logan it shall be the duty of:
A. Every producer, except as hereinafter provided, conducting a place
of amusement, shall on or before the tenth day of each month
transmit to the Township of Logan, or the authorized agent thereof,
on a form prescribed and prepared by the Township of Logan Tax
Collector, a report of amount of tax collected by him during the
preceding month.
B. Every producer conducting a temporary place of amusement or
itinerant form of amusement, shall file a report with the Township
of Logan or any duly authorized agent thereof, within 24 hours
after each performance where only one performance is conducted
at one place on one day, and in the event that more than one
performance is conducted at one place on one day, the report shall
be made within 24 hours of the last performance conducted on
such day. Where performances are conducted at the same place for
a period of more than one day and less than 30 days, the report
shall be made within 24 hours after the termination of such period.
C. Every producer, at the time of making the report required by this
section (§ 205) shall compute and pay to the Township of Logan the
taxes due and collected.
D. Taxes not paid when due shall have a penalty of 6% of the amount
of tax due added and interest of 1/2 of 1% per month added.
1. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive the taxes,
fines, penalties and interest imposed by this Part 2 and to enforce the
provisions of this Part 2 and any rules and regulations promulgated for
the administration of the tax. It shall also be the responsibility of the
§ 204 LOGAN CODE § 206
1:634
§ 207. Failure to File and/or to Pay. [Ord. 12-30A-86]
Tax Collector to maintain a record showing the amount of tax received
by him from each person paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
2. The Tax Collector is responsible for the administration of the provisions
of this Part 2, and is authorized to prescribe, adopt, and promulgate
rules and regulations relating to matters pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this Part 2 including provisions for
the reexamination and correction of returns and payments alleged or
found to be incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed, or
found to have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the
Tax Collector shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Supervisors
of Logan Township.
3. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine books, papers, and
records of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made, or, if no return was made to ascertain the
tax due. Every such taxpayer, or supposed taxpayer, is hereby directed
and required to give to the Tax Collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized. The examinations of records will be conducted at a time and
place so designated by the Tax Collector.
4. The Tax Collector is authorized to issue amusement permits.
5. If any producer, or taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make any report
and payment of tax required by this Part 2, the Tax Collector shall
estimate the tax due by such producer or taxpayer, and determine the
amount due by him for taxes, penalties and interest thereon, as
prescribed herein, from which determination there shall be no right of
review or appeal.
6. Any information gained by the Township Tax Collector or any other
official or agent of the Township of Logan as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearing, or verifications, required or authorized by this
Part 2, shall be confidential, except for official purposes, and except in
accordance with proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by law.
Any disclosures of any such information contrary to the provisions of
this section shall constitute a violation of this Part 2.
1. The Tax Collector may sue for the following reasons:
A. To recover taxes due and unpaid under this Part 2.
B. For the failure of the producer and/or taxpayer to file or properly
complete the information requested on the amusement permits
required under this Part 2.
C. For the failure of the producer and/or taxpayer to file or properly
complete the information requested on the forms required for the
reporting of the amusement tax collected.
§ 206 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 207
1:635
§ 208. Fines and Penalties. [Ord. 12-30A-86; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
§ 209. Payment under Protest, Refunds. [Ord. 12-30A-86]
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest
of the amount of amusement tax claimed by the Township of Logan in any
case where the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of the Township's
claim for tax. If it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction that the Township of Logan has been overpaid, the amount of
the overpayment shall be refunded to the taxpayer.
D. For the failure of the producer and/or taxpayer to provide any of the
information required by this Part 2.
2. Where suit is brought for any of the reasons set forth in § 207,
Subsection 1, the producer and/or taxpayer against whom such suit is
brought shall be liable for the costs of collection and/or prosecution,
and the interest and penalties of this Part 2.
1. Whoever fails to obtain a permit or to file a report form or who makes
any false or untrue statement on his permit(s) or report form(s), or who
refuses to permit the inspection of the books, records or accounts of any
business in his custody or control, when such inspection is requested by
the Tax Collector, may upon conviction before any court, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600 for each and every offense, and in
default of payment of said fine, to be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 30 days for each offense. Every twenty-four-hour period such
person continues in violation of this Part 2, shall constitute a distinct
and separate violation attendant with the fines imposed hereinabove.
2. The failure of any producer and/or taxpayer to receive or procure a
permit or a report form shall not excuse him from filing the report forms
required.
§ 207 LOGAN CODE § 209
1:636
Part 3
EARNED INCOME TAX
§ 301. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set
forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the Tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
ENACTMENT — This Part 3.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Logan.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this Enactment.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Township of Logan.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the
amount of Tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted,
or reported under this Enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the Taxing Authority or any part
of the Taxing Authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 302. Imposition of Tax.
A. General Purpose Resident Tax. The Taxing Authority hereby imposes a
Tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the Taxing Authority.
B. General Purpose Municipal Nonresident Tax. The Taxing Authority also
imposes a Tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned
income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of
the Taxing Authority from any work, business, profession, or activity, of
any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the Taxing Authority.
C. Ongoing Tax. The Tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current Tax Year and each Tax Year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this Enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 302
1:637
§ 303. No Exemption from Tax.
Although credits and deductions against Tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from Tax based on age, income, or other factors.
§ 304. Individual Tax Returns and Payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any Tax
Year shall file Tax Returns and pay Tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 305. Employer Withholding, Remittance, and Tax Returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit Tax, and file Tax Returns
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 306. Tax Collector.
The Tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the Collector.
D. Combined Tax Rate Applicable to Residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the Taxing Authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1%.
E. Municipal Tax Rate Applicable to Nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the Taxing Authority based
on the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
F. Local Tax Enabling Act Applicable. The Tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
Enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this Enactment upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
Enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
G. Applicable Laws, Regulations, Policies, and Procedures. The Tax shall
be collected and administered in accordance with.
(1) All applicable laws and regulations; and
(2) Regulations, policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by the
Collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1937.
§ 302 LOGAN CODE § 307
1:638
§ 307. Interest, Penalties, Costs, and Fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the Collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 308. Severability.
The provisions of this Enactment are severable and if any of its provisions
are ruled by a court invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this Enactment. It is
declared to be the intention of the Governing Body that this Enactment
would have been adopted if such invalid or unconstitutional provision had
not been included.
§ 309. Purpose/Amendment and Restatement/Repeal. [Amended in
its entirety by Ord. 11-10-11]
The primary purpose of this Enactment is to conform to the earned income
and net profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame
required by Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income
or net profits of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read
as stated in this Enactment. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior
enactment conflicting with the provisions of this Enactment is rescinded
insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in
force immediately prior to adoption of this Enactment, the provisions of
this Enactment are intended as a continuation of such prior enactment and
not as a new enactment. If this Enactment is declared invalid, any prior
enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall
not be affected by adoption of this Enactment. If any part of this Enactment
is declared invalid, the similar part of any prior enactment levying a similar
tax shall remain in effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this
Enactment. The provisions of this Enactment shall not affect any act done
or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish
offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to adoption
of this Enactment. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, this
Enactment shall amend and restate on the Effective Date any enactment
levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to
the Effective Date.
§ 307 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 309
1:639

Part 4
BUSINESS PRIVILEGE TAX
§ 401. Title. [Ord. 11-9-89]
This Part 4 shall be known and may be cited as "The Business Privilege Tax
Ordinance of Logan Township."
§ 402. Definitions. [Ord. 11-9-89]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part 4 shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
GROSS RECEIPTS —
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — Includes both cash and credit
transactions.
LICENSE OFFICER — The person authorized and empowered by the Board
of Supervisors of Logan Township to oversee the collection of the taxes
imposed hereby and the enforcement of the provisions of this Part 4.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
corporation, estate, trust, or other form of organization but shall not include
Cash, credits, and/or property of any kind or nature received by any
business offering services and places, offices or establishments within
Logan Township and shall also include receipts from services rendered
within Logan Township regardless of whether or not the business is
conducted from a place, or office or establishment within Logan
Township, without deduction therefrom on account of the materials
used, labor, service, or other cost, interest or discount paid, or any
other expense. "Gross Receipts" shall include both cash and credit
transactions.
1.
Gross receipts shall exclude:
In the case of a Broker, on commissions paid by him to another
Broker on account of a purchase or sales contract initiated,
executed or cleared in conjunction with such other Broker, to the
extent segregated as provided in § 405, Subsection 4.
A.
That portion of gross receipts which Logan Township is prohibited
from taxing by law. Such receipts shall be segregated as set forth
in § 404 of this Part 4.
B.
Those receipts transferred to a subcontractor for the performance
of services offered by a contractor to the extent segregated as
provided in § 405, Subsection 4A.
C.
Receipts attributable to services rendered outside the geographic
limits of the Township of Logan to the extent segregated as
provided in § 405, Subsection 4B.
D.
2.
§ 401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 402
1:641
a wage earner, a nonprofit corporation organized for religious, charitable,
or educational purposes, and association for such purposes, any agency
of the Government of the United States or of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any public utility. Whenever used in any clause prescribing
and imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to a partnership shall
mean the partners thereof, as applied to an association shall mean the
members thereof, as applied to an Estate or Trust shall mean the fiduciary
thereof, and as applied to a corporation and unincorporated association
shall mean the officers thereof. The singular shall include the plural. The
masculine shall include the feminine.
SERVICE — Any act or instance of helping or benefiting another for a
consideration.
SERVICES RENDERED WITHIN LOGAN TOWNSHIP — Services in which
any event forming a part of the service performed occurs within Logan
Township.
TAX COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector designated by Logan Township to
collect the taxes and enforce the provisions of this Part 4.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning the first day of January,
corresponding to the calendar year, or the fiscal year of the "person"
rendering services within Logan Township, with the fiscal year
corresponding to the accounting period utilized by the "person" for filing
an annual Federal Tax return. Verification of the tax year used shall be by
a copy(ies) of the applicable Federal Tax return. To change a "tax year," a
copy of the approval from the Commissioner of Internal Revenue must be
provided to the tax office.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL, OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days.
§ 403. Imposition and Rate of Tax. [Ord. 11-9-89; as amended by
Ord. 12-11-08A]
Every person engaging in business in Logan Township, whether or not
he maintains a place of business in Logan Township, shall pay an annual
business privilege tax for the tax year or any part thereof beginning with
the effective date of this Part at the rate of one mill on each dollar of gross
receipts.
§ 404. Determination of Gross Receipts. [Ord. 11-9-89]
Where a receipt in its entirety cannot be subjected to the tax imposed by
this Part 4 by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United
States or any other provisions of Law, including the exemptions within
this Part 4, the License Officer shall establish rules and regulations and
methods of allocation and evaluation so that only that part of such receipt
which is properly attributable and allocable to the doing of business in
Logan Township shall be taxed hereunder. The License Officer may make
such allocations with due regard to the nature of the business concerned
on the basis of millage division of the receipt according to the number of
§ 402 LOGAN CODE § 404
1:642
jurisdictions in which it may be taxed, the ratio of the value of the property
or assets of the taxpayer owned and situated in Logan Township to the total
property or assets of the taxpayer wherever owned and situated, or any
other method or methods of calculation other than the foregoing, calculated
to effect a fair and proper allocation. The rules and regulations established
shall be in writing and a copy filed with the Secretary of Logan Township.
§ 405. Returns. [Ord. 11-9-89]
§ 406. Payment. [Ord. 11-9-89]
At the time of filing a return, the person making the same shall pay the
amount of tax shown as due thereon to the Tax Collector.
1. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the License
Officer. Every person making a return shall verify the return by
attaching a Schedule C, 1065, Form 1120 and/or any other forms
prescribed by the License Officer and shall certify the correctness
thereof by his signature on the return.
2. The return shall be filed with the Tax Collector on or before the fifteenth
day of the fifth month immediately following the end of the tax year.
3. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this Part 4
who engages in a business temporary, seasonal, or itinerant by its
nature shall within seven days from the day he completes such business
file a return with and pay the amount due to the License Officer setting
forth his name, his business and business address, and such
information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross volume
of business transacted by him during such period and the amount of tax
due.
4. Segregation of Receipts. For receipts eligible for any exclusions
provided in this Part 4, the person filing the return must attach the
following documentation to the return in addition to any other
information required by the License Officer:
A. Subcontracting and Broker Exclusion. Names and addresses of
each subcontractor or broker and the gross receipts paid thereto.
B. Out-of-Logan Township Services Exclusion. Names and addresses
of persons for whom services were performed, specific location
where services were performed, description of the service, dates
during which the service was performed, and the amount of the
exclusion claimed for each service; or in the alternative, provide tax
receipts verifying that the business privilege tax has been paid to
another political subdivision in Pennsylvania on said revenues,
other than a political subdivision any part of which lies within the
geographic limits of Logan Township.
§ 404 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 407
1:643
§ 407. Powers and Duties of Tax Collector and License Officer. [Ord.
11-9-89]
§ 408. Suit on Collection; Penalty. [Ord. 11-9-89]
§ 409. Fines and Penalties. [Ord. 11-9-89]
Whoever fails to file a return or makes any false or untrue statement on
his return, or who refuses to permit inspection of the books, records, or
accounts of any business in his custody or control, when the right to make
such inspection by the Tax Collector or License Officer is requested, shall,
upon conviction before any court, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
1. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive the taxes,
fines, and penalties imposed by this Part 4 and to enforce the provisions
of this Part 4 and any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. It
shall also be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by
him from each person paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
2. The License Officer is hereby charged with the administration of the
provisions of this Part 4, and is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining
to the administration and enforcement of this Part 4, including
provisions for the reexamination and correction of returns and
payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to which an
overpayment is claimed, or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the License Officer or the Tax Collector
shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas as in other
cases provided.
3. The Tax Collector or the License Officer is hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers, and records of any taxpayer or supposed
taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no
return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Every such taxpayer, or
supposed taxpayer, is hereby directed and required to give to the Tax
Collector or License Officer the means, facilities, and opportunity for
such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized. The
examination of records will be conducted at a time and place as so
designated by the Tax Collector or License Officer.
1. The Tax Collector or License Officer may sue for the recovery of taxes
due and unpaid under this Part 4.
2. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due in each year, interest at
the rate of 6% per annum on the amount of the said tax, and an
additional penalty of 0.5% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each
month or fraction thereof during which the tax remains unpaid shall be
added and collected. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such
tax, the person liable therefor, shall, in addition be liable for the costs of
collection and the interest and penalties herein imposed.
§ 407 LOGAN CODE § 409
1:644
than $600 for each offense, and in default of payment of said fine, to be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days for each offense.
§ 410. Payment Under Protest, Refunds. [Ord. 11-9-89]
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of
the amount of business privilege tax claimed by Logan Township in any case
where the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of Logan Township's
claim for tax. If it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction that Logan Township has been overpaid, the amount of the
overpayment shall be refunded to the taxpayer.
§ 411. Savings Clause. [Ord. 11-9-89]
§ 412. Effective Date. [Ord. 11-9-89]
The provisions of this Part shall become effective retroactive to the first
day of January, 1989, pursuant to the authority of the Act of December 31,
1965 (Act 511) known as the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended, and shall
continue in full force and effect from year to year without the necessity of
annual reenactment.
1. Nothing contained in this Part shall be construed to empower Logan
Township to levy and to collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person,
or any business, or any portion of any business not within the-taxing
power of Logan Township under the Constitution of the United States
and the laws and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
2. If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this Part shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose the taxes, or the validity of the taxes
so imposed upon other persons as herein provided.
§ 409 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 412
1:645

Part 5
MERCANTILE LICENSE TAX
§ 501. Title. [Ord. 12-30C-86]
This Part 5 shall be known and may be cited as "The Mercantile License Tax
Ordinance of Logan Township."
§ 502. Definitions. [Ord. 12-30C-86; as amended by Ord. 2-9-89A]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part 5 shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BROKER — Any merchandise broker, factor or commission merchant, but
shall not include any stock broker, bill broker, note broker, exchange broker,
real estate broker or agent, or pawnbroker.
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — Includes both cash and credit
transactions but shall not apply to the dollar volume of annual business
covering the resale of goods, wares or merchandise taken by a dealer as a
trade-in or as part payment for other goods, wares and merchandise except
to the extent that the resale price exceeds the trade-in allowance.
LICENSE OFFICER — The person or persons authorized and empowered
by the Board of Supervisors of Logan Township to collect the taxes imposed
hereby and to enforce the provisions of this Part 5.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association
or corporation. The singular shall include the plural. The masculine shall
include the feminine.
PERSON, WHOLESALE DEALER, WHOLESALE VENDOR, RETAIL DEALER
and RETAIL VENDOR — Shall not include nonprofit corporations organized
for religious, charitable or educational purposes, any associations organized
for such purposes, agencies of the Government of the United States or of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any person vending or disposing
of articles of his own growth, production or manufacture for shipment or
delivery from the place of growth, production or manufacture thereof.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place indoors or outdoors where the
general public or a limited or selected number thereof may, upon payment
of an established price, attend or engage in any amusement, entertainment,
exhibition, contest, recreation, including among other places, theaters,
opera houses, motion picture houses, amusement parks, stadiums, arenas,
baseball or football parks or fields, skating rinks, circus or carnival tents
or grounds, fair grounds, bowling alleys, riding academies, golf courses,
bathing and swimming places, dance halls, tennis courts, archery, rifle
or shotgun ranges and other like places. The term does not include any
exhibitions, amusements, performances or contest conducted by a nonprofit
corporation or association organized for religious, charitable or educational
purposes.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 502
1:647
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer in or
vendor of goods, wares and merchandise who is not a wholesale dealer or
vendor.
TAX COLLECTOR — The various tax collectors designated by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Logan to collect the taxes and enforce the
provisions of this Part.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning the First day of January,
corresponding to the calendar year; or the fiscal year of the "Person"
rendering services within Logan Township, with the fiscal year
corresponding to the accounting period utilized by the "Person" for filing an
annual Federal Tax return. Verification of the "Tax Year" used shall be by
copy(ies) of the applicable Federal Tax return. To change a taxpayers "Tax
Year", a copy of the approval from the Commissioner of Internal Revenue
(Federal) must be provided this office.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who sells
to dealers or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to no other
Persons.
§ 503. Licenses. [Ord. 12-30C-86]
For the year beginning the first day of January, 1987, and for each Year
thereafter, every person desiring to continue to engage in or hereafter
to begin to engage in the business or occupation of wholesale or retail
vendor or dealer in goods, wares, and merchandise, any person conducting
a restaurant or other place where food, drink or refreshment are sold,
whether or not the same be incidental to some other business or occupation,
any person conducting or operating a place of amusement, whether or not
the same be incidental to some other business or occupation, and every
broker, in the Township, shall, on or before the first Monday of January,
1987, and for each Year thereafter, or prior to commencing business in
the tax year, procure a Mercantile License for this place of business or
occupation, or if more than one, for each place of business or occupation
in the Township of Logan from the License Officer, as required by law.
Such license shall be conspicuously posted at the said place of business or
occupation of every such Person at all times.
§ 504. Imposition and Rate of Tax. [Ord. 12-30C-86]
Every person engaging in any of the following occupations or businesses in
the Township of Logan shall be subject to a Mercantile License Tax for the
Tax Year or any part thereof beginning with the effective date of this Part 5
at the rate set forth:
1. Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise at the
rate of 1/2 mill on each dollar of the volume of the annual gross
business transacted by them.
§ 502 LOGAN CODE § 504
1:648
§ 505. Computation of Volume of Business. [Ord. 12-30C-86]
2. Retail vendors, or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise, all persons
engaged in conducting restaurant or other places where food, drink or
refreshments are sold, whether or not the same be incidental to some
other business or occupation, all persons conducting places of
amusement, whether or not the same be incidental to some other
business or occupation, at the rate of 3/4 mill on each dollar of volume
of the annual gross business transacted by them.
3. Wholesale and retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares, and
merchandise, at the rate of 1/2 mill on each dollar of the volume of the
annual gross wholesale business transacted by him, and 3/4 mill on
each dollar of the volume of the annual gross retail business transacted
by them.
4. Brokers at the rate of 1/2 mill on each dollar of the volume of the annual
gross business transacted by them. In the case of brokers the term
"gross business transacted" shall mean "gross commissions earned."
1. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
the Tax Year shall compute his annual gross volume of business upon
the actual gross volume of business transacted by him during the
preceding Tax Year.
2. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced or who commences his business less than one full year
prior to the beginning of the Tax Year, shall compute his annual gross
volume of business for the Tax Year upon the gross volume of business
transacted by him during the first month he engages in business
multiplied by 12.
3. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
commences his business subsequent to the beginning of the Tax Year,
shall compute his annual gross volume of business for the Tax Year upon
the gross volume of business transacted by him during the first month
of his engaging in business multiplied by the number of months he
engages in business in the Tax Year.
4. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed who
engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerate by its nature,
shall compute his annual gross volume of business upon the actual
gross volume of business, transacted by him during the Tax Year.
5. Every person who shall discontinue business during the Tax Year after
having paid the Mercantile Tax for the entire year, upon making proper
application to the Tax Collector, shall be entitled to receive a refund of a
pro rata amount of the tax paid, based upon the period of time he was
not in business during the Tax Year.
§ 504 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 506
1:649
§ 506. Returns. [Ord. 12-30C-86]
§ 507. Payment. [Ord. 12-30C-86]
At the time of filing a return the person making the same shall pay the
amount of the tax shown as due thereon to the Tax Collector.
1. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the License
Officer or Tax Collector. Every person making a return shall certify the
correctness thereof by his signature.
2. Every Person subject to the tax imposed by the Part 5 who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
the Tax Year shall file, on or before the fifteenth day of the fifth month
following the end of the Tax Year, with the License Officer or Tax
Collector, a return setting forth his name, his business and business
address, and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at
the actual gross volume of business transacted by him during the
preceding calendar year and the amount of tax due.
3. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this Part 5 who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to the beginning
of the Tax Year shall file, on or before the fifteenth day of the fifth month
following the Tax Year, with the License Officer or Tax Collector, a
return setting forth his name, his business and business address, and
such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual
gross volume of business transacted by him during his first month of
business and the amount of the tax due.
4. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this Part 5 who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of the Tax Year, shall within 40
days from the date of commencing such business, file a return with the
License Officer or Tax Collector setting forth his name, his business,
and business address, and such information as may be necessary in
arriving at the actual gross volume of business transacted by him
during his first month of business and the amount of the tax due.
5. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by his Part 5
who engages in a business temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature shall, within seven days from the day he completes such
business, file a return with the License Officer or Tax Collector setting
forth his name, his address and business address, and such information
as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross volume of business
transacted by him during such period and the amount of the tax due.
1. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive the taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this Part 5. It shall also be his duty to
keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person
paying the tax and the date of such receipt.
2. The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this Part 5, and is hereby empowered
§ 506 LOGAN CODE § 507
1:650
§ 508. Suit on Collections; Penalty. [Ord. 12-30C-86]
§ 509. Fines and Penalties. [Ord. 12-30C-86; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on his return, or who refuses
to Permit inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business in
his custody or control, when the right to make such inspection by the Tax
Collector, or his duly authorized agent, is requested, and whoever fails or
refuses to procure a Mercantile License when so requested under this Part
5, or fails to keep his license conspicuously posted at his place of business
as required herein, shall, upon conviction before any court, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $600 for each offense, and in default of payment
of said fine to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days for each
offense.
§ 510. Payment Under Protest, Refunds. [Ord. 12-30C-86]
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest of
the amount of mercantile tax claimed by Logan Township in any case where
the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount of Logan Township's claims
for tax. If it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this Part 5, including provision for the reexamination and correction
of returns, and payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to
which an overpayment is claimed, or found to have occurred. Any
person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the
right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas as in other cases
provided.
3. The Tax Collector or his duly authorized agent, or the License Officer is
hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any
taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any
return made, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Every
such taxpayer, or supposed taxpayer, is hereby directed and required to
give to the Tax Collector or License Officer the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
1. The Tax Collector or License Officer may sue for the recovery of taxes
due and unpaid under this Part 5.
2. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof
during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable
therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the
interest and penalties herein imposed.
§ 507 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 510
1:651
jurisdiction that Logan Township has been overpaid, the amount of
overpayment shall be refunded to the taxpayer. The provisions of this
section shall be applicable to cases in which the facts are similar to those in
a case litigated in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 510 LOGAN CODE § 510
1:652
Part 6
LOCAL SERVICES TAX
§ 601. Authority of Enactment. [Ord. 804; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
This Part is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L.
1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. (1982), as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 602. Definitions. [Ord. 804; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88; as
amended by Ord. 2-9-89A]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
COMPENSATION — Salaries, wages, commissions, tips, bonuses, fees,
gross receipts, or any other earned income.
EMPLOYER — Any person, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, governmental
agency, or any other body engaged in business or situated in the Township
of Logan, employing one or more employees engaged in any occupation
other than domestic servants.
OCCUPATION — Any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or
enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or other, for which
monetary compensation is received or charged.
TAX COLLECTOR — The various tax collectors designated by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Logan to collect the taxes and enforce the
provisions of this Part.
TAXPAYER — Any natural person liable for the tax levied by this Part.
§ 603. Imposition of Tax and Exemptions. [Ord. 804; as amended by
Ord. 10-27-88; by Ord. 01-03-06; by Ord. 12-14-06A; and by Ord.
11-08-07]
1. Imposition of Tax. Subject to Subsection 2, a tax for funding emergency
services which shall include emergency medical services, police
services and/or fire services; road construction and/or maintenance;
reduction of property taxes; and property tax relief through
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance
with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85, Subchapter F (relating to homestead
property exclusion) (as may be determined in the discretion of the
Board of Supervisors), in the amount of $47, is hereby imposed upon
the privilege of engaging in an occupation within the Township of Logan
in the year 2007 after the effective date of this Part, and in each
following calendar year. The amount of the said tax imposed hereby,
shall be in addition to any such similar tax amount imposed by a school
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 603
1:653
district. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any
length of time in any calendar year beginning with the year 2007, after
the effective date of this Part, shall pay the tax in accordance with the
provisions hereof. Logan Township shall use no less than 25% of the
funds derived from the Local Services Tax for emergency services.
2. Exemptions from Payment of Tax. The following persons shall be
exempt from the payment of a Local Services Tax:
A. Any person whose total income from all sources within the
Township of Logan is less than $12,000 for the calendar year in
which the local services tax is levied.
B. Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service- connected disability
declared by the United States Veteran's Administration or its
successor to be a total 100% permanent disability.
C. Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For purposes of this subsection, "reserve component
of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army Reserve,
United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve,
United States Coast Guard Reserve, Untied States Air Force
Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
D. A person seeking to claim an exemption from the Local Services
Tax may annually file an exemption certificate with the Township of
Logan and with the person's employer affirming that the person
reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits from
all sources within the Township of Logan of less than $12,000 in the
calendar year for which the exemption certificate is filed. The
exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all of the
employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the
Township of Logan for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the
employee is requesting to be exempted from the Local Services
Tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the Township of Logan or except as required by § 603,
Subsection 2E, hereof, the employer shall not withhold the tax from
the person during the calendar year or the remainder of the
calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies.
Employers shall ensure that the exemption certificate forms are
readily available to employees at all times and shall furnish each
new employee with a form, as prepared and provided by the
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development, at the time of hiring.
§ 603 LOGAN CODE § 603
1:654
§ 604. Collection Through Employers. [Ord. 804; as amended by
Ord. 10-27-88; by Ord. 01-03-06; by Ord. 12-14-06A; and by Ord.
11-08-07]
E. With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the Local Services Tax, upon notification to an
employer by the person or by the Township of Logan that the
person has received earned income and net profits from all sources
within that political subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in
that calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the
tax exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's
payment to the person of earned income within that political
subdivision in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, an employer shall withhold the Local Service Tax
from the person pursuant to § 603, Subsection 2F, hereof.
F. If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the Local Services Tax becomes subject to the tax for the
calendar year under § 603, Subsection 2E, the employer shall
withhold the tax for the remainder of that calendar year. The
employer shall withhold from the person, for the first payroll period
after receipt of the notification under § 603, Subsection 2E, a lump
sum equal to the amount of tax that was not withheld from the
person due to the exemption claimed by the person under this
§ 603, plus the per payroll amount due for that first payroll period.
The amount of tax withheld per payroll for the remaining payroll
periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for
other employees. In the event the employment of a person subject
to withholding of the tax under this Subsection 2F is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due and the Township of Logan may
pursue collection pursuant to applicable law.
1. Each employer shall register with the tax collector the employer's
name, address and other information the tax collector may require
within 15 days after the effective date of this Part or within 15 days
after first becoming an employer.
2. A. Each employer shall prorate and deduct the tax from each payroll
period in which the taxpayer is engaging in an occupation. The pro
rata share of the tax assessed on the taxpayer for a payroll period
shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of the local
services tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll
periods established by the employer for the calendar year. For
purposes of determining the pro rata share, an employer shall
round down the amount of the tax collected each payroll period to
the nearest one-hundredth of a dollar. Collection of the Local
Services Tax levied hereunder shall be made on a payroll period
basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an
occupation. For each taxpayer for whom no prior deduction has
§ 603 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 604
1:655
§ 605. Direct Payment by Taxpayers. [Ord. 804; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
Every taxpayer who is self-employed or whose tax for any other reason
is not collected under section 4 of this Part shall file a return on a form
prescribed by the tax collector and shall pay the tax directly to said
collector. Each such taxpayer who first becomes subject to the tax after the
effective date of this Part, and on or before March 31 of the current tax year,
shall file the return and pay the tax on or before April 30 of the current
been made, who is employed after the effective date of this Part
but for less than a calendar year, each employer shall deduct the
full amount of the local services tax on a pro rata basis from the
payroll periods remaining in the calendar year as required herein,
from compensation payable to the taxpayer, file a return on a
form prescribed by the tax collector, and pay said collector the
full amount of all taxes deducted, within 30 days after the end of
each quarter of the calendar year during which the taxpayer is
employed.
B. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain
from withholding the local services tax, if the taxpayer provides a
recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the
name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and the
amount of the local services tax withheld and a statement from the
taxpayer that the pay statement is from the employee's principal
employer and the taxpayer will notify other employers of a change
in principal place of employment within two weeks of its
occurrence.
C. Each employer required to withhold the local services tax from a
taxpayer shall file a return or a form prescribed by the tax collector,
and pay to said tax collector the full said prorated taxes deducted
within 30 days after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
3. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation before
December 31 of any year during which this tax is in effect, shall file the
return hereinabove required and pay the tax to the tax collector, within
15 days after discontinuing business or ceasing operations.
4. The failure of any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer
who fails to deduct the tax as required by this section, or who fails to
pay such tax to the tax collector, shall be liable for such tax in full,
without deduction of the commission hereinafter provided, as though
the tax had originally been levied against such employer.
5. As to employees who present official receipts evidencing prior payment
of the tax imposed hereby either directly or by collection through
employers, the employer shall not deduct the tax but shall maintain
adequate records concerning such employees.
§ 604 LOGAN CODE § 605
1:656
tax year, and each such taxpayer who first becomes subject to the tax after
March 31 of the current tax year, shall file the return and pay the tax on
or before July 31 or October 31 of the current tax year, or January 31 of
the following year, whichever of such payment dates first occurs at least 30
days after the taxpayer becomes subject to the tax.
§ 606. Nonresident Taxpayers. [Ord. 804; as amended by Ord.
10-27-88]
Both residents and nonresident taxpayers shall, by virtue of engaging in
an occupation within the Township of Logan, be subject to the tax and the
provisions of this Part.
§ 607. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. 804; as amended by
Ord. 10-27-88; as amended by Ord. 12-14-06A; and by Ord.
11-08-07]
The tax collector shall collect and receive the taxes, interests, fines and
penalties imposed by this Part, and shall maintain records showing the
amounts received and the dates such amounts were received. The tax
collector shall prescribe and issue all forms necessary for the
administration of the tax and may adopt and enforce regulations relating to
any matter pertaining to the administration of this Part. The tax collectors
and agents designated by him may examine the records of any employer
and/or supposed employer or of any taxpayer in order to ascertain the
tax due or verify the accuracy of any return. Every employer or supposed
employer and every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall give the tax
collector and any agent designated by him all means, facilities and
opportunity for the examinations hereby authorized. The Township is
hereby authorized to, and the tax collector shall, adopt regulations for
the processing of refund claims for the local services tax paid by any
person who is eligible for the exemption, consistent with 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8425
(relating to refunds of overpayments) and § 8426 (relating to interest on
overpayment). Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days
after the last day the employer is required to remit the local services tax
for the last quarter of the calendar year pursuant to this Part, whichever
is later, shall not be subject to interest imposed under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426.
Refunds shall only be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that
exceed $1.
§ 608. Collection. [Ord. 804; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
The tax collector shall collect by suit or otherwise, all taxes, interests, costs,
fines and penalties due under this Part and unpaid. If for any reason, any
tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per year on the amount
of unpaid taxes and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the amount of
the unpaid tax, for each month or fraction of month during which the tax
remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Whenever suit is brought for
the recovery of unpaid tax, the taxpayer shall, in addition, be liable for the
costs of collection as well as for interest and penalties. The tax collector
§ 605 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 608
1:657
may accept payment under protest of the tax claimed by the Township of
Logan in any case where any person disputes the Township of Logan's claim
for the tax. If a court of competent jurisdiction thereafter decides that there
has been overpayment to the tax collector, the tax collector shall refund
the amount of the overpayment to the person who paid under protest. Any
action instituted for such judicial determination shall be instituted within
two years of the last day of the period for which the tax is disputed or
claim made. All refunds shall be made in conformity with the procedure
prescribed by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 609. Penalties. [Ord. 804; as amended by Ord. 10-27-88]
An employer or taxpayer who makes a false or untrue statement on any
return required by this Part, who refuses inspection of his records in his
custody and control setting forth his employees subject to this tax, who fails
or refuses to file a return required by this Part, or who violates any other
provisions of this Part, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine not more than $600, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
90 days.
§ 608 LOGAN CODE § 609
1:658
Part 7
OCCUPANCY REGISTRATION
§ 701. Definitions. [Ord. 6-23-94]
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust,
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
Commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both. The term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
§ 702. Registration. [Ord. 6-23-94]
§ 703. Fines and Penalties. [Ord. 6-23-94]
Any person, and the principal of any firm and the Chief Executive Officer
of any corporation violating any of the provisions of this Part, shall upon
conviction thereof before any district magistrate or justice of the peace, be
fined in an amount of not less than $25 and not to exceed $600 for any one
offense, recoverable with cost of prosecution. Upon default of payment of
the said fine and costs, such person shall be committed to the Blair County
Jail for a period not exceeding five days.
1. On or before September 1, 1994, any person, firm or corporation
owning or managing property located in the Township of Logan, which
property at the present time is rented or leased, shall furnish to the
Township Secretary the name and address of the tenant or tenants.
2. Any person, association or corporation owning or managing property
located in Logan Township, upon leasing or renting such property, shall
furnish to the Township Secretary the name and address of the tenant
or tenants within 10 days from the execution of the lease or, in the event
no written lease is executed, then within 10 days from the date of
occupancy of said property by the tenant or tenants.
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 703
1:659

Part 8
PER CAPITA TAX
§ 801. Authority for Enactment. [Ord. 01-26-12]
This Part is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L.
1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.; renumbered as
Section 101 et seq. by 2008, July 2, P.L. 197, No. 32, Section 2, as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania (hereinafter "Act").
§ 802. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 01-26-12]
A per capita tax of $10, for the purpose of providing general revenue is
hereby levied, assessed and imposed on all residents ("resident" as used in
this Part shall mean every adult 18 years of age or older who lives within
the Township of Logan) residing within the Township of Logan at any time
during the fiscal year beginning 30 days after passage of this Part by the
Township and ending on the last day of December, 2012, and each calendar
year thereafter.
§ 803. Collection of Tax/Other Taxes Preserved. [Ord. 01-26-12]
All taxes levies under this Part, together with all penalties and interest,
shall be recoverable by a tax collector as designated from time to time by
Township, in the manner authorized by the Act. This per capita tax shall be
in addition to all other real estate, flat rate occupation tax, and other taxes
levied currently by the Township of Logan.
§ 804. Notice of Tax Owed. [Ord. 01-26-12]
The designated tax collector shall send to every resident of the Township
over the age of 18 years a notice of the tax due by such resident for
the calendar year 2011 and each year thereafter. The failure or omission
of the collector to send, or of any taxpayer to receive such notice shall
not relieve such person from the payment of such tax and other legal
assessments. Provided further that any person who shall become a resident
of the Township after the effective date of this Part and each year thereafter,
shall be liable for the tax for that particular calendar year and any person
who shall cease to be a resident at any time after the effective date of this
Part and each year thereafter, shall be liable for the full amount of the tax
for each such year.
§ 805. Early/Late Payment of Tax. [Ord. 01-26-12]
All taxpayers subject to the payment of the tax under this Part shall be
entitled to a discount of 2% on the amount of such tax upon making payment
of the whole amount thereof within two months after the date of the tax
notice. All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes
imposed against them four months after the date of the notice shall be
§ 801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 805
1:661
charged a penalty of 5%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the
collector and collected by said tax collector, and further shall be required to
pay interest upon the amount of the tax and penalty at the rate of 1/2 of 1%
per month from the date the penalty is imposed to the time of payment.
§ 806. Severability. [Ord. 01-26-12]
The provisions of this Part are severable, and if any of its sections, clauses
or sentences shall be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such provisions shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining sections, clauses or sentences. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Supervisors of the Township of Logan that this Part would have
been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, clause or
sentence had not been included therein.
§ 807. Tax Collector List. [Ord. 01-26-12]
It shall be the duty of the tax collector to prepare and keep current a list of
all taxpayers by and through the use of using all legal means at its disposal.
This list shall contain the names of all residents 18 years of age and over.
§ 808. Penalty. [Ord. 01-26-12]
Any person subject to the tax imposed hereby who fails or refuses to pay
the tax or to render accurate information to the Township appointed tax
collector concerning such persons residence and/or occupation shall, in
addition to any other penalty imposed hereby, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine not less than $100 and not more than $600 and in
default of payment, to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30
days.
(a) Nothing contained in this Part shall be construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any resident not
within the taxing power of the Township of Logan under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(b) If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of the Part shall be held
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect the right to impose or collect said tax, or the validity of the tax so
imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 805 LOGAN CODE § 808
1:662
Part 9
FLAT RATE OCCUPATION TAX
§ 901. Authority For Enactment. [Ord. 02-23-12]
This Part is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L.
1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.; renumbered
as § 101 et seq. by 2008, July 2, P.L. 197, No. 32, Section 2, as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania (hereinafter "Act").
§ 902. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 02-23-12]
A tax at the flat rate of $10, for the purpose of providing general revenue
is hereby levied, assessed and imposed on the occupations of all residents
residing within the Township of Logan at any time during the fiscal year,
beginning 30 days after enactment of this Part and ending on the last day
of December, 2012, and each calendar year thereafter provided, the tax
hereby imposed shall not be levied upon any resident whose total income
during the taxable year is any figure less than $1,200. "Occupation" as used
in this Part, shall mean any trade, profession, business, calling, following,
vocation or undertaking of any nature, type or kind carried on, engaged in,
pursued by or performed by any individual whether a salary, wage or other
monetary compensation is or is not received for the same.
§ 903. Other Taxes Preserved. [Ord. 02-23-12]
This flat rate occupation tax shall be in addition to all other real estate, per
capita, and other taxes levied currently by the Township of Logan.
§ 904. Collection of Tax. [Ord. 02-23-12]
All taxes levied under this Part, together with all penalties and interest,
shall be recoverable by a tax collector as designated from time to time by
the Township, in the manner authorized by the Act.
§ 905. Notice of Tax Owed. [Ord. 02-23-12]
The designated tax collector shall send to every resident of the Township a
notice of the occupation tax due by such resident for the calendar year 2012
and each year thereafter. The failure or omission of the collector to send,
or of any taxpayer to receive such notice shall not relieve such person from
the payment of such tax and other legal assessments. Provided further that
any person who shall become a resident of the Township after the effective
date of this Part and each year thereafter, shall be liable for the occupation
tax for that particular calendar year and any person who shall cease to be
a resident at any time after the effective date of this Part and each year
thereafter, shall be liable for the full amount of the occupation tax for each
such year.
§ 901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 906
1:663
§ 906. Late Payment of Tax. [Ord. 02-23-12]
All taxpayers who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes imposed
against them on or before April 15 following the date of the notice, shall be
charged a penalty of $1 plus interest of 1% per month from the date the
penalty is imposed to the time of payment, which penalty shall be added to
the taxes by the collector and collected by said tax collector.
§ 907. Severability. [Ord. 02-23-12]
The provisions of this Part are severable, and if any of its sections, clauses
or sentences shall be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such provisions shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining sections, clauses or sentences. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Logan that this Part
would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section,
clause or sentence had not been included therein.
§ 908. Tax Collector List. [Ord. 02-23-12]
It shall be the duty of the tax collector to prepare and keep current a list of
all taxpayers by and through the use of using all legal means at its disposal.
This list shall contain the names of all residents and the occupation of each
such resident.
§ 909. Penalty. [Ord. 02-23-12]
Any person subject to the tax imposed hereby who fails or refuses to pay
the tax or to render accurate information to the Township appointed tax
collector concerning such persons residence and/or occupation shall, in
addition to any other penalty imposed hereby, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine not less than $100 and not more than $600 and in
default of payment, to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30
days.
(a) Nothing contained in this Part shall be construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any resident not
within the taxing power of the Township under the Constitution of the
United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(b) If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of the Part shall be held
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect the right to impose or collect said tax, or the validity of the tax so
imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 906 LOGAN CODE § 909
1:664
Chapter 27
ZONING
§ 909 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 909
1:665

Part 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
§ 101. Title. [Ord. 11-15-79]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "Logan Township Zoning
Ordinance Amendment No. 16."
§ 102. Purpose. [Ord. 11-15-79]
Whereas, the Supervisors of the Township of Logan deem it necessary to the
promotion of public health, safety, morals, comfort and general welfare of
Logan Township to regulate therein the use, size and location of buildings
and other structures; the size and location of yards and other open spaces in
relation to buildings; and the use of land; the following districts are hereby
created and the following regulations are hereby established to accomplish
that purpose and shall hereafter apply.
§ 103. Statement of Community Development Objectives. [Ord.
1-23-92]
The following list of community development objectives developed through
legislative findings of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Logan is
the basis for the provisions of this chapter.
1. To promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following: the public
health, safety, morals and the general welfare; coordinated and
practical community development and proper density of population;
emergency management preparedness and operations, airports, and
national defense facilities, the provisions of adequate light and air,
access to incident solar energy, police protection, vehicle parking and
loading space, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, recreational
facilities, public grounds, the provision of a safe, reliable and adequate
water supply for domestic, commercial, agricultural or industrial use,
and other public requirements; as well as preservation of the natural,
scenic, and historic values in the environment and preservation of
forests, wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.
2. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life
or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
3. To preserve prime agricultural and farmland considering topography,
soil type and classification and present use.
4. To provide for the use of land within the Township for residential
housing of various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of
housing, including single-family and two-family dwellings, and a
reasonable range of multifamily dwellings in various arrangements,
mobile homes and mobile home parks, provided, however, that this
§ 101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 103
1:667
chapter, or any amendments hereto, shall not be deemed invalid for the
failure to provide for any other specific dwelling type.
5. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for development
of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
6. To encourage growth in terms of population and commercial and
industrial activity so that the Township captures at least its fair share of
regional growth.
7. The Board of Supervisors hereby recognizes that circumstances can
necessitate the adoption and timely pursuit of new goals and the
enactment of zoning ordinance amendments which may neither require
nor allow for the completion of and approval of new community
development objectives.
§ 103 LOGAN CODE § 103
1:668
Part 2
DISTRICTS CREATED
§ 201. District Classes Created. [Ord. 04-13-00; as amended by Ord.
11-15-79]
§ 202. Amendment to Zoning Districts and/or Zoning Map. [Ord.
8-15-96]
1. For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Logan is divided into
the following eight classes of districts:
Agricultural Districts
Agricultural A-1 Districts
Business Districts
Residence R-1 Districts
Residence R-1A Districts
Residence R-2 Districts
Industrial Districts
Institutional Districts
2. The boundaries of these districts and classes of districts are hereby
established on a map entitled "Zoning Map for Logan Township," which
map accompanies and is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter.
3. Except when otherwise indicated by dimensions of fixed boundaries
shown on the Zoning Map, the depth of residential and business
frontage is established, for the purpose of this chapter, at 150 feet.
4. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, existing
at the time of enactment of this chapter, the use authorized on, and the
district requirement of, the least restricted portion of such lot shall be
construed as extending to the entire lot, provided, that such extension
shall not include any part of the lot which is more than 50 feet from the
district boundary line.
1. The procedures for amendment, supplement and/or change in the
boundaries of any zoning district and/or the Zoning Map for Logan
Township shall be in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (hereinafter "Code") as amended from time to time.
2. Any such amendment, supplement and/or change in the boundaries of
any zoning district and/or the Zoning Map may be initiated by:
A. A resolution by the Board of Supervisors; or
B. A petition to the Board of Supervisors presented by the property
owner or contract purchaser.
§ 201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 202
1:669
A public hearing shall be held on any such rezoning resolution or
petition in accordance with the Code. Any party may appear in
person or by agent or attorney.
3. If a petition for rezoning is denied by the Board of Supervisors once in a
one-year period, another petition for a change to the same zone district
and/or area of the Zoning Map shall not be filed within a period of one
year from the date of denial, except upon the initiation of the Township
Supervisors or after a showing of a change of circumstances which
would warrant a rehearing. Determination as to a change in
circumstances shall be made in the sole discretion of the said Board of
Supervisors.
§ 202 LOGAN CODE § 202
1:670
Part 3
DEFINITIONS
§ 301. Definitions. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by Ord. 6-16-83; by
Ord. 1-23-92; by Ord. 04-13-00; by Ord. 09-14-00; by Ord. 09-13-01;
by Ord. 6-27-02A; by Ord. 12-09-04; by Ord. 5-26-05; by Ord.
09-14-06B; by Ord. 11-09-06; by Ord. 11-13-08; by Ord. 08-12-10;
and by Ord. 03-10-11A]
For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, the following definitions shall
be controlling:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of the main building, and which is located on
the same lot or parcel of land. Motor vehicles and/or any parts thereof shall
not be used as accessory buildings.
ACCESSORY USE —
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — A commercial
establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for
sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
An accessory use may be conducted in the main building or in an
accessory building, but in the latter case shall not occupy a floor area
greater than 1/2 the area of the first floor of the main building. There
shall be no commercial display visible from the street, or advertising,
except a small professional nameplate or announcement sign. There
shall be no more than two employees or assistants.
A.
A use not otherwise contrary to law, customarily incidental to the use of
a building for dwelling purposes and including:
The office or studio of a physician or surgeon, dentist, artist,
musician, lawyer, architect, teacher, real estate agent or other
like professional persons residing on the premises which have
obtained similar degrees, training and experience as the specified
professionals herein.
(1)
(2) Workshops not conducted for profit.
Customary home occupations such as millinery, dressmaking, and
hair-dressing, conducted by a person residing on the premises.
(3)
B.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:671
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes
that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or
describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and
still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other
business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishment
from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long
as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified materials which depict or describe "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment, regardless of whether such establishment sells or offers
alcohol for sale, which regularly features:
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown
which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or
other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or
A.
Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities."
B.
A. Persons who appear in the state of nudity; or
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
"specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or
B.
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
C.
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" and has
a sign visible which advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions; or
A.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a time period that is less than 10
hours; or
B.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sublet for a period of
time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:672
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear
in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities."
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare having a right-of-way width of 20 feet or
less regardless of how named.
ALTERATION OF BUILDING — Any changes in supporting members of a
building except such changes as may be required for its safety, any addition
to a building, any change in use from one district classification to another,
or removal of a building from one location to another.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A multiple family dwelling. (See below.)
APPLICANT — A person or entity who has filed an application with the
Township for any purpose set forth in this Chapter 27 of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances, including their heirs, successors or assigns.
Applicant includes Developer or Landowner as those terms may be defined
either in said Chapter 27 and/or Chapter 22 of the said Code of Ordinances.
AREA — The extent of the surface contained within the extremities or
boundaries of land or building.
AREA OF SIGN — The area of a sign shall be construed to include all
lettering, wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with
the background, whether open or closed, on which they are displayed, but
not including any supporting framework and bracing which is incidental to
the display itself. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols
attached to or painted on the surface, the area shall be considered to be the
smallest rectangle or other regular geometric figure which can be drawn to
encompass all of the letters and symbols.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
AUDIENCE — One or more persons who are permitted to view a
performance for consideration of any type in or from a public place.
BASEMENT LIVING — Will not be permitted beyond one year from the date
of permit.
BLOCK — The length of a street between two intersections.
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance or
under this chapter to render final adjudications.
BOARDING HOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling, other than a hotel,
wherein more than three people are sheltered or fed for profit, including,
without limitation, a dormitory.
BUFFER AREA — A strip of required yard space adjacent to the boundary
of a property or district, not less in width than is designated in this chapter,
and on which is placed around shrubbery, hedges, evergreens or other
suitable plantings of sufficient height and density to constitute an effective
screen and give maximum protection and immediate screening to an
abutting property or district. A "buffer area" may include a permissible
fence.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:673
BUILDING — Any structure having enclosing walls and roof permanently
located on the land.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of the total area of the lot covered by
buildings to the total area of the lot.
BUSINESS CORRIDOR — The following locations are defined as business
corridors within the Township:[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
CAMPGROUND — A parcel of land used for camping or overnight
accommodations, with sites for cabins, tents and/or outdoor recreational
vehicles, and which may include accessory buildings and facilities such as
recreational areas, dining halls with kitchen facilities, indoor gymnasiums
and group meeting facilities. A campground shall not include a facility,
building or land designed or used for correctional or penal purposes, in
whole or in part. A campground shall be permitted as a special exception
use in the Agriculture A-1 zone district only.
CENTER LINE OF STREET — A line midway between and parallel to the
two street or property lines.
CHILD-ORIENTED BUSINESS — A commercial establishment which, as one
of its principal business purposes, serves and/or sells to children and/or
their families food, apparel, goods, services, play and/or entertainment.
Pleasant Valley Boulevard/Business Route 220/Plank Road - adjoining
property located within 100 feet of the right-of-way wherein the zoning
designation is business.
A.
Logan Boulevard - adjoining property located within 100 feet of the
right-of-way wherein the zoning designation is business.
B.
State Route 36/Union Avenue from Ward Avenue to the Frankstown
Township line - adjoining property located within 100 feet of the rightof-
way wherein the zoning designation is business.
C.
17th Street - adjoining property located within 100 feet of the right-ofway
wherein the zoning designation is business or industrial.
D.
Goods Lane - adjoining property located within 100 feet of the right-ofway
wherein the zoning designation is business.
E.
Orchard Avenue - adjoining property located within 100 feet of the
right-of-way wherein the zoning designation is business.
F.
Osgood Drive - adjoining property located within 100 feet of the rightof-
way wherein the zoning designation is industrial.
G.
Greyson Street - adjoining property located within 100 feet of the rightof-
way wherein the zoning designation is business.
H.
Amelia Avenue from Frankstown Road to Greyson Street - adjoining
property located within 100 feet of the right-of-way wherein the zoning
designation is business.
I.
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:674
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area at a street intersection or driveway
entrance in which only certain specified signs are permitted.[Added by
Ord. 10-24-13]
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
COMMERCIAL OFF-ROAD VEHICLE PARK — A facility which charges for
entrance to use its land and is established for the riding of off-road vehicles
including but not limited to all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles, four-wheelers,
three-wheelers, dune buggies, and other four wheel drive vehicles. A
commercial off-road vehicle park shall be permitted as a special exception
use in the Agriculture A-1 zone district only.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — R license and above or any vehicle used to
transport 10 or more passengers.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Land which is specifically dedicated to passive
and/or active recreational activities and is freely accessible to residents,
property owners, and tenants of a PRD or neighborhood. This land is owned
and maintained by the homeowners' or condominium association.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device used for the transmission or
reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile
radio service or any other wireless communications signals, including
without limitation omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or
panel antennas, owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such device.
This definition shall not include private residence-mounted satellite dishes
or television antennas or amateur radio equipment including without
limitation ham or citizen band radio antennas.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — An unmanned building or
cabinet containing communications equipment required for the operation of
communications antennas and covering an area on the ground not greater
than 250 square feet.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure other than a building, such as
a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower, designed and used to support
communications antennas.
COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENTS — A dwelling or structure, which
complies with all of the requirements of the zoning district in which said
dwelling or structure is located, wherein individuals are sheltered and/
or fed for or not for profit and all such individuals (excepting caregivers)
having their residence therein have a "handicap" as defined in the Fair
Housing Amendments, Act of 1988, P.L. 100-430, 102 Stat. 1619.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:675
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of Logan Township,
as amended from time to time.
CONDOMINIUM — Any structure meeting the definition of condominium as
defined in the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
CORNER LOT — A lot fronting on two streets at their intersection.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this chapter to do so, either by
reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the court of common
pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the Township lies.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre.
DENSITY, GROSS — The total number of dwelling units divided by the total
acreage of the tract proposed for a PRD.
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with
the administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder,
except the following:
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent or such landowner or tenant with
the permission from a landowner, who makes or causes to be made an
application for approval of a development plan.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A proposal for a PRD, prepared in accordance
with this chapter, including a plat of subdivision or land development,
location of various uses, all covenants relating to use, location, and bulk of
building and other structures, intensity of use or density of development,
streets, ways, and parking facilities, common open space, and public
facilities. The phrase, "provisions of the development plan," when used in
this Part, shall mean both the verbal and graphic materials.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign containing directional information locating
public places owned or operated by federal, state or local governments or
their agencies; public or privately owned natural phenomena, historical,
cultural, scientific, educational and religious sites; and areas of natural
scenic beauty or which are naturally suited for outdoor recreation.[Added
by Ord. 10-24-13]
DORMITORY — A building designed or used exclusively or primarily for the
housing of students of an educational institution, faculty, staff and paying
and nonpaying guests utilizing school, college, and university facilities for
school, college, and university sponsored or supported activities, which
buildings are owned by the education institution. The term dormitory shall
include, but shall not be limited to, fraternity and sorority houses.
DWELLING — A building occupied by and maintained exclusively for
residential purposes, excluding hotel, motel, rooming house, student home,
A. The Board of Supervisors.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:676
tourist home, community living arrangement, institutional home, private
club within residence facilities, and the like.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers or advertises
to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person or who agrees or
offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for
another person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or
disposal systems and their essential buildings, excluding communications
towers and communications antennas, as defined herein.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
FACILITY OWNER — The entity or entities having an equity interest in a
wind energy facility, including their respective successors and assigns.
FALL ZONE — The potential fall area for the small wind energy system. It is
measured by using 110% of the total height as the radius around the center
point of the base of the tower.
FLAG LOT — A lot, tract of parcel of land, each of which front a minimum
of 15 feet upon a public street (i.e., any street accepted and maintained by
a local, state or federal government) and extend back therefrom a minimum
width of 15 feet, so as to provide each such lot, tract or parcel of land with
access, which is used solely and exclusively for ingress, egress and regress
from such lot, tract or parcel of land to such public street; provided that
each such lot, tract or parcel of land meets the area and frontage, front
yard, rear yard and side yard requirements as well as the minimum frontage
of either 75 or 100 feet, which frontage shall be measured not less than
30 feet from the building situate upon or proposed to be constructed or
erected upon said lot, tract or parcel of land. One single-family dwelling
house and its accessory uses and out buildings or one mobile home (where
so permitted in the zoning district) or one two-family dwelling and its
accessory uses and outbuildings (where so permitted in the zoning district)
shall be the only structures and uses permitted upon said lot, tract or parcel
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
A.
The conversion of any existing business whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to a sexually oriented business;
B.
The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:677
of land. No more than two flag lots shall be permitted to abut, adjoin or in
any manner touch upon each other.
FLICKER — The moving shadow created by the sun shining on the rotating
blades of the wind turbine.
FREESTANDING SIGN — An independently supported sign, not attached to
any building.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
FREESTANDING SOLAR COLLECTORS — A solar collection system not
attached to and separate from any existing structures on the site.
FRONTAGE — The horizontal or curvilinear distance along the public street
line upon which a lot abuts. Vehicular access shall be provided along the
frontage.
FRONT LOT LINE — The line separating a lot from a street or other rightof-
way.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
FRONT YARD — The space between the building line or front main wall of a
building and the front property line.
GROUND SIGN — A sign integral with the base structure (typically a brick
or concrete base) from the ground up to the top of the sign.[Added by Ord.
10-24-13]
HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower foundation
to the height of the wind turbine hub, to which the blade is attached.
HEIGHT OF A COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — The vertical distance
measured from the ground level to the highest point on a communications
tower, including antennas mounted on the tower.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the average
ground level at the sides of the building, exclusive of chimneys and similar
fixtures.
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured from the adjacent
roadway grade at the front of the sign to its highest point. The highest point
in the case of a sign shall include the supporting structure.[Added by Ord.
10-24-13]
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation for gain or support conducted only
by members of a family whose principal residence is on the premises and
which is conducted entirely within the dwelling, provided that no article
is sold or offered for sale, and which occupation does not include onpremises
retailing activity or direct sale of merchandise to the public. The
following is to be considered a "home occupation": Instructions in violin,
piano or other individual musical instruments, limited to a single person
at a time, dressmaker, watchmaker, milliner, seamstress or other persons
who offer skilled services to clients and are not professionally engaged in
the purchase or sale of economic goods. The following is not considered to
be a "home occupation": Dancing instruction, band instrument instruction
in groups, barbershops, beauty shops, tearooms, tourist homes, real estate
offices, convalescent homes, mortuary establishments, stores, trades or
business of any kind not herein above listed shall not be deemed to be home
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:678
occupations. The conducting of a clinic, hospital, animal hospital or any
similar use shall not be deemed to be a "home occupation."
HOSPITAL — A sanitarium, sanatorium, preventorium, clinic, rest home,
nursing home, convalescent home, and any place for the diagnosis,
treatment, or other care of human ailments, and shall be deemed to be
limited to such places.
HOTEL — A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public
for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from rooms is
made from an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at
all hours, and which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a
boarding house, lodging house, or rooming house.
I-99 CORRIDOR — Adjoining property located within 100 feet of the federal
I-99 right-of-way.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A small sign, emblem or decal, less than four square
feet per side in area, informing the public of goods, facilities or services
available on the premises, e.g., a credit card sign, directional (entrance,
exit) sign, or a sign indicating hours of business.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
INSTITUTIONAL HOME — A public or private benevolent establishment
devoted to the shelter, maintenance, or education and care of minor
children, homeless, aged or infirm persons; or members of a religious
community. This classification shall not include almshouses, penal or
reformatory institutions, nursing homes, or institutions for the custody, care
or treatment of persons suffering from amentia, mental derangement, or
drug or alcoholic addiction.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder or an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), if the lessee is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having
proprietary interest in the land.
LCD SIGN — An on-premises or off-premises sign with a liquid crystal
display.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT LINE — A line forming the front, rear, or side boundary of a lot.[Added
by Ord. 10-24-13]
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (MET TOWER) — Includes the tower, base
plate, anchors, guy wires and hardware, anemometers (wind speed
indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment for
anemometers and vanes, data loggers, instrument wiring, and any
telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind
flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind
information or to characterize the wind resource at a given location.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:679
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation. All mobile homes placed in the Township, with the exception of
those placed in a mobile home park, shall be placed/built on a permanent
block or poured wall foundation. All mobile homes placed in the Township
shall have a 3:12 roof pitch/slope.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MODULAR HOME — A structure intended for residential housing, built offsite
in modular components that are transported to a residential site and
erected on a permanent block or poured wall foundation, however such
structure is built without a permanent chassis.
MOTEL — A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the
transient public for compensation and in which egress and ingress to and
from rooms may be made either through an inside lobby or office supervised
by a person in charge at all times or directly from the exterior.
MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING — Any building under a single roof, with
or without firewall partitions or party walls, designed for occupancy by
or occupied by three or more households living as families and including
but not limited to an apartment house, townhouse and condominium. Any
multifamily dwelling constructed or erected after the enactment of this
chapter shall be constructed with firewall partitions or firewall party walls
only.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipalities
Authority Act of 1945."
NET ACRE — The area of land contained within the legal limits of the
property lines bounding that area. Any portion of a lot included in a street
right-of-way, utility easement, stormwater management facility or the
access strip to an interior flag-shaped lot and the above ground portion of
sewerage systems including buffer areas shall not be included in calculating
the minimum lot area under the provisions of this chapter.
NET METERING — The difference between the electricity supplied over the
electric distribution system and the electricity generated by the small wind
energy system which is fed back into the electric distribution system over a
billing period.
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:680
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reason of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign which does not conform to the
requirements of this Part or subsequent amendments hereto but which
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this Part.[Added by Ord.
10-24-13]
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the use or extent of use provisions
of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or
amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include,
but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment, or prior
to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation.
NONPARTICIPATING LANDOWNER — Any landowner except those on
whose property all or a portion of a wind energy facility is located pursuant
to an agreement with the facility owner or operator.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in a
state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — A building with sleeping rooms
where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing
care for hire.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any building that is occupied or in use when the
land development plan or permit application is submitted.
OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which directs attention
to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold, or
offered elsewhere other than upon the premises where the sign is
displayed.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
ON-PREMISES BUSINESS SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a
business, profession, event, activity, exhibit, entertainment, or industry
conducted on the premises or to products sold, manufactured or assembled
upon the same premises on which the sign is displayed.[Added by Ord.
10-24-13]
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:681
OPEN PORCH — A porch open on three sides except for wire screening.
A porch shall not be considered open if enclosed by either permanent or
detachable glass sash.
OPEN SPACE — Combination of common open space and parkland.
OPERATOR — The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of a wind energy facility.
OUTBUILDING — A building detached from and subordinate to the main
building on the same lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to
the main building. Vehicles and/or any structure which at any time had
wheels affixed thereto and/or constructed to accommodate wheels, and/or
any parts of vehicles and/or said structures thereof shall not be used as
accessory buildings.
PARCEL — A piece of real estate contained in one legal description.
PARKLAND — Land which is specifically dedicated to the Township for
the purpose of active and/or passive recreation and is freely accessible
to residents, property owners, and tenants of a PRD, neighborhood, or
Township. This land is owned and maintained by the Township.
PARTICIPATING LANDOWNER — A landowner upon whose property all or
a portion of a wind energy facility is located pursuant to an agreement with
the facility owner or operator.
PERFORMANCE — Any live or reproduced exhibition, including but not
limited to any play, motion picture film, dance or appearance presented to
or performed before an audience.
PERMANENT SIGN — Any sign which is not a temporary sign.[Added by
Ord. 10-24-13]
PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE — A person in whose name a permit and/or
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or
license.
PERSON — An individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other entity.
PERSONAL CARE HOME — A building in which food, shelter, and personal
assistance or supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours
for at least four residents who are not relatives of the operator and who
require assistance or supervision in such matters as dressing, bathing, diet,
or medication prescribed for self administration. All such facilities shall
contain no less than 200 square feet of floor area per resident.
POLE SIGN — A sign supported by an exposed single pole structure.[Added
by Ord. 10-24-13]
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign identifying a political candidate or
party.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:682
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign designed to be moved easily and not
permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure or building.[Added by
Ord. 10-24-13]
POWER GRID — The transmission system created to balance the supply and
demand of electricity for consumers in the North East.
PRD or PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A contiguous area
of land, controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity
for a number of dwelling units, the development plan for which does not
correspond in lot size, bulk or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage, and
required open space to the regulations established in any one residential
district created from time to time, under the provisions of the Township
Zoning Ordinance.
PREMISES — An area occupied by a business or other public enterprise.
When more than one business occupies a single building, each business
area shall be considered a separate premises.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
PRIVATE GARAGE — A garage not conducted as a business or used for the
storage of more than one commercial vehicle which shall be owned by a
person residing on the premises.
PUBLIC GARAGE — A garage conducted as a business. The rental of storage
space for more than two cars not owned by persons residing on the
premises shall be deemed a business use.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Board of Supervisors intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior
to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 53 P.S. § 271 et seq.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC SEWAGE — All separate sanitary sewers, all sewage pumping
stations, all sewage treatment plants, and all other facilities provided and
owned or leased by lessee by the Township of Logan for the collection and
transportation of sanitary sewerage and industrial waste.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas.
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:683
PUBLIC STREET — Any and all streets owned and maintained by any local,
state or federal government.
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER — A Structure, owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead
electricity transmission lines.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line which is opposite from the front lot
line.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
REAR YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building between the
rear wall of the building and the rear line of the lot, either attached or
detached garages and open porches, which in the aggregate shall occupy
not more than 35% of the area. In the case of a corner lot, the owner may
designate any interior lot line as the rear lot line.
REGIONAL OR NATIONAL TENANT OR BUSINESS — A tenant or business
having 10 or more stores or businesses.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to
any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost
of reproduction.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected or maintained in whole or in part upon,
against, or directly above the parapet line of the roof of the building.[Added
by Ord. 10-24-13]
SANITARIUM, SANITORIUM — A private hospital, whether or not such
facility is operated for profit.
SECTION — A geographical area or portion of a tract that is proposed
for PRD and which is to be developed in accordance with a timetable for
development that is included as part of the applicant's development plan.
SEMI-NUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER —
A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business
purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex; or
(1)
A.
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:684
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
SHADOW — The outline created on the surrounding area by the sun shining
on the small wind energy system.
SIDE YARD — The open unobstructed space between the side building line
or side wall of a building and the side lot line or boundary and extending
through the front yard and rear yard.
SIGN — Any structure, wall, or other outdoor surface, or any device or part
thereof, which displays or includes any letter, word, model, banner, flag,
pennant, insignia, device, or other representation used for announcement,
direction, advertisement, information, attraction, or any other
information.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A detached house designed for the use of
a single household, including two or more people living as a family and
wherein not more than three other people are sheltered or fed for profit.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a small wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or
conversion electronics, which has a rated capacity of 100 kilowatts or less
and will be used primarily for on-site consumption. All small wind energy
systems shall be considered as accessory structures and uses.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT — The vertical distance from
ground level to the tip of the wind turbine blade when at its highest point.
SMALL WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system, which has
a rated capacity of 100 kilowatts or less, that converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and includes the
nacelle, rotor, tower, and pad transformer, if any.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
semi-nude.
(2)
This term does not include the following types of commercial
enterprises:
An enterprise in which massage therapy that does not involve
"specified sexual activities" is provided by a physician,
chiropractor, registered nurse, or other medical practitioner
licensed or certified by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for such
area of practice.
(1)
An enterprise in which massage therapy that does not involve
"specified sexual activities" is provided by a professional massage
therapist who is licensed or certified by a national massage
therapist professional organization that has an explicit and
enforced policy statement which fully deals with the concerns
raised by this chapter and furthers the purposes of this chapter.
(2)
B.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:685
SOLAR COLLECTION SYSTEM — A panel or other solar energy device,
the primary purpose of which is to provide for the collection, inversion,
storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space
heating, space cooling or water heating. The collection system may be
either structurally attached or freestanding.
SOLAR PANEL — An electrical device consisting of an array of connected
solar cells which converts solar energy into electricity.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Articles VI and IX of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq. and
§ 10901 et seq.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals in a state of sexual
arousal, the male buttocks and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the
female genitals, buttocks and female breasts.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
STAGE — One or more sections on which an applicant proposes to
commence development at the same time, as part of a timetable for
development of a PRD over a period of years.
STORY — That part of a building included between any floor and the floor
or roof next above. When applying to the permissible height of building, the
term "story" shall not include a basement if the basement is not designed
for living quarters and if the ceiling thereof is not more than four feet above
the average ground level.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private.
STREET FRONTAGE — The horizontal or curvilinear distance along the
public street line upon which the lot abuts.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
STREET LINE — A street line is the right-of-way or established property line
of a street as indicated by dedication or by deed of record.
STRUCTURALLY ATTACHED SOLAR COLLECTORS — A solar collection
system attached to an existing structure's roof or wall, or serving as a
structure's roof, wall, window, or other structural member.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, and female breasts;
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
B.
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A through C above.
D.
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:686
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land not
including pavement for driveways, or accesses, and associated curbing and
stormwater management facilities.
STUDENT HOME — A living arrangement for students, unrelated by blood,
marriage or legal adoption, attending or about to attend a college or
university or who are on a semester or summer break from studies at a
college or university, or any combination of such persons. Students homes
shall not include fraternities or sororities.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT — Of a sexually oriented business means
the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as
the floor area exists on the date of enactment of this chapter.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign not constructed or intended for long-term use;
for use for a period of 60 days or less; not including portable or vehicular
signs, as defined.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
TEMPORARY STORAGE FACILITY — A trailer, container, or similar facility
which is not permanently affixed to the real estate. A temporary storage
facility does not have wheels and cannot move on its own. Temporary
storage facilities are only permitted with a permit in the Business Zoning
District.
TERMS — The present tense shall include the future; the singular number
shall include the plural; and the plural, the singular. The word "shall" is
always mandatory.
TOURIST HOME — A private residence in which accommodations are
provided for sleeping and feeding not more than 10 overnight paying
guests.
TOWNHOUSE — A structure consisting of a series from three or more
attached dwellings, separated from one another by continuous vertical walls
without opening from basement to roof. The term shall include "row house."
TOWNSHIP — Township of Logan, Blair County, Pennsylvania.[Added by
Ord. 10-24-13]
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
TURBINE HEIGHT — The distance measured from the surface of the tower
foundation to the highest point of the turbine rotor blade.
A. The sale, lease, sublease and/or assignment of lease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
§ 301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 301
1:687
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling with or without party walls,
designed or arranged for occupancy of two households, each including two
or more persons living as a family. From and after the date of the enactment
of this chapter, all two-family dwellings shall be constructed or erected with
firewall partitions or firewall party walls.
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 PS
§ 10101 et seq.
VEHICULAR SIGN — A sign which is affixed to a vehicle in such a manner
that the carrying of such sign or signs is no longer incidental to the vehicle's
primary purpose but becomes a primary purpose in itself.[Added by Ord.
10-24-13]
WALL SIGN — A sign attached directly to an exterior wall of a
building.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — An electric generating facility, whose main
purpose is to supply electricity, consisting of one or more wind turbines
and other accessory structures and buildings, including substations,
meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and
other appurtenant structures and facilities.
WIND ENERGY OVERLAY ZONE — The zoning district created for the
purpose of permitting wind energy facilities within a certain defined area
of the Township. Specifically, the zone boundaries are State Route 36 to
the north, the Blair County/Cambria County line to the west, the Logan
Township/Allegheny Township boundary to the south, a minimum of 3,000
feet from the center of the railroad bed surrounding the Horseshoe Curve
National Historic Landmark, and following property lines along the eastern
edge of the ridge to the east.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to or visible through a window of a
building.[Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts wind
energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and
includes the nacelle, rotor, tower, and pad transformer, if any.
§ 301 LOGAN CODE § 301
1:688
Part 4
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
§ 401A. Agricultural Districts. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by Ord.
6-16-83; by Ord. 1-23-92; by Ord. 04-13-00; by Ord. 09-14-00; by
Ord. 05-24-01; by Ord. 09-13-01; by Ord. 6-27-02A; and by Ord.
03-10-11A]
In "Agricultural Districts," only the following building, structures and uses
shall be permitted:
§ 401B. Agricultural A-1 Districts. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by
Ord. 6-16-83; by Ord. 1-23-92; by Ord. 04-13-00; by Ord. 09-14-00;
1. Agricultural dwellings, barns and their accessory uses and buildings.
2. The growing and selling, either retail or wholesale, of all types of
agricultural produce, livestock, and appurtenant products produced on
the premises and resulting from agricultural, farming, viticulture, and
animal and poultry husbandry.
3. Whenever a lot, tract or parcel of land located in an Agricultural District
is not being developed with the buildings, structures and uses
permitted under § 401A(1) and (2) of this Part only those buildings,
structures and uses permitted in Residence R-1 Districts shall be
permitted on said lot, tract or parcel of ground. Additionally, all parcels
of land less than five acres in area, and having more than 70% of their
area not actively used for agricultural purposes, and all lots less than
1 1/2 acres shall be classed as residential and subject to R-1
restrictions.
4. A church, public library, public or private school or other religious,
charitable or educational institution, a public park or playground, and
Community Living Arrangements.
5. Other special structures and uses as specifically provided in Part 10,
§ 1001A, Subsections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 9 only.
6. Any permanent building, to be used as a living quarters in an
Agricultural District must comply with §§ 501, 502 and 503 of Part 5,
and is subject to a building permit.
7. Buildings or structures used for the production of forest products.
8. Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure, and communications
equipment buildings subject to the regulations governing
communications antennas and communications equipment buildings at
§ 1018.
9. A solar collection system subject to the general conditions and
standards set forth in Part 10, § 1021 of this Chapter 27.
§ 401A ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 401B
1:689
by Ord. 05-24-01; by Ord. 09-13-01; by Ord. 6-27-02A; and by Ord.
03-10-11A]
In "Agricultural A-1 Districts" only the following buildings, structures and
uses shall be permitted:
§ 402. Yard, Area, Height and Lot Provisions for all Agricultural and
Agricultural A-1 Districts. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by Ord.
6-16-83; by Ord. 1-23-92; by Ord. 04-13-00; by Ord. 09-14-00; by
Ord. 05-24-01; by Ord. 09-13-01; by Ord. 6-27-02A; and by Ord.
03-10-11A]
1. Agricultural dwellings, barns and their accessory uses and buildings.
2. The growing and selling, either retail or wholesale, of all types of
agricultural produce, livestock, and appurtenant products produced on
the premises and resulting from agricultural, farming, viticulture, and
animal and poultry husbandry.
3. Whenever a lot, tract or parcel of land located in an Agricultural A-1
District is not being developed with the buildings, structures and uses
permitted under § 401B(1) and (2) of this Part, only those buildings,
structures and uses permitted in Residence R-1 Districts shall be
permitted on said lot, tract or parcel of ground. Additionally, all parcels
of land less than five acres in area, and having more than 70% of their
area not actively used for agricultural purposes, and all lots less than
1 1/2 acres shall be classed as residential and subject to R-1
restrictions.
4. A church, public library, public or private school or other religious,
charitable or educational institution, a public park or playground, and
Community Living Arrangements.
5. Other special structures and uses as specifically provided in Part 10,
§ 1001A, Subsections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 9 only, and § 1001B.
6. Any permanent building, to be used as a living quarters in an
Agricultural A-1 District must comply with §§ 501, 502 and 503 of Part
5, and is subject to a building permit.
7. Buildings or structures used for the production of forest products.
8. Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure, and communications
equipment buildings subject to the regulations governing
communications antennas and communications equipment buildings at
§ 1018.
1. Front Yards. No building exclusive of open porches, steps and
overhanging eaves and cornices, shall extend nearer to the front street
property line than the mean distance of setback of the nearest building
or buildings, other than accessory buildings within 150 feet on each
§ 401B LOGAN CODE § 402
1:690
§ 403. Private Garages and Other Outbuildings. [Ord. 11-15-79; as
amended by Ord. 6-16-83; by Ord. 1-23-92; by Ord. 04-13-00; by
Ord. 09-14-00; by Ord. 05-24-01; by Ord. 09-13-01; by Ord.
6-27-02A; and by Ord. 03-10-11A]
No garage or other outbuildings shall be placed nearer to a side or rear
property line than 10 feet; provided, however, that the foregoing shall not
prevent the following:
side of said building and fronting on the same side of the street. Where
no building or buildings exist as described above, the building setback
at the front shall not be less than 30 feet from the street or road
property line, and any building other than a detached garage or other
outbuilding may be placed to within 20 feet of the side street line.
2. Rear Yards. There shall be a rear yard not less than 30 feet in depth.
3. Side Yards. There shall be two side yards with a total of not less than 24
feet except that, when a lot plotted prior to the time of enactment of this
chapter is less than 60 feet wide, the total width of the two side yards
may be reduced by nine inches for each foot of difference to a total
width of not less than 16 feet. With the width of the narrowest of the
two side yards not to be less than seven feet. Side yard setback for all
buildings on corner lots shall be as near as possible in conformity to the
frontage setback of buildings facing such side street, using the
minimum side lot requirements to establish foundation location.
4. Area and Frontage. All lots without public sewerage shall have an area
not less than 20,000 square feet and frontage of not less than 100 feet.
All lots with public sewerage shall have an area not less than 9,000
square feet and a frontage of not less than 75 feet. To the contrary
notwithstanding, this chapter shall not prevent the use for residential
purposes of a lot plotted prior to the time of enactment of this chapter,
providing that the front yard, rear yard and side yard requirements are
met.
5. Minimum Floor Area. No dwelling shall have usable ground floor area
which totals less than 600 square feet, exclusive of open or screened
porches.
6. Height. Dwellings shall not exceed 35 feet in height. There shall be no
limit on the height of nonresidential structures except that for each foot
the height of such structure exceeds 70 feet, the total width of the two
side yards shall be increased by two feet.
7. Flag Lots. Structures and uses permitted hereunder may be located on
a flag lot.
1. The building of a common or joint garage on lots adjoining at the side;
or
§ 402 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 403
1:691
§ 404. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. 11-15-79; as
amended by Ord. 6-16-83; by Ord. 1-23-92; by Ord. 04-13-00; by
Ord. 09-14-00; by Ord. 05-24-01; by Ord. 09-13-01; by Ord.
6-27-02A; and by Ord. 03-10-11A]
Off-street parking requirements shall be provided as required or permitted
in accordance with Part 10, § 1017, of this chapter.
§ 405. Additional Provisions. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by Ord.
6-16-83; by Ord. 1-23-92; by Ord. 04-13-00; by Ord. 09-14-00; by
Ord. 05-24-01; by Ord. 09-13-01; by Ord. 6-27-02A; and by Ord.
03-10-11A]
2. The construction of a garage as a structural part of a dwelling and a
garage so constructed may extend into an interior side yard required
under this chapter for a distance not to exceed four feet, provided it has
no window openings at the side and does not extend nearer than eight
feet to a side lot line.
1. Upon recommendation by the Township Engineer to the Board of
Supervisors, a traffic study may be required in conjunction with any
proposed use in accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances.
2. A buffer area, fencing or similar screening may be required along any
or all property lines, or portions thereof, or between uses on a lot in
accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of Logan Code of
Ordinances.
3. No zoning permit shall be required for a building or structure used for
agriculture and/or agricultural purposes, unless the same shall exceed
the cost of $500. For the purpose of this chapter, "agricultural" shall
include agriculture, farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture,
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry.
§ 403 LOGAN CODE § 405
1:692
Part 5
RESIDENCE R-1 DISTRICT
§ 501. Permitted Buildings, Structures and Uses. [Ord. 11-15-79; as
amended by Ord. 6-10-82; by Ord. 6-16-83; by Ord. 7-25-85; by Ord.
10-31B-85; by Ord. 1-23-92; by Ord. 04-13-00; by Ord. 9-14-00; by
Ord. 6-27-02A; and by Ord. 03-10-11A]
In Residence "R-1" Districts, only the following buildings, structures and
uses shall be permitted.
§ 502. Yard and Area Provisions. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by
Ord. 6-10-82; and by Ord. 1-23-92]
1. One single-family dwelling or one two-family dwelling on any one lot
and those buildings, structures and uses included in Part 4,
"Agricultural Districts," § 401A(4) and (8), shall be the only uses
permitted in this district; provided, however, that the construction of
each two-family dwelling shall be limited to one such two-family
dwelling for every two single-family dwellings in a Land Development,
as defined in Chapter 22 of the Township of Logan Code of Ordinances.
2. Other special structures and uses as specifically provided by Part 10,
§ 1001A, Subsections 4 and 9 only.
3. A Solar Collection System subject to the General Conditions and
Standards set forth in Part 10, § 1021, of this Chapter 27.
1. Front Yards. No building exclusive of open porches, steps and
overhanging eaves and cornices shall extend nearer to the front street
property line than the mean distance of setback of the nearest building
or buildings, other than accessory buildings within 150 feet on each
side of said building and fronting on the same side of the street. Where
no building or buildings exist as described above, the building setback
at the front shall be not less than 30 feet from the street or road
property line, and any building other than a detached garage or other
outbuilding may be placed within 20 feet of the side street line.
2. Rear Yards. There shall be a rear yard not less than 30 feet deep.
3. Side Yards. There shall be two side yards with a total width of not less
than 24 feet except that, when a lot plotted prior to the time of
enactment of this chapter is less than 60 feet wide, the total width of
the two side yards may be reduced by nine inches for each foot of
difference to a total width not less than 16 feet, with the width of the
narrowest of the two side yards not to be less than seven feet. Side yard
setback for all buildings on corner lots shall be as near as possible in
conformity to the frontage setback of buildings facing such side street,
using the minimum side lot requirement to establish foundation
location.
§ 501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 502
1:693
§ 503. Private Garage and Other Outbuildings. [Ord. 11-15-79; as
amended by Ord. 1-23-92]
Requirements shall be the same as for Agricultural Districts.
§ 504. Additional Provisions. [Ord. 02-10-00]
4. Area and Frontage. All lots without public sewerage shall have an area
not less than 20,000 square feet and frontage of not less than 100 feet.
All lots with public sewerage shall have an area not less than 9,000
square feet and a frontage of not less than 75 feet. To the contrary
notwithstanding, this chapter shall not prevent the use for residential
purpose of a lot plotted prior to the time of enactment of this chapter)
providing that the front yard, rear yard and side yard requirements are
met.
5. Minimum Floor Area.
A. No one story dwelling with a basement shall have a usable ground
floor area which totals less than 600 square feet, and no one story
basementless dwelling shall have a usable ground floor area which
totals less than 800 square feet, exclusive of open or screened
porches.
B. All one-and-one-half-, two-story and multi-level dwellings in a
Residential R-1 district must have a livable floor space of 800
square feet, with sidewall heights in a 1 1/2 or multi-level dwelling
not to be less than eight feet in height. If the total livable square
footage does not meet or exceed 800 square feet then the said
structure must have 650 square feet on the ground floor, exclusive
of open or screened porches.
6. Height. Dwellings shall not exceed 35 feet in height. There shall be no
limit on the height of nonresidential structures except that for each foot
the height of such a structure exceeds 35 feet, the total width of the two
side yards shall be increased by two feet.
7. Flag Lots. To the contrary notwithstanding, lots, tracts or parcels of
land, each of which front a minimum 15 feet upon a public street and
extend back therefrom a minimum width of 15 feet, so as to provide that
each such lot, tract or parcel of land with access, which is used solely
and exclusively for ingress, egress and regress from such lot, tracts or
parcel of land to such public street (herein referred to as a "Flag Lot");
provided that each such flag lot meets the area and frontage, front yard,
rear yard and side yard requirements as well as the minimum frontage
of either 75 or 100 feet, which frontage shall be measured not less than
30 feet from the building situate upon or proposed to be constructed or
erected upon said flag lot. One single-family dwelling house and its
accessory uses and buildings or one mobile home shall be the only
structures and uses permitted upon flag lots.
§ 502 LOGAN CODE § 504
1:694
§ 505. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. 04-13-00]
Off-street parking requirements shall be provided as required or permitted
in accordance with Part 10, § 1017, of this chapter.
1. Upon recommendation by the Township Engineer to the Board of
Supervisors, a traffic study may be required in conjunction with any
proposed use in accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances.
2. A buffer area, fencing or similar screening may be required along any
or all property lines, or portions thereof, or between uses on a lot in
accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of Logan Code of
Ordinances.
§ 504 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 505
1:695

Part 6
RESIDENCE R-1A DISTRICTS
§ 601. Residence R-1A Districts. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by
Ord. 6-10-82; by Ord. 09-14-00; and by Ord. 09-14-06B]
All permitted uses, structures (including modular homes) and requirements
permitted in Residence R-1 Districts, except for the use of or placement of
two-family dwellings and/or mobile homes.
§ 602. Additional Provisions. [Ord. 02-10-00]
§ 603. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. 11-15-79; as
amended by Ord. 6-20-82; by Ord. 04-13-00; and by Ord. 09-14-00]
Off-street parking requirements shall be provided as required or permitted
in accordance with Part 10, § 1017, of this chapter.
1. Minimum Floor Area.
A. No one story dwelling with a basement shall have a usable ground
floor area which totals less than 1,050 square feet, and no one story
basementless dwelling shall have a usable ground floor area which
totals less than 1,200 square feet, exclusive of open or screened
porches.
B. All 1 1/2, two story and multi-level dwellings in a Residential R-1
district must have livable floor space of 1,500 square feet, with
sidewall heights in a 1 1/2 or multi-level dwelling not to be less
than eight feet in height. If the total livable square footage does not
meet or exceed 1,500 square feet then said structure must have
1,050 square feet on the ground floor, exclusive of open or
screened porches.
1. Upon recommendation by the Township Engineer to the Board of
Supervisors, a traffic study may be required in conjunction with any
proposed use in accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances.
2. A buffer area, fencing or similar screening may be required along any
or all property lines, or portions thereof, or between uses on a lot in
accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of Logan Code of
Ordinances.
§ 601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 603
1:697

Part 7
RESIDENCE R-2 DISTRICTS
§ 701. Permitted Buildings, Structures and Uses. [Ord. 11-15-79; as
amended by Ord. 1-23-92; and by Ord. 09-14-00]
In Residence "R-2" Districts, only the following buildings, structures and
uses shall be permitted:
§ 702. Yard, Area and Height Provisions. [Ord. 11-15-79; as
amended by Ord. 7-25-85; and by Ord. 6-27-02A]
1. All buildings, structures and uses permitted in Residence "R-1"
Districts, and mobile homes.
2. Two-family dwellings and multiple family dwellings of not more than 12
families.
3. Multiple family dwellings without limit as to the number of dwelling
units within a unified development on a property with a net land area of
not less than five acres or on a property bounded on all sides by streets
or park or other permanent public open space, provided: (1) the height
of structures shall not exceed 70 feet; (2) the coverage of the net land
area shall not exceed 20%; (3) the density of dwelling units shall not
exceed 22 units per net acre; (4) there shall be a side yard width of not
less than 12 feet in relation to any side line or lines of an adjoining
property or properties, which side yard shall be unoccupied and
unobstructed by buildings except garages, which shall not be placed
closer to a front street line than 30 feet; and (5) any garage or other
outbuilding shall be constructed in accordance with Part 4, § 404.
4. Other special structures and uses as specifically provided by Part 10,
§ 1001A, Subsections 1 through 8, inclusive.
1. Front, Rear and Side Yards, Area, Frontage and Height. The front yards,
rear yards, side yards, area, frontage and height provisions shall be the
same as required for Residence R-1 Districts. Dwellings shall not
exceed 70 feet in height. There shall be no limit on the height of
nonresidential structures except that for each foot the height of such
structure exceeds 70 feet the total width of the two side yards shall be
increased by two feet. Structures that are accessory to the principal use
of property shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
2. Minimum Floor Area.
A. No one-story dwelling with a basement shall have a usable ground
floor area which totals less than 650 square feet, and no one story
basementless dwelling shall have a usable ground floor area which
totals less than 800 square feet, exclusive of open or screened
porches.
§ 701 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 702
1:699
§ 703. Private Garages and Other Outbuildings. [Ord. 11-15-79; as
amended by Ord. 1-23-92]
No garage or other outbuildings shall be placed nearer to a side or rear
property line than 10 feet; provided, however, that the foregoing shall not
prevent the following:
§ 704. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. 04-13-00]
Off-street parking requirements shall be provided as required or permitted
in accordance with Part 10, § 1017, of this chapter.
§ 705. Additional Provisions. [Ord. 02-10-00]
B. All 1 1/2, two story and multi-level dwellings in a residential R-2
district must have a livable floor space of 800 square feet, with
sidewall heights in 1 1/2 and multi-level dwellings not to be less
than eight feet in height. If the total livable square footage of this
type of dwelling does not meet or exceed 800 square feet then said
structure must have 850 square feet on the ground floor, exclusive
of open or screened porches.
1. The building of a common or joint garage on lots adjoining at the side;
or
2. The construction of a garage as a structural part of a dwelling and a
garage so constructed may extend into an interior side yard required
under this chapter for a distance not to exceed four feet, provided it has
no window openings at the side and does not extend nearer than eight
feet to a side lot line.
1. Upon recommendation by the Township Engineer to the Board of
Supervisors, a traffic study may be required in conjunction with any
proposed use in accordance with Part 10, § 1015 of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances.
2. A buffer area, fencing or similar screening may be required along any
or all property lines, or portions thereof, or between uses on a lot in
accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of Logan Code of
Ordinances.
§ 702 LOGAN CODE § 705
1:700
Part 8
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
§ 801. Business Districts. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by Ord.
1-23-92; as amended by Ord. 04-13-00]
In "Business" Districts, only the following buildings, structures and uses
shall be permitted:
1. All buildings, structures and uses permitted in Residence "R-2"
Districts.
2. Stores, shops and business offices, restaurants, motels, hotels and
theaters; garages and gas stations, subject to the regulations of
Pennsylvania State laws and as permitted by law in all other respects;
and all other buildings, structures and uses except the following, which
are specifically prohibited:
A. Any process of manufacture, assembly or treatment which normally
constitutes a nuisance by reason of odor, noise, dust or smoke, or
which constitutes an unusual fire hazard.
B. Slaughtering poultry and animals, rendering lards and other fats
and meat smoking, whether or not the same is incidental to a retail
business.
C. Junkyards, secondhand material yards, and automobile graveyards
and disassembly plants.
D. Repair or machine shops, not including public garages, employing
more than five persons.
E. Laundries or dyeing and cleaning works with capacity for more
than 10 employees engaged in these processes.
F. Coal yards.
G. Bottling works and the brewing or distilling of liquors.
H. The storage of explosives, and the storage of crude oil or any of its
volatile products or other highly inflammable liquids in
aboveground tanks except in accordance with, State regulations
thereto.
I. Stone and monument works.
J. All buildings, structures and uses prohibited in "Industrial"
Districts.
K. Sexually Oriented Businesses.
§ 801 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 802
1:701
§ 802. Semi-Fireproof Construction. [Ord. 11-15-79]
All buildings constructed or erected in a "Business District" shall comply
with all regulations of Bulletin No. 109, Pennsylvania State Building Code,
Division of Factory and Building Inspection, Department of Industrial
Relations, entitled: "Workshops, Factories, Mercantile and Office
Buildings," and other regulations applying to the type of building to be
constructed, except when the structure is to be used for residential
purposes only, and it shall then, conform to the front, side and rear yard
requirements of Residence "R-2" Districts.
§ 803. Yard Area Setbacks. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by Ord.
02-10-00]
No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the minimum
yard areas and setbacks are provided as follows:
§ 804. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. 04-13-00]
Off-street parking requirements shall be provided as required or permitted
in accordance with Part 10, § 1017, of this chapter.
§ 805. Additional Provisions. [Ord. 02-10-00]
§ 806. Temporary Storage Facilities. [Ord. 7-25-85; as amended by
Ord. 10-27-88; as amended by Ord. 5-26-05]
Temporary storage facilities, including but not limited to, trailers or similar
facilities or structures, such as containers, which are not permanently
affixed to the real estate are permitted in a "Business" District, subject,
however, to the following regulations:
1. Front Yard. Not less than 60 feet.
2. Side Yard. Not less than 12 feet each. Where abutting upon a
Residential District, there shall be provided side yards equal to 35 feet
each.
3. Rear Yard. Not less than 25 feet, plus not less than an additional 15 feet,
thereby being 40 feet where abutting a Residential District.
4. Height provisions shall be the same as for Residence R-2 Districts.
1. Upon recommendation by the Township Engineer to the Board of
Supervisors, a traffic study may be required in conjunction with any
proposed use in accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances.
2. A buffer area, fencing or similar screening may be required along any
or all property lines, or portions thereof, or between uses on a lot in
accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of Logan Code of
Ordinances.
§ 802 LOGAN CODE § 806
1:702
1. Trailers may be used to transport goods, inventory, equipment and
other materials into, out of or through Business Districts.
2. Trailers or other temporary structures used in conjunction with the
construction of buildings or other improvements shall be permitted
during the period of construction.
3. Trailers for transient businesses may be placed for a period of less than
30 days.
4. A zoning permit must be obtained for each new temporary storage
facility and the following criteria must be met:
A. The temporary storage facilities must not be on wheels.
B. The temporary storage facilities must meet the setbacks of the
business district.
C. The temporary storage facilities must not interfere with traffic
circulation.
D. The temporary storage facilities must not interfere with required
parking for the business.
E. If the temporary storage facilities can be seen from the public
right-of-way, as determined by the Zoning Officer, a fence must be
constructed which would obstruct the view of the facility.
5. A building permit must be obtained for each temporary storage facility.
The building permit fee is in accordance with the Logan Township fee
schedule.
6. On a yearly basis, a zoning permit must be obtained. The fee for this
zoning permit is in accordance with the Logan Township fee schedule.
7. Existing Temporary Storage Facilities, as of the date of adoption of this
chapter, will be exempt from the requirement to obtain a zoning permit
and meet the stated criteria. However, all existing temporary storage
facilities will be required to pay a temporary storage facility fee in
accordance with the Township's adopted fee schedule. If any business,
which has existing temporary storage facilities, moves the existing
facilities, or adds new facilities, the zoning permit and criteria as
outlined in this chapter will apply to the new or moved facilities.
§ 806 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 806
1:703

Part 9
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
§ 901. Industrial Districts. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by Ord.
04-13-00; by Ord. 05-24-01; and by Ord. 9-13-01]
In "Industrial Districts" there shall be permitted all buildings, structures
and uses permitted in any of the other districts, and all other buildings,
structures and uses (however, Communications Towers shall be subject to
the Standards for Communications Towers as a special exception subject to
the provisions of both § 1001A and § 1019), except the following, which are
specifically prohibited:
§ 902. Off-Street Parking, Off-Street Parking Requirements.
(Reserved)
1. Any process of assembly, manufacture or treatment constituting a
nuisance by reason of smoke, odor, dust or noise and including, but not
limited to, such things as the manufacture or refining of asphalt; blast
furnaces; the manufacture or processing of cork, fertilizer, linoleum or
oilcloth and glue or gelatin; the tanning of hides and skins; abattoirs
and slaughter houses (except for poultry); and the manufacture of
paint, oil and varnish.
2. Any process of assembly, manufacture or treatment constituting a
hazardous use, including, but not limited to such things as: the
manufacture or bulk storage of fireworks and explosives; and the
manufacture of illuminating gas and other explosive or poisonous
gases, except as may be incidental to a permitted industrial process.
3. The storage of crude oil or any of its volatile products or other highly
inflammable liquids in aboveground tanks except in accordance with
State regulations in respect thereto, and provided further that all
aboveground tanks having a capacity of 10,000 gallons or more shall be
properly diked with dikes having a capacity equal to 1 1/2 times the
capacity of the tank or tanks surrounded.
4. Junkyards, automobile graveyards or disassembly plants and the
storage of secondhand materials for resale except entirely within a solid
enclosure.
5. The storage, bailing or treatment of junk, iron, rags, bottles or scrap
paper, except within a building.
6. Strip mining for mineral, sand, gravel, clay, limestone or sandstone
covered by State Regulations.
7. Sexually Oriented Businesses.
§ 901 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 903
1:705
§ 903. Yard Area Setbacks. [Ord. 02-10-00]
No building or structure shall be erected or enlarged unless the following
yards are provided and maintained in connection with such building,
structure or enlargement:
§ 904. Additional Provisions. [Ord. 02-10-00; as amended by Ord.
12-11-03]
1. Front Yard - Not less than 60 feet.
2. Side Yard - Not less than 15 feet. When abutting a street, not less than
35 feet. When abutting a Residential District or Business District, not
less than 50 feet.
3. Rear Yard - Not less than 35 feet. When abutting a street, not less than
35 feet. When abutting a Residential District or Business District, not
less than 50 feet.
4. Height provisions shall be the same as for Residence R-2 Districts.
1. Upon recommendation by the Township Engineer to the Board of
Supervisors, a traffic study may be required in conjunction with any
proposed use in accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances.
2. A buffer area, fencing or similar screening may be required along any
or all property lines, or portions thereof, or between uses on a lot in
accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of Logan Code of
Ordinances.
3. Structures to be used for residential purposes only within said district
shall conform to the front, side and rear yard requirements of
Residence R-2 Districts.
§ 903 LOGAN CODE § 904
1:706
Part 9.5
Institutional Districts
§ 901.5. Purpose. [Ord. 04-13-00; as amended by Ord. 09-14-00; by
Ord. 9-13-01; by Ord. 12-11-03; by Ord. 09-24-09; and by Ord.
03-10-11A]
It is the purpose and intent of this District to make provisions for
institutional uses; and to encourage a harmonious pattern of development
which can mutually benefit the Township and these institutions.
§ 902.5. Permitted Uses. [Ord. 04-13-00; as amended by Ord.
09-14-00; by Ord. 9-13-01; by Ord. 12-11-03; by Ord. 09-24-09; and
by Ord. 03-10-11A]
1. Public and private schools, colleges and universities and the following
related uses and structures:
A. Dormitories.
B. Cafeterias and snack bars owned by or operated in conjunction
with the school, college and/or university.
C. Ancillary service facilities selling or providing books, educational
supplies, art supplies, athletic supplies, or other incidental clothing
or food items owned by or operated in conjunction with the school,
college and/or university.
D. Gymnasiums, stadiums, playing fields, courts, and rinks and
swimming and diving facilities, and other athletic facilities.
E. Accessory uses on the same lot or tract with and customarily
incidental to any of the foregoing permitted uses owned by or
operated in conjunction with the school, college and/or university.
F. All uses and/or structures located on real estate owned by any
public and/or private school, college and/or university may be
developed, owned, leased and/or maintained by persons and/or
entities other than the public and/or private school, college and/or
university.
2. Public and private hospitals, sanitariums, mental or health center,
nursing home, or similar health facility.
3. Institution or home for children, the aged, the indigent, or the
handicapped.
4. Governmental uses and structures; except garages, warehouses, and
storage yards.
5. Child day care centers.
6. Public libraries, community centers, and museums.
§ 901.5 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 902.5
1:707
§ 903.5. Prohibited Uses. [Ord. 04-13-00; as amended by Ord.
09-14-00; by Ord. 9-13-01; by Ord. 12-11-03; by Ord. 09-24-09; and
by Ord. 03-10-11A]
It is understood that any use not complying with the specifications of this
Part is prohibited.
§ 904.5. Height Regulations. [Ord. 04-13-00; as amended by Ord.
09-14-00; by Ord. 9-13-01; by Ord. 12-11-03; by Ord. 09-24-09; and
by Ord. 03-10-11A]
The maximum height of a building shall be the same as for Residence R-2
Districts.
§ 905.5. Area Regulations. [Ord. 04-13-00; as amended by Ord.
09-14-00; by Ord. 9-13-01; by Ord. 12-11-03; by Ord. 09-24-09; and
by Ord. 03-10-11A]
7. Churches and similar places of worship, parish houses, and convents.
8. Communications antennas mounted on an existing public utility
transmission tower, building or other structure, and communications
equipment buildings subject to the regulations governing
communications antennas and communications equipment buildings at
§ 1018.
9. A solar collection system subject to the general conditions and
standards set forth in Part 10, § 1021, of this Chapter 27.
1. Yard Area Setbacks for Buildings. No building or structure shall be
erected or enlarged unless the minimum yard areas and setbacks are
provided as follows:
A. Front Yard - Not less than 60 feet.
B. Side Yard - Not less than 12 feet each. Where abutting upon a
Residence District, there shall be provided side yards equal to 35
feet each.
C. Rear Yard - Not less than 25 feet, plus not less than an additional 15
feet, thereby being 40 feet where abutting a Residence District.
2. Yard Area Setbacks for Parking Areas.
A. No parking area shall be constructed or enlarged unless the
minimum setback is 70 feet from the property line of adjoining
residentially zoned property.
B. Parking areas may be constructed or enlarged with a minimum
setback of 10 feet from any public road right-of-way or property
line of any nonresidentially zoned property.
§ 902.5 LOGAN CODE § 906.5
1:708
§ 906.5. Coverage Regulations. [Ord. 04-13-00; as amended by Ord.
09-14-00; by Ord. 9-13-01; by Ord. 12-11-03; by Ord. 09-24-09; and
by Ord. 03-10-11A]
The lot coverage shall be no more than 40%.
§ 907.5. Off-Street Parking. [Ord. 04-13-00; as amended by Ord.
09-14-00; by Ord. 9-13-01; by Ord. 12-11-03; by Ord. 09-24-09; and
by Ord. 03-10-11A]
Off-street parking requirements shall be provided as required or permitted
in accordance with Part 10, § 1017, of this chapter.
§ 908.5. Additional Provisions. [Ord. 04-13-00; as amended by Ord.
09-14-00; by Ord. 9-13-01; by Ord. 12-11-03; by Ord. 09-24-09; and
by Ord. 03-10-11A]
1. Upon recommendation by the Township Engineer to the Board of
Supervisors, a traffic study may be required in conjunction with any
proposed use in accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of
Logan Code of Ordinances.
2. A buffer area, fencing or similar screening may be required along any
or all property lines, or portions thereof, or between uses on a lot in
accordance with Part 10, § 1015, of the Township of Logan Code of
Ordinances.
3. Structures to be used for residential purposes only within said district
shall conform to the front, side and rear yard requirements of
Residence R-2 Districts.
§ 906.5 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 908.5
1:709

Part 10
EXCEPTIONS AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS
§ 1001. Special Uses Permitted. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by Ord.
6-16-83; by Ord. 1-23-92; by Ord. 04-13-00; by Ord. 09-14-00; by
Ord. 9-13-01; by Ord. 6-27-02A; and by Ord. 11-13-08]
The Zoning Hearing Board, as hereinafter created, may authorize the
issuance of a permit for any of the following buildings or uses:
A. In Agricultural Districts or as set forth in specified residence districts:
(1) A nursing home or hospital.
(2) A clubhouse without features likely to occasion a nuisance in a
residential neighborhood by reason of noise or other objectionable
characteristics.
(3) An air landing field and its necessary appurtenances.
(4) A public or quasi-public building or private athletic field.
(5) Animal cemeteries.
(6) Boarding house, rooming house or dormitory, as defined in Part 3
hereof.
(7) Student home for no more than three students located in a dwelling
with a floor area of at least 850 square feet, exclusive of basements,
garages and accessory buildings. A special exception authorizing a
student home shall expire without further action by the Township
unless the use is registered on a yearly basis with the Township.
Students homes shall meet the area and width regulation for
single-family dwelling, except that student homes are not
permitted in structures designed as townhouses and/or row houses.
(8) Mobile Home Park.
(9) Communications Towers and Communication Equipment Buildings
subject to the "Standards For Communications Towers as Special
Exceptions" as set forth in § 1019 hereof.
(10)Home Occupations. Home occupations, as defined, shall be subject
to and shall comply with the following provisions and regulations:
(a) The area occupied by the home occupation shall not exceed
more than 25% of the total floor area, exclusive of porches and
garages, or 400 square feet, whichever is the lesser.
[1] There shall be no displays on the premises visible from the
outside.
[2] Off-street parking requirements shall be as prescribed in
this chapter, and the computation of required off-street
§ 1001 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1001
1:711
parking shall apply to the area devoted to the home
occupation and shall be in addition to those for the
residential use. The area devoted to off-street parking for
the home occupation shall also comply with the buffer area
regulations of this chapter.
[3] There shall be no exterior evidence of such use.
(b) Such special permits, however, may be authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board only upon satisfaction in each instance
of such conditions as to general character, height, and use of
structure, the provision of surrounding open space and
treatment of the grounds, and as to street capacity and use as
in the opinion of the Board may be necessary to safeguard
public health, comfort and convenience, and as may be
required for the preservation of the general character of the
neighborhood in which such building is to be placed or such
use is to be conducted.
B. In Agricultural A-1 Districts:
(1) Sexually Oriented Businesses. The Zoning Hearing Board, as
hereinafter created, may authorize the issuance of a permit for
Sexually Oriented Businesses if the said Businesses comply with
the requirements of Chapter 13, Part 6, Regulating the Time,
Manner and Place of Sexually Oriented Businesses as well as
comply with the following:
(a) A sexually oriented business shall not be located within 1,000
feet of a church; a public or private pre-elementary, elementary
or secondary school; a public library; a child care facility or
nursery school; a public park adjacent to any residence
district; a child-oriented business; or the boundary of any
residence district.
(b) A sexually oriented business shall not be located within 1,000
feet of another sexually oriented business.
(c) For the purpose of § 1001B(1)(a) of this Part 10, measurement
shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building
or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually
oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of
the premises of a church, public or private pre-elementary,
elementary, or secondary school, public library, child care
facility, child-oriented business, or nursery school; to the
nearest boundary of an affected public park; or to the nearest
boundary of any residence district.
(d) For purposes of § 1001B(1)(b) of this Part 10, the distance
between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
§ 1001 LOGAN CODE § 1001
1:712
structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the
structure in which each business is located.
(e) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the date of
enactment of this Part that is in violation of § 1001B(1)(a) or (b)
of this Part 10 shall be deemed a nonconforming use.
(f) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a
conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the
subsequent location of a church, public or private preelementary,
elementary or secondary school, public library,
child care facility, child-oriented business, nursery school or
public park or residence district within 1,000 feet of the
sexually oriented business.
(g) Section 1001B(1)(a) through (f) of this Part 10 does not apply
to modeling classes operated:
[1] By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation;
[2] By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
[3] In a structure:
[a] Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a
nude person is available for viewing; and
[b] Where, in order to participate in a class, a student
must enroll at least three days in advance of the class;
and
[c] Where no more than one nude model is on the
premises any one time.
(2) Campgrounds and/or Commercial Off-Road Vehicle Park. The
Zoning Hearing Board may authorize the issuance of a permit for
Campgrounds and/or Commercial Off-Road Vehicle Parks if the said
entities comply with the requirements of the Agriculture A-1
Zoning District as well as comply with the following:
(a) The type and character of the land uses adjacent to and in the
immediate area of the facility.
(b) The effect of the facility on water and sewer services, storm
water drainage, road capacity and volume of vehicle traffic and
traffic safety and circulation.
§ 1001 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1001
1:713
§ 1002. Yard Exceptions. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by Ord.
1-23-92]
(c) The effect of the facility on police and fire services and other
public safety and emergency services.
(d) The effect of the facility on the protection and preservation of
natural features and natural resources.
(e) The impact of the facility in relation to other pertinent land use
factors including, but not limited to, the view from adjacent
and nearby lands; off-street parking and loading; refuse
removal and similar services; control of noise, glare and
vibration; signs; outdoor lighting; and whether the facility
would be consistent with the intent and purposes of the
ordinance.
C. Separation Requirements.
(1) No residential use authorized under § 1001, Subsection A, above
shall be permitted if any other residential use listed in that
subsection or any nonconforming use is located in any residential
zoning district and within 500 feet from another measured by the
shortest distance between the lot on which the proposed use will be
located and the lot or lots which contain the existing use.
(2) Legislative intent. Certain uses in the various zoning districts,
while compatible with other lawful uses, can be detrimental to the
quiet use and enjoyment by others of their property if concentrated
in the same neighborhood. The Board of Supervisors has
determined that undue concentration can be avoided by mandating
a minimum distance of separation between these uses. Thus the
essential nature of the various districts can be maintained while
providing a broad level of inclusion for the variety of uses that
enrich our community.
1. For large scale housing developments:
A. Upon presentation to the Zoning Hearing Board of a site plan
showing location of buildings, streets, yards and other open spaces,
for the unified development of an area bounded on all sides by
street or park or other permanent public open space, the Board
may waive all side and rear yard requirements with respect to such
development, and direct the Zoning Officer to issue permits in
accordance with the approved plan thereof, provided:
(1) That open space equal to or greater than that required under
the yard restrictions of the district in which the proposed
development is to be located is otherwise furnished within the
tract in such manner as to give equally good access of light and
air to individual dwellings; and
§ 1001 LOGAN CODE § 1002
1:714
§ 1003. Alteration of Existing Dwellings. [Ord. 11-15-79; as
amended by Ord. 1-23-92]
Nothing herein shall prevent alteration of a single-family dwelling, existing
at the time of enactment of this chapter, in a Residence "R-2" District for
multiple family dwelling (as defined herein) and use, provided:
§ 1004. Public Garages and Gas Filling Stations. [Ord. 11-15-79]
(2) That the total coverage of the net land area (exclusive of
streets) by buildings shall not exceed 20% in a Residence R-1
District or 25% in a Residence R-2 District, or 30% in any other
district.
2. For closely built-up areas:
A. Where there is at the time of the enactment of this chapter a lot 40
feet or less in width, in a Residence District, pocketed by buildings
existing on the two lots adjoining at the side, both being in other
ownership, it shall be permitted to build or rebuild a single-family
dwelling upon such lot without requirement of side yards wider
than the respective adjacent side yards existing on the adjoining
lots.
1. That after alteration of building, the area of lot upon which the building
is located amounts to not less than 1,000 square feet for each dwelling
unit;
2. That no dwelling unit shall have less total floor area than 600 square
feet;
3. That no living quarters are placed in a basement or in any other room or
space having less than six feet of ceiling clearance above the average
outside ground level; and
4. That there is not exterior alteration of the building except as may be
necessary for safety and for improved access to the building.
1. No public garage repair space shall have an opening in roof or walls
within 15 feet of any side property line, and: (1) in Business Districts, no
public garage, or private garage accommodating more than five cars, or
gas filling station shall have a vehicular entrance upon the same side of
the street with, and closer to, an entrance to a public school, church,
hospital, public park, playground, or fire station, than 100 feet, except
that this shall not apply if a street 50 feet wide or wider intervenes
between such garage or gas filling station entrance and the entrance to
such public place, and (2) in all other districts, no such garage or gas
filling station entrance shall be closer to an entrance to such a public
place than 200 feet whether or not on the same side of the street, and
whether or not there is an intervening street, and said measurement
shall be taken as the shortest distance between such entrances, across
the street if the entrances are upon opposite sides of the street, and
§ 1002 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1004
1:715
§ 1005. (Reserved) [Ord. 07-12-07]
§ 1006. Buildings of Public Utility Corporations. [Ord. 11-15-79]
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any existing or proposed building
or extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation if,
upon petition of the corporation, the Public Utility Commission shall after a
public hearing decide that the present or proposed situation of the building
in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the
public.
§ 1007. Fire Escapes. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by Ord. 12-11-03]
Fire escapes may project into a required side yard not more than 1/3 of its
width, and not more than four feet in any case. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the projection of an open fireproof fire escape or stairway into
a rear or side yard for a distance not to exceed eight feet.
§ 1008. Height Exceptions. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by Ord.
9-13-01]
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted to limit or restrict the height
of a church spire, belfry, clock tower, chimney flue, water tower, elevator
bulkhead, State tower, scenery lift or similar structures. These height
exceptions shall not apply to any communications antennas or
communications towers.
§ 1009. Continuance of Non-Conforming Uses. [Ord. 11-15-79; as
amended by Ord. 09-24-09]
Uses, not conforming to the regulations of the district in which they are
located at the time of enactment of this chapter, shall be known and
regarded as nonconforming.
along the street frontage if both entrances are on the same side of the
street or within the same city block.
2. All gas filling stations shall be so arranged, and all gasoline pumps shall
be so placed as to permit all servicing on the premises and outside the
public way; and no gasoline pump shall be placed closer to a side
property line than 10 feet.
1. A nonconforming building or use may be continued subsequent to
adoption of this chapter provided there shall thereafter be no structural
extension or addition to such nonconforming building or use exceeding:
50% of the cubical contents of the building or buildings as existing at
the time of enactment of this chapter, or 50% of the existing service
capacity if the use is conducted all or partly in the open. Subsequent to
such allowable addition to building or expansion of use, there shall be
no further additions or expansion except in accordance with the
§ 1004 LOGAN CODE § 1009
1:716
§ 1010. Revision of Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses. [Ord.
11-15-79; as amended by Ord. 1-23-92]
§ 1011. Permanence of Yards and Other Open Spaces. [Ord.
11-15-79]
No space applied under this chapter to satisfy the yard requirements in
relation to any building, whether now or subsequently built, shall be
regulations for the district in which such nonconforming building or use
is located.
2. A nonconforming use may not be changed to another nonconforming
use disallowed by this chapter in a district in which the original
nonconforming use would be permitted.
3. All nonconforming uses, structures and lots, which were in existence at
the time of the enactment of this chapter and/or any amendment
thereto, may be continued, subject to the provisions set forth in this
chapter. The Zoning Officer shall identify properties and maintain a file
for the registration of nonconforming uses, structures and lots. The
owner of any nonconforming structure or lot, or the owner who
maintains or allows any nonconforming use, may apply for a Certificate
of Nonconformity on forms prepared by the Zoning Officer. The Zoning
Officer shall investigate each request for a Certificate of Nonconformity
to determine the existence and extent of the nonconformity. Upon
determining that such nonconformity exists, the Zoning Officer shall
prepare a report describing the nature and extent of the nonconformity.
If no valid nonconformity is determined to exist, the Zoning Officer shall
make a report of the results of the Zoning Officer's investigation. Such
report shall constitute a Certificate of Nonconformity to the extent such
a valid nonconformity is reported to exist and is described. A copy of
such report and determination shall be sent to the applying owner and
to any other interested party. A copy of such report shall be placed in
the registration file, regardless of the determination. Any person
aggrieved by the report shall have a right to appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board as from the decision of the Zoning Officer.
1. A nonconforming building or use may not be altered, rebuilt or
resumed, except in conformity with the regulations for the district in
which it is located if:
A. It has once been changed to a conforming use;
B. Subsequent to the enactment of this chapter it has been
discontinued for a consecutive period of one year or more, which
shall be deemed an abandonment of the nonconforming use.
2. The provisions in this subsection shall-not apply in respect to
nonconformity in side and rear yards.
§ 1009 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1011
1:717
counted as part of a yard or required open space in relation to any other
building.
§ 1012. Temporary Permits. [Ord. 11-15-79; as amended by Ord.
1-23-92]
Temporary permits may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board for
a period not to exceed one year, for nonconforming uses incidental to
housing any construction projects and including such structures and uses as
storage of building supplies and machinery, and a real estate office located
on the tract being offered for sale; provided such permits are issued only
upon agreement by the owner to remove the structure or structures upon
expiration of permit. Such permits are annually renewable over a period not
to exceed three years.
§ 1013. Fencing of Retention Basins or Ponds. [Ord. 7-25-85; Ord.
10-31D-85]
The owner of the real estate upon which there is located a retention basin
or pond shall erect and maintain a fence or barrier enclosing said retention
basin or pond. Said fence shall be constructed of chain link, or other
similar material as may be approved by the Board of Supervisors, with a
minimum height of six feet. No fence shall be constructed in a manner so
as to obstruct the line of vision of the operators of motor vehicles at the
intersection of any street or road.
§ 1014. Nonconforming Buildings and/or Structures. [Ord. 3-19-98;
as amended by Ord. 01-22-09]
1. Nonconforming Duplexes, Triplexes and Townhouses/Row Houses. Any
and all Duplex, Triplex or Townhouse/Row House structures/buildings
which do not comply, as of January 1, 1998, with the side yard setbacks
as well as area and frontage regulations of the zoning district in which
they are located, shall be regarded as permitted nonconforming
structures/buildings as follows:
A. A nonconforming Duplex, Triplex and/or Townhouse/Row House
structure/building shall not be deemed to be violative of the
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located and may be
sold, gifted and/or otherwise conveyed without being in violation of
said regulations. For purposes of this Chapter 27, a Duplex and
Triplex structure/building shall be defined as a structure under a
single roof with or without firewall partitions or party walls,
designed for occupancy by or to be occupied by two or three
households respectively living as families wherein each such
section housing said households has a separate deed for each such
section and may be conveyed separately. For purposes of this
Chapter 27, a Townhouse shall have the same meaning as a Row
House as defined herein with the addition that each such Row
§ 1011 LOGAN CODE § 1014
1:718
§ 1015. Traffic Studies and Buffer Areas. [Ord. 02-10-00]
House has a separate deed for each such structure/building and
may be conveyed separately.
B. The continuance and/or revision of said nonconforming Duplex,
Triplex and/or Townhouse/Row House structure/building shall
comply with the provisions set forth in Part 10, 1009 and 1010, of
this Chapter 27 and any other applicable law.
2. Other Nonconforming Buildings and/or Structures. Any and all
Buildings and/or Structures which do not comply, as of March 14, 2006,
with the setback regulations of the zoning district in which they are
located shall be regarded as permitted nonconforming structures and/
or buildings as follows:
A. A nonconforming Building and/or Structure shall not be deemed to
be violative of the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located as to setback requirements only if said nonconforming
building or structure was in existence as of March 14, 2006, and
the same appears on the Township's ortho-photographs taken on
that date and the same is otherwise in compliance with other
applicable law.
B. The continuance and/or revision of said nonconforming Building
and/or structure shall comply with the provisions set forth in Part
10, §§ 1009 and 1010, of this Chapter 27 and any other applicable
law.
1. Traffic Study.
A. Applicability. Any use within any district may be required to provide
a traffic study where the Township determines it is necessary for
the safety and welfare of Township residents using the streets in
the area of the proposed use.
B. General Requirements. The traffic study shall include a
comparative analysis of present capacity of street(s) adjacent to the
proposed use with potential capacity and volumes generated by the
proposed use, together with necessary points of access to off-street
parking and loading. Traffic data available from available sources
should be utilized including, but not limited to any information from
the Blair County Planning Commission and the Logan Township
Municipal Office. Additionally, traffic studies shall include such
other requirements as deemed necessary by the Township
Engineer.
2. Buffer Areas.
A. Applicability. Any use within any district may be required to provide
a buffer area where the Township determines it is necessary to
screen or block vision, noise or other negative by-products
§ 1014 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1015
1:719
associated with that use. It may be required to separate an intense
use such as a business or industry from a less intense use such
as a single-family residence. The exact placement and character
of the buffer area shall be established by the Township subject to
following general requirements.
B. General Requirements.
(1) A buffer area shall provide a year-round visual screen. The
buffer area may consist of one or a combination of the
following:
(a) Native species of evergreen and deciduous plant material;
(b) A natural or artificial land form or wooded area, provided
such area is preserved from future development by
easement, deed restriction, covenant or similar measure;
or
(c) An exposed fence or wall between five and eight feet in
height with at least 60% of the surface being opaque with
appropriate landscaping as determined by the Township
based on the objectives and requirements of the section.
(2) Unless otherwise specified by this chapter, the required depth
of any buffer area shall be determined by the Township based
on the objectives and requirements of this section.
(3) When a planted buffer is utilized, it shall consist of a mix of
native species of evergreen and deciduous plant materials. At
the time of planting, the evergreen material shall be sufficient
to screen the property visually and shall be a minimum of five
feet in height (at the time of planting). The remainder of the
plantings may be of varying lesser heights.
(4) When a fence, wall or structure is used, it shall be designed to
be architecturally compatible with adjacent buildings, and,
comply with all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
(5) The property owner shall be responsible for the continuing
maintenance of all buffer areas, including the replacement of
any dead plant material. Buffer areas shall be kept clean of all
debris, rubbish, weeds and tall grass.
(6) No structure shall be permitted within a required buffer area,
except an authorized fence or wall, nor shall a buffer area be
used for parking, loading, vehicular circulation, such as a
private road, storage or any other purpose.
(7) The buffer area shall be continuous along property lines where
they are required, except for points of vehicular or pedestrian
access. Clear sight distances at all street and driveway
intersections shall be maintained.
§ 1015 LOGAN CODE § 1015
1:720
§ 1016. Screening of Obtrusive Uses. [Ord. 02-10-00; as amended by
Ord. 09-14-00]
In any Business, Industrial and/or Institutional District, and in any Multiple
Family Dwelling use, all refuse, garbage, similar solid waste and recyclables
shall be enclosed in a masonry or equivalent structure of sufficient height,
width and depth to prevent dispersal of the solid waste in the vicinity with a
solid gate sufficient to conceal the contents. In addition, in all said Districts
and in conjunction with said use, parking, loading areas or another visually
obtrusive uses shall be screened from view of the adjacent uses, properties
or public streets as determined by the Township based upon the objectives
and requirements of this part.
§ 1017. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. 04-13-00; as
amended by Ord. 09-14-00; by Ord. 11-09-00; and by Ord. 6-27-02A]
(8) The Township may authorize a modification in the otherwise
applicable buffer area requirements where it determines that:
(a) A greater buffer area, or an element thereof, is required to
accomplish the purposes of this chapter; or
(b) The changes in elevation between abutting properties or
other natural features exist such that they decrease or
eliminate the need for the buffer area at the points where
the buffer area is required by this chapter.
1. Application.
A. Unless specifically exempted by the provisions of this Part, all
structures built and all uses established hereafter shall provide offstreet
parking areas in accordance with this Part. This Part shall
also be applicable to any tract or area of land used for parking
vehicles regardless of being for profit or not for profit.
B. When an existing structure or use is expanded, parking spaces for
the area or capacity of such expansion shall be required in
accordance with this Part.
C. An expansion or alteration of an existing use, or a subdivision or
combination of zoning lots, shall not result in the elimination of any
existing required off-street parking spaces.
2. General Provisions.
A. Open Parking: Open-air parking areas shall be located on a zoning
lot in accordance with the provisions of the district regulations.
B. Enclosed Parking: Enclosed parking facilities containing off-street
parking shall be subject to the area and bulk requirements
applicable in the district in which they are located, unless
otherwise specified in this Part.
§ 1015 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1017
1:721
C. Location: Required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the
same zoning lot as the structure or use that they serve unless a
joint use or off-site parking plan is approved (see Subsection H or I
below).
D. Design and Maintenance:
(1) Size. The minimum dimensions for a conventional parking
space will be nine feet in width by 18 feet in length, exclusive
of curbs and maneuvering space. For a handicapped parking
space, the size shall be 12.5 feet in width by 20 feet in length.
(2) Design. Each parking space shall open directly onto an aisle or
driveway with a minimum dimension of not less than 25 feet.
Driveways and aisles for other than single, two-family or
individual townhouse dwellings shall be designed so that each
vehicle may have ingress and egress from the space without
moving any other vehicle. All access ways shall be designed so
as to provide safe exit and entrance from the public street, in
accordance with applicable Township standards or PennDOT
specifications.
(3) Surfacing. All parking areas, including those for family
dwellings, shall be graded and paved or otherwise improved
with an all-weather, dustless material of asphalt, concrete,
grouted brick, paving blocks or similar materials approved by
the Township.
(4) Striping. Parking areas shall be striped to outline the entire
parking space with a durable paint and maintained in said
manner.
(5) Signs. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, no signs shall
be displayed in any parking area within any residence district,
except as may be necessary for the orderly use of the parking
facilities.
(6) Storm Water. Adequate storm water drainage facilities shall be
installed in order to insure that storm water does not flow onto
abutting property or abutting sidewalks in such a way or
quantity that pedestrians using the sidewalk would be
detrimentally affected or inconvenienced.
(7) Maintenance. Parking spaces shall be kept clean of debris,
refuse and garbage and maintained so as to be free of potholes
and other defects which might constitute danger to persons or
property.
E. Landscaping: In business, industrial and institutional districts and
in any multifamily dwelling use, all open off-street parking areas
containing more than 15 parking spaces shall have a three-foot
minimum landscaped area on each side in accordance with the
§ 1017 LOGAN CODE § 1017
1:722
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. Parking areas shall
be arranged and designed so as to prevent damage to, or intrusion
into, such landscaping. Clear sight triangles, as defined by this
Part, shall be maintained. Open parking areas for 50 or more cars
shall be interspersed with landform or other appropriate landscape
or planted area.
F. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas
and driveways shall be directed away from residential properties or
public streets in such a way as not to interfere with such uses, and
all such lighting shall be arranged so as to protect the street or
highway and adjoining property from direct glare or hazardous
interference of any kind. Any luminary shall be equipped with some
type of glare shielding device approved by the Zoning Officer. The
height of any luminary shall not exceed 25 feet in a residential or
agricultural zone, and 50 feet in all other zoning districts. The
lighting system shall furnish minimally an average of two foot
candles during hours of operation.
G. Repair and Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any
kind shall be permitted in association with any off-street parking
facility, other than for a single- or two-family dwelling.
H. Joint Use of Parking Spaces:
(1) Two or more uses may share a common parking area provided
the total spaces equal or exceed the sum of the spaces required
for each use individually. However, the Board of Supervisors
may approve a joint parking plan which permits a reduction in
this total subject to the following:
(a) A written report shall be prepared by the applicant which
clearly demonstrates that one or more uses require
parking at times when other uses in the building or
complex are not normally in operation and, therefore, the
uses could share parking, thus reducing the total spaces
that otherwise would be required for all uses.
(b) Not more than 50% of the required parking spaces for any
one use shall be supplied jointly with other uses, except
that up to 100% of the spaces for a place of worship or
school may be supplied jointly with another use.
(c) All uses shall be located within 350 feet of the joint
parking spaces and connected by safe pedestrian access.
(d) A written agreement shall be executed with the Township
assuring the continued availability of the joint parking
spaces to all proposed uses.
(2) Any change or expansion of the uses sharing the joint parking
area shall require a new review by the Board of Supervisors
§ 1017 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1017
1:723
and may result in additional spaces being required and a
revised agreement with the Township.
(3) Continued compliance with approved joint parking plan is a
condition of occupancy; any violation thereof may result in the
suspension or revocation of the occupancy.
I. Off-site Parking Facilities: The Board of Supervisors may approve a
plan for providing all or some of the required off-street parking
spaces on a lot other than where the principal use is located,
provided that:
(1) Both lots are held in the same ownership, or a lease has been
executed for the spaces which guarantees their availability for
as long as the use exists. Evidence of ownership or a copy of
the lease shall be filed with the Township.
(2) The off-site parking spaces are located within 350 feet distance
from the principal use and connected by a safe pedestrian
walkway.
(3) The continued availability of the approved off-site parking shall
be a condition of occupancy for the principal use which they
serve; any violation thereof may result in the suspension or
revocation of the principal user's occupancy.
J. Parking for Recreational Vehicles: A recreational vehicle shall be
parked or stored in an off-street parking space.
3. Required Spaces by Type of Use.
A. When calculating the required number of spaces, a fractional space
of 1/2 or over shall be considered an entire space while a fraction
below 1/2 may be disregarded.
B. In the case of a single or two-family residence or townhouse unit, a
driveway for the dwelling may count as one off-street parking
space, provided such parking does not block access to parking for
another dwelling.
C. Wherever employee parking is required by this section, it shall be
calculated based on the number of employees on a peak shift.
D. The following shall be the minimum number of parking spaces
required; additional spaces may be required by the Township as a
result of the development application review.
Land Use Requirement
Agricultural service
business
1 space per each 400 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Art gallery or art
museum
1.2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
§ 1017 LOGAN CODE § 1017
1:724
Land Use Requirement
Auditorium or
noncommercial movie
theater
1 space per each 4 fixed seats or 6 linear
feet of fixed benches; if there is no fixed
seating, 1 space for each 75 square feet
of enclosed gross floor area
Automobile parts store 1 space per each 300 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Automobile repair
shop
1 space per each service bay, a service
bay shall not count as a parking space
Automobile sales 1 space per each 600 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area + 1 space for
each 2,000 square feet of outside display
area + 100% of the additional parking
spaces required by this table for other
land uses on the same lot (e.g., an
automobile repair shop); 170 square feet
of lot area shall be provided for each
vehicle stored on the premises
Bait shop 1 space per each 300 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Bakery 1 space per each 500 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area for the first
25,000 square feet of gross floor area + 1
space per each 650 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area for the next
25,000 square feet + 1 space per each
800 square feet of enclosed gross floor
area over 50,000 square feet
Bank or financial
institution
1 space per each 300 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area + 3 reserved
waiting spaces of not less than 20 feet in
length shall be provided at each drive-in
window
Bar, tavern, night club,
dance hall
1 space per each 100 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Basketball court,
tennis court,
racquetball court
5 spaces per each court or 1 space per
each 3 spectator seats, whichever is
greater
Beauty parlor, barber
shop
1 space per each 200 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Bed and breakfast
establishment
1 space per guest bedroom + 2 spaces
for permanent residents
Beverage distributor 1 space per each 350 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
§ 1017 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1017
1:725
Land Use Requirement
Bicycle repair shop 1 space per each 350 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Bookstore 1 space per each 250 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Bowling alley 3 spaces per each alley + 50% of the
additional parking spaces required by
this table for other land uses on the
premises (e.g., restaurant, bar)
Building, plumbing,
welding, and/or
heating supplies store
1 space per each 500 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area used for display
+ 1 space per each 1,000 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area of warehouse
area + 1 space for each company vehicle
Campground 1 space per campsite
Car wash 1 space per each employee + storage
areas for at least 5 times the number of
cars that can be in the wash process at
any 1 time
Cemetery 1 space per employee
Clubs, lodges 1 space per each 300 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Community center 1 space per each 250 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Contractor's yard 1 space per each 2,000 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area or 1 space per
employee, whichever is more
Convalescent center,
nursing home
1 space per each 600 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Convenience store 1 space per each 300 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area + 80% of the
additional parking spaces required by
this table for other land uses on the same
premises (e.g., gasoline station)
Convent, monastery 1 space per each 1,000 square feet of
enclosed religious residence
Correctional facility 1 space per employee + 1 space per
every 25 inmates of maximum capacity
Crematorium 1 space per every 4 seats of chapel
capacity + 1 space per each 3 employees
Data processing
facility
1 space per 300 square feet of enclosed
gross floor area
§ 1017 LOGAN CODE § 1017
1:726
Land Use Requirement
Day care center 2 spaces for each 3 teachers, employees,
or administrators
Dormitories 1 space per every 3 beds occupied at
maximum capacity
Dry cleaning
establishment
1 space per each 300 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Emergency medical or
ambulance service
1 space per employee + 1 space for each
motor vehicle operated in connection
with the service
Employment agency 1 space per 200 square feet of enclosed
gross floor area
Exterminator 1 space per 800 square feet of enclosed
gross floor area
Farm (agricultural or
silvicultural)
1 space per employee
Fire or police station 1 space per each 2 employees
Food catering facility 1 space per each employee
Funeral home,
mortuary
1 space per 1,000 square feet of enclosed
gross floor area
Furniture store 1 space per 1,000 square feet of enclosed
gross floor area
Gasoline station 1 space per each fuel nozzle + 1 space
per each 50 square feet of usable floor
area in the cashier's office (All gas
station/convenience store businesses
shall be classified as a convenience store
in this table.)
Golf course (nonminiature)
100 spaces per each 9 holes
Golf course (miniature) 1.5 spaces per each hole
Golf driving range 1.5 spaces per each tee
Government building 1 space per each 200 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area used by the
public + 1 space per each 600 square
feet of enclosed gross floor area not used
by the public
Grocery store,
supermarket
1 space per each 250 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area + 100% of the
additional parking spaces required by
this table for other land uses in the same
building (e.g., restaurant)
§ 1017 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1017
1:727
Land Use Requirement
Gunsmith, hunting
supplies store
1 space per each 350 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Hardware store 1 space per each 400 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Health club 1 space per each 300 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Historical use or
historical museum
1.2 spaces per 1000 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Hospital 1 space per every 2 beds + 1 space for
each 5 outpatients at the peak outpatient
period + 1 space per each 1.5 employees
+ 1 space per each hospital vehicle
(Bassinets may not be counted as beds.)
Hotel/motel/inn 1 space per each guest room + 50% of
the parking spaces that this table would
require for other commercial uses within
the same building (e.g., restaurant)
Junkyard, landfill 2 spaces for every 3 employees + 1 space
for each motor vehicle customarily used
in connection with the facility
Kennel or animal
grooming facility
1 space per each 400 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Laundromat,
commercial laundry
1 space per each 200 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Library 1 space per each 1,000 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Liquor store 1 space per each 400 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Machinery sales and/
or service business
(farm machinery,
construction
equipment, industrial
or mining equipment,
commercial trucks,
boats, etc.)
1 space per each 600 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area + 1 space for
each 2,500 square feet of outside display
area + 2 spaces per each service bay + 1
space per each employee
§ 1017 LOGAN CODE § 1017
1:728
Land Use Requirement
Manufacturing,
industrial, and/or
research and
development facility
1 space per each 500 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area for the first
25,000 square feet of gross floor area + 1
space per each 650 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area for the next
25,000 square feet + 1 space per each
800 square feet of enclosed gross floor
area over 50,000 square feet
Meeting room facility
other than those listed
1 space for each 4 seats or 1 space for
each 100 square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is less
Mining and/or mineral
extraction facility
1 space per employee + 1 space for each
company vehicle
Mobile Home Park 2 spaces per mobile home lot
Model home sales
office
1 space per each 300 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Movie theater
(commercial)
1 space per each 4 fixed seats or 6 linear
feet of fixed benches; if there is no fixed
seating, 1 space for each 75 square feet
of enclosed gross floor area
Multi-household
residential complex
sales office
1 space per each 300 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Museum (other than
art or historical)
1.2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Nursery or greenhouse
(commercial)
1 space per 1,000 square feet of enclosed
gross floor area + 1 space per 2,000
square feet of outside sales area
Office (business or
professional, but not
medical or dental)
1 space per 300 square feet of enclosed
gross floor area
Office (medical or
dental)
1 space per each 250 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Park, playground, or
other noncommercial
recreational facility
1 space for every 4 persons of maximum
design capacity for the facility
Pet shop 1 space per each 300 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Pharmacy or drug
store
1 space per each 250 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Photography studio 1 space per each 400 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
§ 1017 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1017
1:729
Land Use Requirement
Place of worship 1 space per each 6 fixed seats or 9 linear
feet of fixed benches. If there is no fixed
seating, 1 space for each 100 square feet
of enclosed gross floor area. For places of
worship where 25% or more of the
parishioners walk to such place, the
parking space requirement may be
reduced proportionately subject to the
approval of the zoning officer
Printing and/or
publishing facility
1 space per 1,000 square feet of enclosed
gross floor area or 1 space per employee,
whichever is greater
Radio or television
station
1 space per 1,000 square feet of enclosed
gross floor area
Railroad, bus, or other
transit terminal or
station
1 space per each 600 square feet of gross
floor area
Railroad maintenance
facility or switching
yard
1 space per employee
Repair shop (for
common household
appliances such as
radios, televisions, and
vacuum cleaners)
1 space per each 600 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Residential dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling containing 2 or less
bedrooms
Residential dwelling
containing more than
2 bedrooms
2 spaces per dwelling + 1 space per
every 2 bedrooms over 2 bedrooms
Residential dwelling
exclusively for the
elderly
1 space per dwelling
Restaurant (sit down),
including restaurants
with bars
1 space per each 200 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Restaurant (fast food) 1 space per each 100 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
School (for dance,
music, crafts, martial
arts, or the fine arts)
1 space per each 200 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
§ 1017 LOGAN CODE § 1017
1:730
Land Use Requirement
School, public or
private (elementary)
1 space for each 20 students of design
capacity + 1 space per each 400 square
feet of enclosed gross floor area for
offices or teacher lounges
School, public or
private (junior high)
1 space for each 15 students of design
capacity + 1 space for each 400 square
feet of enclosed gross floor area for
offices or teacher lounges
School, public or
private (high school or
"vo-tech" school)
1 space for each 10 students of design
capacity + 1 space for each 400 square
feet of enclosed gross floor area for
offices or teacher lounges
School (trade school) 1 space for each 2 students
Self-service storage
facility
1 space per each 2,000 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Sexually oriented
business
1 space per 200 square feet of enclosed
gross floor area. Adult theaters shall
follow the requirements for movie
theaters
Shopping center,
shopping mall,
department store
Stores shall provide a minimum of 1
parking space per each 250 square feet
of enclosed gross floor area used for
retail and a maximum of 1 space per each
180 square feet of enclosed gross floor
area used for retail. Stores shall also
provide 50% of the parking spaces that
this table would require for nonretail
uses within the same building (e.g.,
restaurants).
Skating rink 1 space for each 250 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Slaughterhouse 1 space per each 1,000 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Stadium (including
high school football
stadiums)
1 space per 75 square feet of assembly
area or 1 space per every 5 fixed seats,
whichever is greater (20 inches of fixed
bench shall be considered a fixed seat
here)
Student home 3 spaces per each student home
occupying a premises
Swimming pool 1 space for each 100 square feet of water
surface area + space for each 30 square
feet of area used for spectator seating
purposes
§ 1017 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1017
1:731
Land Use Requirement
Travel agency 1 space per each 200 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Truck terminal 1 space per 1,000 square feet of enclosed
gross floor area or 1 space per employee,
whichever is greater
Utility facility,
commercial
communications
facility or tower
1 space per employee at the peak shift on
an average day
Veterinary office,
animal clinic, or
animal hospital
1 space per each 500 square feet of
enclosed gross floor area
Warehouse 1 space per 2,000 square feet of enclosed
gross floor area
Others not listed above To be determined by the Board of
Supervisors, based on a recommendation
from the Township Engineer
4. Reduction of Required Parking Spaces.
A. Parking for elderly housing may be reduced to one space for every
five dwellings subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
For purposes of this Part, elderly housing shall be a building or
portion thereof with units designed and reserved specifically for
the occupancy by persons 62 or more years of age.
B. The aforementioned nonresidential parking space requirements
may be reduced up to 10% of the required parking for any
nonresidential use, building or complex if the nonresidential use,
building or complex is within 1,000 feet of any regularly scheduled
bus stop/train station. If a bus stop/train station is proposed, a
letter from the applicable transit authority is required which states
their intentions to serve the proposed development with a regularly
scheduled stop.
5. Nonresidential Parking in Residence Districts: Accessory off-street
parking facilities serving nonresidential uses of property may be
permitted in any Residence District when authorized by the Zoning
Hearing Board after review and study by the Township Board of
Supervisors, subject to the following requirements in addition to all
other relevant requirements of this Part:
(a) The parking lot shall be accessory to, and for use in connection
with, one or more nonresidential establishments located in
adjoining districts or in connection with one or more existing
professional or institutional office buildings or institutions, and
within 350 feet of the nonresidential use which it is to serve.
§ 1017 LOGAN CODE § 1017
1:732
§ 1018. Regulations Governing Communications Antennas and
Communications Equipment Buildings. [Added by Ord. 9-13-01]
(b) Said parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of passenger
automobiles.
(c) No commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be
conducted on said parking lot.
(d) No sign of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits,
and conditions of use, shall be maintained on said parking lot, and
shall not exceed 12 square feet in area.
(e) The parking lot may be open from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and shall
be closed at all other times; however, when supervised by one or
more full-time attendants, the parking lot may be kept open until
12:00 midnight.
(f) Each entrance to and from said parking lot shall be a distance of at
least 35 feet from any adjacent property located in any residence
district except where ingress and egress to the parking lot is
provided from a public alley or public way separating the
residential areas from the proposed parking lot. A buffer area as
required by the Board of Supervisors shall be provided and
maintained along all lot lines, which are not street lines, abutting
residential uses.
(g) In addition to the foregoing requirements, such parking lots shall
conform to any further requirements and conditions as may be
prescribed by the Township Supervisors for the protection of
properties adjacent to and in the vicinity of the proposed parking
lot.
1. Building-mounted communications antennas shall not be located on any
single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling.
2. Building-mounted communications antennas shall be permitted to
exceed the height limitations of the applicable zoning district by no
more than 20 feet.
3. Omnidirectional or whip communications antennas shall not exceed 20
feet in height and seven inches in diameter.
4. Directional or panel communications antennas shall not exceed five feet
in height and three feet in width.
5. Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on a
building or other structure shall submit evidence from a Pennsylvania
registered professional engineer certifying that the proposed
installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the building or
other structure, considering wind and other loads associated with the
antenna location.
§ 1017 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1018
1:733
§ 1019. Standards for Communications Towers as Special
Exceptions. [Added by Ord. 9-13-01]
6. Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on a
building or other structure shall submit detailed construction and
elevation drawings indicating how the antennas will be mounted on the
structure for review for compliance with the Township of Logan's
Building Code, if any or other applicable law.
7. Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on a
building or other structure shall submit evidence of agreements and/or
easements necessary to provide access to the building or structure on
which the antennas are to be mounted so that installation and
maintenance of the antennas and communications equipment building
can be accomplished.
8. Communications antennas shall comply with all applicable standards
established by the Federal Communications Commission governing
human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
9. Communications antennas shall not cause radio frequency interference
with other communications facilities located in the Township of Logan.
10. A Communications equipment building shall be subject to the height
and setback requirements of the applicable zoning district for an
accessory structure.
11. The owner or operator of communications antennas shall be licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission to operate such antennas.
1. The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission to operate a communications tower, if
applicable, and licensed to operate communications antennas.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed communications
tower and communications antennas proposed to be mounted thereon
comply with all applicable standards established by the federal
communications commission governing human exposure to
electromagnetic radiation.
3. Communications towers shall comply with all applicable Federal
Aviation Administration, Commonwealth Bureau of Aviation and
applicable Airport Zoning Regulations.
4. Any applicant proposing construction of a new communications tower
shall demonstrate that a good faith effort has been made to obtain
permission to mount the communications antennas on an existing
building, structure or communications tower. A good faith effort shall
require that all owners of potentially suitable structures within a onequarter-
mile radius of the proposed communications tower site were
contacted and that one or more of the following reasons for not
selecting such structure apply:
§ 1018 LOGAN CODE § 1019
1:734
A. The proposed antennas and related equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of the existing structure and its reinforcement
cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
B. The proposed antennas and related equipment would cause radio
frequency interference with other existing equipment for that
existing Structure and the interference cannot be prevented at a
reasonable cost.
C. Such existing structures do not have adequate location, space,
access or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to
allow it to perform its intended function.
D. Addition of the proposed antennas and related equipment would
result in electromagnetic radiation from such structure exceeding
applicable standards established by the Federal Communications
Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic
radiation.
E. A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with
the owners of such Structures.
5. Access, if not provided by a public street, shall be provided to the
communications tower and communications equipment building by
means of an easement to a public street. The easement shall be a
minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be improved to a width of at least
10 feet with a dust-free, all weather surface for its entire length. Access
to an easement must be limited by a gate or other means to prevent
members of the public from using any part of such easement and failure
to prevent such access and/or use by the general public, unless
authorized by the Board of Supervisors of the Township shall be
considered a violation of this Part.
6. A communications tower may be located on a lot occupied by other
principal structures and may occupy a leased parcel within a lot
meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district.
7. Recording of a plat of subdivision or land development shall not be
required for a lease parcel on which a communications tower is
proposed to be constructed, provided the communications equipment
building is unmanned.
8. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the
communications tower is the minimum height necessary to perform its
function.
9. In all zoning districts the maximum height of any communications
tower shall be 200 feet; provided, however, that such height, may be
increased by the Zoning Hearing Board upon consideration by said
Board of the following:
§ 1019 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1019
1:735
A. Proof from the applicant that all other regulatory approvals have
been obtained permitting such height, and that such height is
feasible based on sound engineering technology (all preexisting
nonconforming Towers will also have to provide this proof before
the allowable increase permitted herein if said increase will exceed
the 200 feet maximum);
B. Such height is compatible with the surrounding land uses, and will
not have a negative impact on the existing area in terms of noise,
potential hazards, illumination, glare, and restrictions to natural
light and circulation;
C. Such height is sustainable in terms of topography, soil conditions
and similar physical features;
D. Such height conforms to the scale, character and exterior
appearance of existing structures and uses in the area in which it is
located.
10. The foundation and base of any communications tower shall be set back
from a property line (not lease line) the same distance as set forth for
the zoning district in which said communications tower is to be located,
or 1/2 of the height of the said communications tower or that height
which sound engineering requires, whichever is greater.
11. The base of a communications tower shall be landscaped so as to screen
the foundation and base and communications equipment building from
abutting properties.
12. The Communications equipment building shall comply with the
required yards and height requirements of the applicable zoning
district for an accessory structure.
13. The applicant shall submit certification from a Pennsylvania registered
professional engineer that a proposed communications tower will be
designed and constructed in accordance with the current Structural
Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting
Structures, published by the Electrical Industrial Association/
Telecommunications Industry Association.
14. The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal
Communications Commission license; the name, address and
emergency telephone number for the operator of the communications
tower; and a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and
property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence covering the communications tower and communications
antennas.
15. All guy wires associated with guyed communications towers shall be
clearly marked so as to be visible at all times and shall be located within
a fenced enclosure.
§ 1019 LOGAN CODE § 1019
1:736
§ 1020. Sidewalks. [Ord. 11-10-05B]
Sidewalks shall be constructed, in accordance with the Township's
Subdivision Ordinance, on both sides of all streets of all subdivisions with
six lots or more when the development is being served with public sewer.
When a development is proposed to be constructed in phases, the number
of lots shall be the total for all phases. Sidewalks shall be constructed on
both sides of all streets in all land developments. All preliminary and final
plans shall include provisions for such sidewalks.
§ 1021. General Requirements and Standards for all Solar
Collection Systems. [Added by Ord. 03-10-11A]
16. The site of a communications tower shall be secured by a fence with a
maximum height of eight feet to limit accessibility by the general
public.
17. No signs or lights shall be mounted on a communications tower, except
as may be required by the Federal Communications Commission,
Federal Aviation Administration or other governmental agency which
has jurisdiction.
18. Communications towers shall be protected and maintained in
accordance with the requirements of the Township of Logan's Code of
Ordinances.
19. If a communications tower remains unused for a period of 12
consecutive months, the owner or operator shall dismantle and remove
the communications tower within six months of the expiration of such
twelve-month period.
20. One off street parking space shall be provided within the fenced area.
1. General Requirements.
A. Solar collection systems shall be considered an accessory use in all
zoning districts.
B. Solar collection systems which are intended to be the primary use
on the lot, may only be located in an Industrial Zoning District.
C. Solar collection systems shall comply with all applicable building
and electrical codes.
D. A property owner who has installed or intends to install a solar
collection system shall be responsible for negotiating with other
property owners in the vicinity for any necessary solar easement
and shall record the easement at the Blair County Courthouse.
2. Standards for Freestanding Solar Collectors.
§ 1019 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1021
1:737
A. Collection systems shall be classified as accessory structures and
shall not be located in the front yard between the principal
structure and the public right-of-way.
B. Setbacks: 10 feet from all property lines and other structures.
C. Height: Freestanding collection systems shall not exceed 20 feet in
height.
D. Size: Freestanding collection systems on residential properties
shall not exceed the greater of 1/2 the footprint of the principal
structure or 600 square feet, whichever is less. The size of panels
for nonresidential properties shall not exceed 1/2 of the footprint of
the principal structure.
3. Standards for Structurally Attached Solar Collectors.
A. On a sloped roof, the collection system may not extend above the
peak of the roof. On a flat roof, the collection system may not
extend vertically more than five feet above the roof.
B. Collection systems shall not exceed the maximum height permitted
in the zoning district in which it is located.
C. Collection systems located on the roof or attached to a structure
shall provide, as part of their permit application, a structural
certification.
D. Solar collection systems may be located on accessory structures.
§ 1021 LOGAN CODE § 1021
1:738
Part 11
ADMINISTRATION
§ 1101. Interpretation. [Ord. 11-15-79]
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety,
comfort and general welfare.
§ 1102. Appointment and Powers of Zoning Officer. [Ord. 11/15/
1979; as amended by Ord. 1/23/92]
§ 1103. Zoning Permits. [Ord. 11/15/79; as amended by Ord. 1/23/
92]
1. For the administration of this chapter, a Zoning Officer, who shall not
hold any elective office in the Township, shall be appointed.
2. The Zoning Officer shall meet the qualifications established by the
Township and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Township a working knowledge of municipal zoning.
3. The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with its
literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction or
any use or change of use which does not conform to this chapter.
4. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of
his employment.
1. Zoning permits shall hereinafter be secured from the Township Zoning
Officer, at a fee to be determined from time to time by the Board of
Supervisors, prior to construction, erection, or alteration of any
building or part of building, costing or valued at $50 or more; except as
otherwise stated in Part 4 of this chapter; and prior to the construction
or erection of any stationary sign or bill board. All requests for zoning
permits shall be made in writing by the owner or by his authorized
agent and shall include a statement of the use or intended use of the
building or structure after construction, erection or alteration, and
shall be accompanied by a plan drawn to scale, showing the proposed
building line in its exact relation to lot and street lines as well as
satisfactory evidence that the line or lines of the bounding street or
streets has or have been accurately located on the ground.
2. No zoning permit shall be issued until satisfactory evidence has been
submitted to the Township Zoning Officer showing that:
A. A map, plan or plat of any subdivision or land development, drawn
to scale and showing lot and street lines has been approved by the
Board of Supervisors of Logan Township in accordance with the
terms and provisions of Township Ordinance No. 5-17-79, entitled
§ 1101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1103
1:739
§ 1104. Zoning Hearing Board. [Ord. 11/15/1979; as amended by
Ord. 1-23-92]
the "Logan Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance." [Chapter 22] The term "subdivision" as used herein
shall mean the division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the
court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership
or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
B. A road occupancy permit, if required, has been issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Transportation, or
the Township of Logan.
C. A permit to tap onto a public sewerage system has been issued by
Logan Township, Central Blair County Sanitary Authority, or other
appropriate authority, or a permit has been issued for a septic tank,
individual sewer system, or community sewer system by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental
Resources. As amended August 3, 1972.
1. There is hereby created for the Township a Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
2. The membership of the Board shall consist of three residents of the
Township appointed by resolution by the Board of Supervisors. The
terms of office shall be for three years and shall be so fixed that the
term of office of one member shall expire each year. The Board shall
promptly notify the Board of Supervisors of any vacancies which occur.
Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of
the term. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in the
Township.
3. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the
Board of Supervisors which appointed the member, taken after the
member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such
a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the
member shall request it in writing.
4. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board
may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any
§ 1103 LOGAN CODE § 1104
1:740
§ 1105. Special Exceptions. [Ord. 11/15/1979; as amended by Ord.
1-23-92]
Where the Board of Supervisors, in this chapter, has stated special
exceptions to be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant
to express standards and criteria, the Board shall hear and decide requests
for such special exceptions in accordance with such standards and criteria.
In granting a special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter,
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter and
Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101
et seq.
§ 1106. Hearings. [Ord. 1-23-92]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10901 et seq., as amended.
§ 1107. Hearing Fees. [Ord. 1-23-92]
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Logan may prescribe
reasonable fees with respect to hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board.
Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the secretary and
members of the Zoning Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and
necessary administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The cost,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants or
expert witness costs.
§ 1108. Variances. [Ord. 1-23-92]
hearing on its behalf and the parties may waive further action by the
Board as provided in this chapter.
5. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and laws of the
Commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business,
which records shall be the property of the Township and shall submit a
report of its activities to the Board of Supervisors as requested by the
Board of Supervisors.
6. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors, the
Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of the
Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as
may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors, but in no case shall it exceed
the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 1104 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1108
1:741
§ 1109. Enforcement Notice. [Ord. 1-23-92]
1. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of
application and may require preliminary application to the Zoning
Officer. The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
A. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
B. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
C. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
D. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
E. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
2. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
1. If it appears to the Township that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Township shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
2. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
3. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
§ 1108 LOGAN CODE § 1109
1:742
§ 1110. Enforcement Remedies. [Ord. 11/15/1979; as amended by
Ord. 10/27/1988; and by Ord. 1-23-92]
A. The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take action.
B. The location of the property in violation.
C. The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
D. The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
E. That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a period of 10 days.
F. That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
district justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no
such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
2. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
3. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings brought
under this section.
§ 1109 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1110
1:743

Part 12
AMENDMENTS TO ZONING MAP
§ 1201. Amendments to Zoning Map.
Ord. Date Description
6-29-78 6/29/1978 Rezoned from Residence R-1 to Residence
R-2
6-29-78 6/29/1978 Rezoned from Residence R-1 to Business
9-15-83 9/15/1983 Rezoned from Residence R-1 and R-2 to
Business
10-31C-85 10/31/1985 Rezoned from Residence R-1A to R-2
1-8-87 1/8/1987 Rezoned from Residence R-2 to Business
6-15-89 6/15/1989 Rezoned from Residence R-1 to Business
6-15-89A 6/15/1989 Rezoned from Residence R-1 to Residence
R-2
6-29-89 6/29/1989 Rezoned from Agricultural to Business
8-24-89 8/24/1989 Rezoned from R-1 Residence and Business
to Residence R-1A
2-15-90 2/15/1990 Rezoned from Agriculture to Business
6-4-92 6/4/1992 Rezoned from Residential R-2 to Business
7-15-93 7/15/1993 Rezoned from Residential R-2 to Business
12-1-94 12/1/1994 Rezoned from Residential R-2 to Business
4-4-96 4/4/1996 Rezoned from Residential R-1A to
Residential R-2
6-20-96 6/20/1996 Rezoned from Residence R-1 to Business
3-13-97 3/13/1997 Rezoned from Residence R-2, Business
and Industrial to Business
02-10-00A 2/10/2000 Rezoned from Residence R-1 to Business
4-13-00A 4/13/2000 1. Rezoned from Agricultural to
Residence R-1
2. Rezoned from Residence R-2 to
Residence R-1
3. Rezoned from Agricultural to
Residence R-1A
4. Rezoned from Residence R-2 to
Residence R-1A
5. Rezoned from Residence R-2 to
Residence R-1A
6. Rezoned from Residence R-1A and
Residence R-2 to Institutional
§ 1201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1201
1:745
Ord. Date Description
7. Rezoned from Agricultural to
Agricultural A-1
06-08-00 6/08/2000 1. Rezoned Residence R-1 and
Residence R-2 to Residence R-1A
2. Rezoned Agricultural to Institutional
3. Rezoned from Agricultural and
Residence R-1 to Residence R-1A
4. Rezoned Agricultural to Residence
R-1
5. Rezoned from Agricultural to
Residence R-1A
6. Rezoned from Agricultural to
Residence R-2
7. Rezoned from Residence R-1 To
Residence R-1A
8. Rezoned from Agricultural and
Residence R-1 to Industrial
9. Rezoned from Residence R-1 to
Business
10. Rezoned from Residence R-1 To
Business
11-09-00 11/09/2000 1. Rezoned from Agricultural and
Residence R-2 to Residence R-1A
2. Rezoned from Residence R-1 To
Residence R-1A
3. Rezoned from Residence R-1 To
Business
10-09-03 10/09/2003 Rezoned from Residence R-2 to Business
12-11-03 12/11/2003 1. Rezoned from Residence R-1A to
Institutional
2. Rezoned from Residence R-1A to
Institutional
3. Rezoned from Residence R-1A to
Institutional
8-26-04 8/26/2004 Rezoned from Residence R-2 to Business
08-14-08 8/14/2008 Rezoned from Agricultural to Residence
R1-A
11-13-08A 11/13/2008 Rezoned from Residence R-1 to Industrial
§ 1201 LOGAN CODE § 1201
1:746
Ord. Date Description
03-24-11 3/24/2011 Rezoned from Residence R-1A to
Agriculture Parcels 14-10-95, 14-10-154,
14-10G-190, 14-10-94J, 02-07-10A,
02-07-12 and 02-07-13
03-28-13 3/28/2013 Rezoned from Residence R-1 to Industrial
Parcels 14-23-6-4-D; 14-23-90; a 10-acre
portion of 14-23-90; and a 3-acre portion
of 14-23C-101-1
06-12-14 6/12/2014 Rezoned from Agricultural to Business an
approximate 8.5-acre property known as
"the Armory," Blair County Tax Map Parcel
Number 1400-16-29
03-12-15 3/12/2015 Rezoned from Residence R-1 to
Agriculture: Parcels 14-13E-8, 14-13E-10
(portion only), 14-13E-11, 14-13E-12,
14-13E-13, 14-13E-24, 14-13-5-2, and
14-13-5C (a combined 80-acre parcel), and
Parcels 14-13-6 and 14-13-10A (portion
only) (a combined 30-acre parcel)
08-11-16 8/11/2016 Rezone from Residence R-1 to Business:
Tax Map Parcel Numbers
14.00-18F.-025.00-000,
14.00-18F.-028.00-000, and
14.00-18F.-030.00-000
§ 1201 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1201
1:747

Part 13
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS (PRD)
§ 1301. Title. [Added by Ord. 12-09-04; as amended by Ord.
09-14-06B; and by Ord. 06-12-08]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Township of Logan PRD
Ordinance."
§ 1302. Statutory Authority. [Added by Ord. 12-09-04; as amended
by Ord. 09-14-06B; and by Ord. 06-12-08]
This Part is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the General
Assemble of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, July 31, P.L. 805, as amended (53
P.S. § 10101 et seq.)
§ 1303. Purpose. [Added by Ord. 12-09-04; as amended by Ord.
09-14-06B; and by Ord. 06-12-08]
§ 1304. Eligibility. [Added by Ord. 12-09-04; as amended by Ord.
09-14-06B; and by Ord. 06-12-08]
1. Innovative Residential Development. To encourage innovations in
residential development and renewal so that the growing demand for
housing may be met by greater variety in type, design, density, and
layout of dwellings and by the conservation and more efficient use of
open space ancillary to said dwellings;
2. Housing/Recreation. To provide greater opportunities for housing and
recreation for all who are/or will be residents of the Township;
3. Changing Technology. To encourage a more efficient use of land and
public services and to reflect changes in the technology of land
development;
4. Flexible Land Development. To encourage more flexible land
development which will respect and conserve natural resources such as
streams, lakes, floodplains, groundwater, wooded areas, steeply-sloped
areas, and areas of unusual beauty or importance to the natural
ecosystem;
5. Site Specific Development. To provide a procedure which can relate the
type, design, and layout of residential development to the particular site
and the particular demand for housing existing at the time of
development in a manner consistent with the preservation of property
values within existing residential areas, and to assure that the
increased flexibility of regulations over land development established
hereby is carried out pursuant to sound, expeditious, and fair
administrative standards and procedures.
§ 1301 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1304
1:749
§ 1305. Permitted Uses. [Added by Ord. 12-09-04; as amended by
Ord. 09-14-06B; and by Ord. 06-12-08]
A PRD may include the following uses:
1. Eligibility Requirements. No application for tentative approval of a PRD
shall be considered or approved unless the conditions outlined in the
following subsections are met:
A. The tract proposed for planned residential development consists of
a contiguous area which exceeds 75 acres.
B. The development will be served by public water supply and public
sewage disposal systems.
C. The proposed development is found to be generally consistent with
the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
D. The PRD shall be entirely within an area or district designated as
eligible for PRD. The zoning districts eligible for PRD include R1,
R1A and R2.
E. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or, if in
multiple ownerships, shall be developed according to a single plan
with common authority and responsibility.
F. All PRD's must have a minimum of two points of ingress and egress.
G. All issues not addressed by this section will be covered by other
sections of the Zoning and Subdivision Ordinances, i.e., lighting,
stormwater, signage, traffic.
1. Residential Uses. Residential uses including detached, semidetached
(duplex), attached (townhouses, quadplexes) or multiple family (e.g.,
garden apartment, mid-rise apartment) structures, or any combination
thereof, however, mobile homes are not permitted.
2. Nonresidential Uses. Nonresidential uses such as schools, churches,
day cares and nursing/convalescent homes to the extent that,
combined, they do not exceed a maximum of 5% of the total area of the
PRD and their location is approved by the Board of Supervisors. Access
to nonresidential uses must be provided from a collector or arterial
street. Landscaping must be provided around parking lots to block the
view from any residential structures.
3. Recreational Uses. Recreational uses deemed appropriate by the
governing body for incorporation into the design of the development.
4. Home Occupations. Customary accessory uses or home occupations
pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 1304 LOGAN CODE § 1306
1:750
§ 1306. Open Space/Parkland Development Standards. [Added by
Ord. 12-09-04; as amended by Ord. 09-14-06B; and by Ord.
06-12-08]
1. Minimum Acreage. A minimum of 30% of the gross acreage of the tract
proposed for PRD shall be designated as and devoted to a combination
of common open space and public parkland.
2. Public Parkland Requirement. Ten percent of the open space within the
PRD must be dedicated as public parkland. This parkland must be free
of floodplain, steep slopes and other constraints which would limit the
use of the land as active parkland. This parkland will be master planned
and maintained by the Township.
3. Common Open Space Requirement. Twenty percent of the open space
within the PRD must be maintained as common open space.
4. Recreational Facilities Requirement. Recreational facilities may be
located within required open space areas provided, however, that no
buildings shall be constructed within a floodplain area or within an area
having a slope greater than 25%. Stormwater management facilities
may be located within the common open space.
5. Entity Responsible For Maintenance Of Open Space. Either of the
following methods may be used to preserve, own, and maintain common
open space: condominium or homeowners association.
6. Restriction On Transfer Of Open Space. Common open space shall not
be eligible for transfer to another party except for transfer to another
method of ownership permitted under this section, and then only where
there is no change in the open space ratio. The following specific
requirements are associated with each of the various methods:
A. Homeowners Association. The common open space may be held in
common ownership by a homeowners' association. This method
shall be subject to all of the provisions for homeowners'
associations set forth in § 606 below, and the homeowners'
association agreement shall be recorded.
B. Condominium Association. The common open space may be
controlled through the use of condominium agreements. Such
agreements shall be in conformance with the Uniform
Condominium Act. All open space land shall be held as "common
element."
7. Location Of Open Space. The common open space/parkland shall be laid
out to the satisfaction of the Board in accordance with the best
principles of site design, shall be consistent with the Township
Comprehensive Plan and any applicable Open Space Plans, and shall be
located and designed as an area or areas easily accessible to residents
of the PRD and preserving natural features. Common open space areas
§ 1306 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1306
1:751
should include both active and passive recreation areas for all age
groups.
8. Designation Of Use Of Open Space. The tentative and final plans shall
designate the use of common open space, the type of maintenance to be
provided, and a planting plan or schedule. In designating use and
maintenance, the following classes may be used:
A. Lawn. A grass area with or without trees which may be used by the
residents for a variety of purposes and which shall be mowed
regularly to insure a neat and tidy appearance.
B. Natural Area. An area of natural vegetation undisturbed during
construction, or replanted; such areas may contain pathways.
Meadows shall be maintained as such.
C. Recreation Area. An area shall be designated for a specific
recreational use, including but not limited to tennis, swimming,
playfields, and tot lots. Such areas shall be located and maintained
in such manner as not to create a hazard or nuisance.
D. Stormwater Management Areas. Areas of stormwater management
that are maintained in accordance with the approved stormwater
maintenance program as prepared by the design consultant.
9. Open Space Design Standards. The following design standards, as
deemed appropriate by the Board, shall apply to areas of common open
space. Such areas shall be:
A. Not less than 75 feet in width at any point and not less than 1/2
acre of contiguous area, except when part of a trail system or
pathway network;
B. Interconnected with common open space areas on abutting parcels
wherever possible, including provisions for pedestrian pathways
for general public use to create linked pathway systems within the
Township;
C. Provided with sufficient perimeter parking when necessary, and
with safe and convenient access from adjoining public road
frontage or other rights-of-way or easements capable of
accommodating pedestrian, bicycle, and maintenance and vehicle
traffic, containing appropriate access improvements. Areas
required for parking may be included in calculating the minimum
acreage required for open space;
D. Undivided by any crossing of public or private roads, except where
necessary for proper traffic calculation, and then only upon
recommendation of the Township Engineer and Planning
Commission;
E. Free of all structures, except those related to outdoor recreational
use;
§ 1306 LOGAN CODE § 1306
1:752
F. Suitably landscaped by retaining existing natural cover and
wooded areas and/or by a landscaping plan which is consistent with
the purposes of this section and which minimizes maintenance
costs; and made subject to such agreement with the Township and
such deed restrictions duly recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds as may be required by the Board of Supervisors for the
purpose of preserving the common open space or such use.
10. Maintenance of Open Space.
A. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain
the common open space (including stormwater management
facilities), or any successor organization, shall at any time after
establishment of the planned residential development fail to
maintain the common open space in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the development plan, the Township
may serve written notice upon such organization or upon the
residents and owners of the PRD, setting forth the manner in which
the organization has failed to maintain the common open space in
reasonable conditions, and said notice shall include a demand that
such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within 30 days thereof,
and shall state the date and place of a hearing therein which shall
be held within 14 days of the notice. At such hearing the Township
may modify the terms of the original notice as to the deficiencies
and may give an extension of time within which they shall be
corrected. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in
the modifications thereof shall not be corrected within said 30 days
or any extension thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the
taxable values of the properties within the PRD and to prevent the
common open space from becoming a public nuisance, may enter
upon said common open space and maintain the same for a period
of one year. Said entry and maintenance shall not constitute a
taking of said common open space, and shall not vest in the public
any rights to use the common open space except when the same is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the residents and owners and
such dedication is acceptable to the Township. Before the
expiration of said year, the Township shall, upon its initiative or
upon the request of the organization theretofore responsible for the
maintenance of the common open space, call a public hearing upon
notice to such organization, or to the residents and owners of the
PRD, to be held by the Township, hearing such organization or the
residents and owners of the PRD shall show cause why such
maintenance by the Township shall not, at the election of the
Township, continue for a succeeding year. If the Township shall
determine that such organization is ready and able to maintain said
common open space in reasonable condition, the Township shall
cease to maintain said common open space at the end of said year.
If the Township shall determine such organization is not ready
and able to maintain said common open space in a reasonable
§ 1306 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1306
1:753
§ 1307. Design Standards. [Added by Ord. 12-09-04; as amended by
Ord. 09-14-06B; and by Ord. 06-12-08]
condition, the Township may, in its direction, continue to maintain
said common open space during the next succeeding year and
subject to a similar hearing and determination in each year
thereafter. The decision of the Township in any case shall constitute
a final administrative decision subject to judicial review.
B. The cost of such maintenance and enforcement proceedings by the
Township shall be assessed ratably against the properties within
the PRD that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space
and shall become a lien on said properties. Said assessment or
charges shall be subordinate in lien to the lien of any prior
mortgage or mortgages on the property which is subject to such
assessments or charges. The Township, at the time of entering
upon such said common open space for the purpose of
maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien, in the office of the
Prothonotary of the County, upon the properties affected by such
lien within the PRD.
1. Site design.
A. All housing shall be designed with regard to topography and
natural features of the site. The effects of prevailing winds,
seasonal temperatures, and hours of sunlight on the physical layout
and form of the proposed buildings shall be taken into account.
B. Housing and other facilities near the periphery of the planned
residential development shall be designed so as to be harmonious
with neighboring areas.
2. Conservation of Trees and Natural Features.
A. The development shall be designed and programmed so as to
minimize earthmoving, erosion, tree clearance, and the destruction
of natural amenities.
B. Developers shall exercise care to protect trees from damage during
construction.
C. Trees with a minimum caliper of two inches shall be provided by
the developer where deemed necessary by the Board to mitigate
the loss of existing trees. Unless clearly infeasible, native species
shall be utilized.
3. Density and Spacing Requirements.
A. In this Part, where the word "former" is used, said word shall refer
to the zoning classification of a parcel of land prior to its having
been zoned PRD (planned residential development) under the
provisions of this section.
§ 1306 LOGAN CODE § 1307
1:754
B. The distance between buildings in a planned residential
development shall not be less than that required for in the former
district; however, the Board of Supervisors may permit reductions
in these requirements if it finds that through the use of topography,
sitting on the lot, or design, such building or buildings do not
infringe upon the privacy of adjacent, existing or potential
structures, provided that:
C. Front yard minimum setback distances shall be required as follows:
Type of Building
Distance From
Local and
Collector Streets
(feet)
Distance From
Arterial Streets
(feet)
Single-family
dwelling
20 100
Two-family and
multifamily
dwellings
30 100
Nonresidential 50 100
NOTES:
Streets will be defined as local, collector, or arterial by a traffic
study completed by the developer.
D. Nonresidential buildings shall not be located closer than 100 feet
from residential buildings.
E. Spacing shall be provided between buildings to ensure privacy and
sufficient light and air. Each development shall provide reasonable
visual and acoustical privacy for dwelling units. Fences, walks,
barriers and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for
protection and aesthetic enhancement of property, the privacy of
its occupants, the screening of objectionable views or uses and the
reduction of noise within the PRD tract, PRD sections and off site.
F. The proposed location and arrangement of structures shall not be
detrimental to existing or prospective adjacent dwellings or to the
existing or prospective development of the neighborhood. Multiple
story buildings shall be located within a planned residential
development in such a manner so as not to create an adverse
impact on adjoining low-rise buildings.
G. All structures shall be situated at least 50 feet from the property
line perimeter of the tract to be developed.
H. In order to encourage landowners to take advantage of the PRD
concept and to fulfill the intent of this Part, the Board of
Supervisors may permit up to and including the densities listed
§ 1307 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1307
1:755
below, provided that the development exhibits good project design,
provides maximum open space and encourages pedestrian
movement throughout. Each PRD shall consist of an appropriate
mix of dwelling types.
Former District PRD Density
R1 5 units per acre
R1A 5 units per acre
R2 10 units per acre
4. Height Regulations. No structure shall exceed 35 feet in height as
measured from the mean finished grade, nor contain more than three
stories, exclusive of attic and cellar. (Basements, as defined in this
chapter, shall be considered a story).
5. Streets and Walkways.
A. The design, dimensions, and construction of all streets shall comply
with the applicable standards in the Logan Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance. Where the Board finds that the
purposes of this chapter will be better served, however, it may
modify the terms of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, provided that a comparable level of performance will be
achieved.
B. A traffic study, the scope of which is defined by the Township, must
be completed for all proposed PRDs.
C. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all roadways.
D. The street and walkway systems shall be designed so as to relate
harmoniously with land uses and adjacent streets, and to minimize
through traffic in residential areas. All residential parking and
recreational areas shall be connected by pedestrian walkways.
Walkways that connect residential areas and parking areas shall be
of a durable all-weather surface satisfactory to the Board.
E. Separation of vehicular from pedestrian and bicycle traffic is
encouraged. Where pedestrian walkways are not within a street
right-of-way, a walkway easement at least 10 feet in width shall be
designated. Where a walkway crosses over open space land,
however, the easement shall not be subtracted from the open space
land for purposes of calculating the area thereof.
F. Where dwelling units front on a collector or arterial street, no
direct vehicular access from the lot or tract to the street shall be
permitted.
G. Shade trees of varying species shall be planted along all streets
within the street right-of-way. At least one tree of minimum two-
§ 1307 LOGAN CODE § 1307
1:756
inch caliper and six-foot height on each side of the street shall be
provided for each 40 feet of street length, or fraction thereof.
6. Landscaping and Buffers.
A. All common parking areas shall be landscaped with trees and
shrubs of varying species. At least one shade tree of minimum twoinch
caliper and six-foot height shall be provided within the interior
of each parking area for every five parking spaces.
B. The Board may require that a planting strip be installed, along the
entire perimeter of the tract proposed for PRD or identified
segments thereof that adequately meets the following criteria.
(1) All existing trees two inches or more in caliper and/or six feet
or more in height shall be preserved, except when cutting
thereof is specifically approved by the Board or is necessary for
insuring adequate sight distance.
(2) The amount, density, and types of planting shall be based upon
physiographic features, feasibility of using native species,
proximity to existing dwellings, compatibility of adjacent uses,
and natural views. Where adjacent property has been
developed in such a manner that privacy from the PRD is
desirable, the planting strip adjacent thereto shall be of,
sufficient density and contain sufficient evergreen material to
effectively screen the portions of the PRD from which privacy is
desired. In other areas, particularly where the physiographic
features and existing vegetation provide an attractive setting,
the planting strip may be left in its natural state or enhanced
with additional plant material of lesser density than a full
screen.
(3) No planting shall be placed with its center closer than five feet
from a property line of the tract.
(4) Plantings shall be permanently maintained and, if necessary to
maintain an effective screen, replaced in the event they
become diseased or dead.
(5) Planting species shall be mixed; generally, a minimum of 25%
shall be evergreen and 10% flowering material.
(6) The required planting strip may be situated within private yard
space that abuts the tract boundary.
C. In addition to perimeter planting strips, the following landscaping
requirements shall be met:
(1) Disturbed topsoil shall be stockpiled, protected from erosion,
and replaced after construction. Planting and protection of
landscape material shall be in accordance with a plan and shall
be completed within six months of initial occupancy of each
§ 1307 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1307
1:757
§ 1308. Development in Stages. [Added by Ord. 12-09-04; as
amended by Ord. 09-14-06B; and by Ord. 06-12-08]
A developer may construct a PRD in stages if the following criteria are met:
stage of development. Maintenance specifications for all plant
material shall be submitted with the Final Plan.
7. Water Supply. The PRD shall be provided with a complete public water
distribution system. The design and installation of such public system
shall be subject to the approval of the Township.
8. Other Utilities. All other utility lines including, but not limited to,
electric, gas, street light supply, cable TV, and telephone shall be placed
underground. Installation of all utilities shall be in strict accordance
with the engineering standards and specifications of the Township,
municipal authority, or other public utility concerned. All such
underground utilities shall be put in place, connected, and approved
before the streets are constructed, where such utilities lie under the
proposed cartway, and before any person is permitted to occupy any
building to be served by such utilities.
1. Approval By Township. The application for tentative approval covers the
entire planned residential development and shows the location and
approximate time of construction for each stage, in addition to other
information required by this chapter. The phasing plan must be
approved by the Board and shall be revised and approved by the Board
each year.
2. Minimum Number Of Units. At least 15% of the dwelling units in the
plan given tentative approval are included in all but the final stage.
3. Improvements Necessary. The second and subsequent stages are
completed consistent with the approved tentative plan and are of such
size and location, including a sufficient degree of completion of the road
network and other infrastructure, that they constitute economically
sound units of development.
4. Common Space Required. Each phase shall include common open space
in amounts and at locations deemed acceptable by the Board to meet, at
minimum, the open space needs generated by that phase and to assure
protection of the sensitive features of the tract. If the public parkland is
not included in the first phase, surety must be posted for the eventual
dedication of this land.
5. Residential Density Requirements. Gross residential density may be
varied from stage to stage, provided that final approval shall not be
given to any stage if the gross residential density of the area which
includes stages already finally approved and the stage for which final
approval is being sought exceeds by more than 20% the gross
residential density allowed for the entire planned residential
development in the tentatively approved plan.
§ 1307 LOGAN CODE § 1309
1:758
§ 1309. Specific Requirements for Homeowners' Association.
[Added by Ord. 12-09-04; as amended by Ord. 09-14-06B; and by
Ord. 06-12-08]
A homeowners association shall be governed according to the following
regulations:
§ 1310. Submission and Review Procedures and Contents of
Application. [Added by Ord. 12-09-04; as amended by Ord.
09-14-06B; and by Ord. 06-12-08]
1. Description Of Organization. The developer shall provide to the
Township description of the organization, including its by-laws and
documents governing open space maintenance and use restrictions.
2. Operation Prior To Sale. The organization shall be established by the
developers and shall be operating (with financial subsidization by the
developers, if necessary) before the sale of any lots within the
development.
3. Membership Requirements. Membership in the organization is
mandatory for all purchasers of homes therein and their successors.
4. Open Space Obligations. The organization shall be responsible for
maintenance of insurance on common open space. The organization
also shall be responsible for real estate taxes on common open space,
except where the following alternative is utilized:
A. The developer of any subdivision or land development proposed to
contain an area(s) of common open space shall arrange with the
County Board of Assessment a method of assessment of the open
space which will allocate to each tax parcel in the subdivision a
share of the total assessment for such open space. Where this
alternative is to be utilized, the method of allocation shall be
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
5. Cost Sharing. The members of the organization shall share equitably
the costs of maintaining and developing common open space, in
accordance with the procedures established by them.
6. Notification of Transfer of Open Space. In the event of any proposed
transfer of common open space land by the homeowners' association
within the methods here permitted, or of the assumption of
maintenance of common open space land by the Township as
hereinafter provided, notice of such action shall be given to all property
owners within the PRD by the homeowners' association.
7. Staffing Requirements. The organization shall have or give adequate
staff to administer common facilities and maintain common open space.
1. Pre-Application Procedures. Before submitting an application, a
landowner proposing to develop a PRD is strongly encouraged to confer
§ 1309 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1310
1:759
with the Planning Commission, Board of Supervisors, Township Staff
and Blair County Staff to obtain guidance before incurring expense in
the preparation of plans.
2. Application for Tentative Approval.
A. The application for tentative approval shall be executed by, or on
behalf of, the landowner and filed with the Township Department of
Planning and Zoning. All fees as established by the Board by
resolution shall be paid upon filing of the application, and
additional deposits shall be made from time to time as requested by
the Township. Such deposits shall be applied against the expenses
of processing and reviewing the application.
B. The developer shall submit 14 copies of all required plans and
information. The Township Department of Planning and Zoning
shall thereafter distribute copies of the plans to all appropriate
agencies, including but not limited to the Township Planning
Commission, the Board of Supervisors, the County Planning
Commission, the Township Engineer, and any Township Park and
Recreation Board.
C. All pertinent reviews, including those of the Township and County
Planning Commission and the Township Engineer, shall be provided
within 55 days of referral or at least five days prior to the public
hearing to be held by the Board of Supervisors on the tentative
application, whichever shall first occur. The Township Planning
Commission shall forward to the Board copies of reports received
from the Township Engineer and all other reviewing agencies
together with its own recommendations, within the aforesaid time
limitations. Copies of such reports and recommendations also shall
be furnished to the applicant within the aforesaid time limitations.
3. Tentative Application Requirements. The application for tentative
approval shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following
documents:
A. A key map drawn at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet showing the
location and size of the property and showing the relation of the
property to adjoining areas, zoning and streets within 1,000 feet.
B. An existing conditions plan, at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet (or
a scale determined appropriate by the Director of Planning and
Zoning). The following information shall be included on such plan:
(1) Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than five feet and
showing location and elevation of the closest established
benchmark(s) from which the contour elevations are derived;
(2) Total tract boundaries of the property being developed,
showing bearings and distances and a statement of the total
acreage of the property;
§ 1310 LOGAN CODE § 1310
1:760
(3) Locations of all existing tree masses, specimen trees, rock
outcroppings, watercourses, geology, floodplain areas,
wetlands, sinkholes, closed depressions, wildlife habitat and
other significant natural features (where floodplain areas, as
defined in this chapter, are located on the tract, such areas
shall be delineated in accordance with the Floodplain District
Map that is part of the Ordinance);
(4) Delineation of existing drainage patterns on the property;
(5) Existing soil classifications;
(6) Any existing buildings, sewer lines, water lines, electric and
telephone utility lines, pipelines, culverts, bridges, railroads,
roads, and other significant man-made features;
(7) Locations on the tract, or within 50 feet of the property
boundary, of all structures and areas of known or potential
cultural or historical significance.
C. A plan of lots, at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet (or a scale
determined appropriate by the Director of Planning and Zoning),
showing proposed use areas, common open space, and location of
buildings and improvements to be installed. The following shall be
shown on the plan of lots:
(1) The total number of residential units proposed, with subtotals
for each housing type, and in each phase;
(2) The total acreage of the tract;
(3) The average gross residential density and residential density
by phase.
(4) The approximate location of all buildings, roads, parking areas,
public transit amenities, bike paths, sidewalks or pathways,
descriptions of the use of all structures, dimensions (including
height) of all buildings and other structures;
(5) The width and location of proposed road rights-of-way and
cartway widths;
(6) The location, function, size, ownership, and manner of
maintenance of common open space areas, indicating the
nature of the facilities or structures therein and proposed uses
thereof;
(7) Connections to public utilities and streets, accompanied by
documentation as to the impact of the proposed development
on such utilities and streets;
(8) Lot lines with approximate dimensions for all residential units
for which individual ownership is proposed;
§ 1310 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1310
1:761
(9) A public utility plan for sanitary sewer, water and stormwater
management controls and their easements, and a general
grading plan.
D. Additional mapping and narrative shall be provided to illustrate the
following analysis:
(1) Hydrology - Analysis of natural drainage patterns and water
resources, including an analysis of streams, natural drainage
swales, ponds or lakes, wetland areas, floodplain areas,
permanent high water table areas, and seasonal high water
table areas throughout the site.
(2) Geology - Analysis of characteristics of rock formations
underlying the site, including delineation of aquifers
(particularly those locally subject to pollution), shallow
bedrock areas, and areas in which rock formations are
unstable or subject to sinkholes.
(3) Soils - Analysis of types of soils present in the site area,
including delineation of prime agricultural soil areas, aquifer
recharge soil areas, unstable soils, soils most susceptible to
erosion, and soils suitable for urban development. The analysis
of soils will be based on the Blair County Soil Survey (USDA
Soil Conservation Service).
(4) Topography - Analysis of the site's terrain, including mapping
of elevations and delineation of slope areas greater than 25%,
between 15% and 25%, and less than 15%.
(5) Vegetation and Wildlife - Analysis of tree and plant cover and
wildlife habitats of the site, emphasizing the location of
woodland and meadowland areas. Dominant tree, plant, and
animal species should be identified and the characteristics of
each recognized. Particular emphasis shall be placed on
preserving wildlife or vegetation identified as rare or
threatened.
E. A narrative describing the following:
(1) A narrative documenting the feasibility of the proposals for
control of stormwater, erosion and sedimentation, and for the
sanitary sewage treatment system.
(2) A narrative describing the substance of covenants, grants of
easements, restrictions to be imposed upon the use of land,
and structures, including proposed grants and/or for public
utilities.
(3) A plan of lots and narrative illustrating phasing, including a
time schedule for all on-site and off-site improvements which
shall be made, and the proposed times within which
§ 1310 LOGAN CODE § 1310
1:762
applications for final approval of all sections of the PRD are
intended to be filed. The schedule must be updated annually
on the anniversary of its approval until the development is
completed and accepted.
(4) A written statement by the landowner setting forth reasons
why, in his/her opinion, the PRD would be in the public interest
and would be consistent with the Township Comprehensive
Plan.
(5) Narrative with a statement of present ownership, along with a
statement of the applicant's interest in the property.
F. Traffic study.
G. Signature block with date for the Planning Commission and Board
of Supervisors.
4. Public Hearings.
A. Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative
approval of a PRD pursuant to this chapter, a public hearing
pursuant to public notice on said application shall be held by the
Board of Supervisors in the manner prescribed in the Zoning
Ordinance for the enactment of an amendment. The chairman or, in
his absence, the acting chairman of the Board or its designated
agency may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing shall be given
under oath and every party of record at a hearing shall have the
right to cross-examine adverse witnesses.
B. A verbatim record of the hearing shall be caused to be made by the
Board whenever such records are requested by any party to the
proceedings; but the cost of making and transcribing such a record
shall be borne by the party making the request and the expense of
copies of such record shall be borne by those who wish to obtain
such copies. All exhibits accepted in evidence shall be properly
identified and duly preserved or, if not accepted in evidence, shall
be properly identified and the reason for the exclusion clearly
noted in the record.
C. The Board may continue the public hearing provided, however, that
the ensuing hearings shall be concluded within 60 days from the
date of the first public hearing.
5. Findings.
A. Within 60 days following the conclusion of the public hearing
provided for in this Article, or within 180 days after the date of
filing of the application, whichever occurs first, the Board shall, by
official written communication to the landowner either:
(1) Grant tentative approval of the development plan as submitted;
§ 1310 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1310
1:763
(2) Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not
included in the development plan as submitted; or
(3) Deny tentative approval of the development plan.
Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed to be
a grant of tentative approval of the development plan as
submitted. In the event, however, that tentative approval is
granted subject to conditions, the landowner may, within 30
days after receiving a copy of the official written
communication of the Board of Supervisors, notify the Board
of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in which case, the
Board shall be deemed, to have denied tentative approval of
the development plan. In the event that landowner(s) does
not, within said period, notify the Board of his refusal to
accept all said conditions, tentative approval of the
development plan, with all said conditions, shall stand as
granted.
B. The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings
of fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the
reasons for the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial,
and said communication shall set forth in what respects the
development plan would or would not be in the public interest,
including but not limited to findings of fact and conclusions on the
following:
(1) Those respects in which the development plan is or is not
consistent with the comprehensive plan for the development of
the Township;
(2) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including but not limited to density, bulk, and use,
and the reasons, if any, why such departures are not deemed to
be in the public interest.
(3) The purpose, location, and amount of the common open space
in the planned residential development, the reliability of the
proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space, and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and
purpose of the common open space, and the adequacy or
inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common open
space as related to the proposed density and type of residential
development;
(4) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which said design does or does not make adequate provisions
for public services, provide adequate control over vehicular
§ 1310 LOGAN CODE § 1310
1:764
traffic, and further the amenities of light and air, recreation,
and visual enjoyment;
(5) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed
planned residential development to the neighborhood in which
it is proposed to be established; and
(6) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents of the planned residential development in the
integrity of the development plan.
C. In the event a development plan is granted tentative approval, with
or without conditions, the Board may set forth in the official written
communication the time within which an application for final
approval of the development plan shall be filed or, in the case of a
development plan which provide for development over a period
years, the periods of time within which applications for final
approval of each stage thereof shall be filed. Except upon the
consent of the landowner, the time so established between grant of
tentative approval and an application for final approval shall not be
more than three months and, in case of development over a period
of years, the time between applications for final approval of each
stage of a plan shall not be more than 12 months.
6. Status of Plan after Tentative Approval.
A. The official written communication provided for in Subsection 5B of
this section shall be certified by the Secretary of the Board of
Supervisors and shall be filed in the Township office, and a certified
copy shall be mailed to the landowner. Where tentative approval
has been granted, the same shall be noted on the Township Zoning
Map.
B. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of
the planned residential development for recording nor authorize
development or the issuance of any building permits. A
development plan which has been given tentative approval as
submitted, or which has been given tentative approval with
conditions which have been accepted by the landowner (and
provided that the landowner has not defaulted nor violated any of
the conditions of the tentative approval), shall not be modified or
revoked or otherwise impaired by action of the Township pending
an application, or applications for final approval, without the
consent of the landowner, provided an application for final approval
is filed or, in the case of development over a period of years,
provided applications are filed, within the periods of time specified
in the official written communication granting tentative approval.
C. Any changes to the tentatively approved development plan which
are proposed prior to the final plan submittal shall be submitted to
§ 1310 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1310
1:765
the Board of Supervisors for consideration and determination as
to whether or not the changes are substantial enough to require
a public hearing prior to approval. If the Board of Supervisors
determines a public hearing is not required, the plan may move
to the final approval stage. If the Board of Supervisors determines
a public hearing is necessary, the process outlined in subsections
public hearings and findings, above, shall be followed. If a public
hearing is required to review the revised plan, the applicant shall
be responsible for payment of the fee for the legal advertising
notice. Upon tentative approval, the applicant shall provide the
Township with three copies of the revised master plan.
D. In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval
and thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect
to abandon said development plan and shall so notify the governing
body in writing, or in the event the landowner shall fail to file an
application or applications for final approval within the required
period of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative approval
shall be deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area
included in the development plan for which final approval has not
been given shall be subject to those local ordinances otherwise
applicable thereto as they may be amended from time to time, and
the same shall be noted on the zoning map and in the records of the
Township Secretary.
E. A development plan which has been given tentative approval shall
submit street, sanitary, water and stormwater plans for the entire
development to be approved by the Township Engineer. The plans
shall include information sufficient for review and approval of a
pre-final design as required by the Township ordinances for a
preliminary subdivision plan. Approval of this submission is
required prior to any final plan submissions for separate section(s)
or the complete development. Review shall be within 90 days of the
submission or resubmission date. Pre-final design submission must
be reviewed and approved by the Director of Planning and Zoning,
fire chief, water and sewer provider, and Township Engineer.
7. Application for Final Approval. An application for final approval may be
for all the land included in a development plan or, to the extent set forth
in the tentative approval, a section thereof. Said application shall be
made to the Department of Planning and Zoning and within the time or
times specified by the official written communication granting tentative
approval. The application shall include the documents as outlined
below.
A. Ten copies of the final plan, prepared or certified by a registered
engineer or surveyor in accordance with the Township's
Subdivision [Chapter 22] and Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27],
showing the final location and widths of all streets, the location of
all buildings, parking areas, pedestrian ways, utilities, utility
easements, lot lines, the location and size of all open space not
§ 1310 LOGAN CODE § 1310
1:766
devoted to parking lots, streets or driveways, the proposed use of
all lands and buildings and the metes and bounds of all proposed
dedicated areas and lots.
B. Restrictive covenants executed by all owners of the premises
within the section covered by the final plan which, if approved,
shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Blair County. The
restrictive covenants shall be effective for a period of at least 35
years, except that covenants relating to stormwater management
facilities, parks, recreation and other open space areas shall
provide that the same remain as such perpetually.
C. Any additional conditions set forth at the time of tentative approval.
8. Optional Public Hearing. A public hearing on an application for final
approval of the development plan, or part thereof, shall not be required
provided that the development, or part thereof, submitted for final
approval is in compliance with the development plan theretofore given
tentative approval and with any specified conditions attached thereto.
9. Time Requirements On Approval. In the event the application for final
approval has been filed, together with all drawings, specifications, and
other documents in support thereof, and as required by the Ordinance
and the official written communication of tentative approval, the
Township shall, within 45 days from the date of the regular meeting of
the Board of Supervisors or Planning Commission, whichever first
reviews the plans, next following the date the application is filed, grant
such development plan final approval provided, however, that should
the next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of
the application, the forty-five-day period shall be measured from the
30th day following the day the application was filed.
10. Disapproval Procedures. In the event the development plan as
submitted contains variations from the development plan given
tentative approval, the approving body may refuse to grant final
approval and shall, within 45 days from the date of the regular meeting
of the governing body or the planning agency, whichever first reviews
the application, next following the date the application is filed, so advise
the landowner in writing of said refusal, setting forth in said notice the
reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the public
interest. Provided, however, that should the next regular meeting occur
more than 30 days following the filing of the application, the forty-fiveday
period shall be measured from the 30th day following the day the
application has been filed. In the event of such refusal, the landowner
may either:
A. Refile his application for final approval without the variations
objected; or
B. File a written request with the approving body that it hold a public
hearing on his application for final approval.
§ 1310 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1310
1:767
If the landowner wishes to take either such alternate action he
may do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply
for final approval, or within 30 additional days if the time for
applying for final approval shall have already passed at the time
when the landowner was advised that the development plan was
not in substantial compliance. In the event the landowner shall
fail to take either of these alternate actions within said time, he
shall be deemed to have abandoned the development plan. Any
such public hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice with
30 days after request for the hearing is made by the landowner,
and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner described in this
article for public hearings on applications for tentative approval.
Within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the approving
body shall by official written communication either grant final
approval to the development plan or deny final approval. The
grant or denial of final approval of the development plan shall, in
cases arising under this section, be in the form and contain the
findings required for an application for tentative approval set forth
in this article. Failure of the governing body or agency to render
a decision on an application for final approval and communicate
it to the applicant within the time and in the manner required
by this section shall be deemed an approval of the application
for final approval, as presented, unless the applicant has agreed
in writing to an extension of time or change in the prescribed
manner of presentation of communication of the decision, in which
case, failure to meet the extended time or change in manner or
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
11. Recording of Approved Plan. A development plan, or any part thereof,
which has been given final approval shall be so certified without delay
by the approving body and shall be filed of record forthwith in the office
of the recorder of deeds before any development shall take place in
accordance therewith. Upon the filing of record of the development
plan the zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the
land included in such plan shall cease to apply thereto. Pending
completion, in accordance with the time provisions stated in the
tentative approval of said planned residential development or of that
part thereof, as the case may be, that has been finally approved, no
modification of the provisions of said development plan, or part thereof,
as finally approved, shall be made except with the consent of the
landowner. Upon approval of a final plan, the developer shall record the
plat and post financial surety in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 22.
12. Abandonment After Approval. In the event that a development plan, or a
section thereof, is given final approval and thereafter the landowner
shall abandon such plan or the section thereof that has been finally
approved, and shall so notify the Board of Supervisors in writing; or, in
the event the landowner shall fail to commence and carry out the
planned residential development within such reasonable period of time
§ 1310 LOGAN CODE § 1310
1:768
§ 1311. Administration. [Added by Ord. 12-09-04; as amended by
Ord. 09-14-06B; and by Ord. 06-12-08]
as may be fixed by ordinance after final approval has been granted, no
development or further development shall take place on the property
included in the development plan until after the said property is resubdivided
and is reclassified by enactment of an amendment to the
Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
1. Performance Guarantee. Prior to release of the approved final plan for
recording, the developer shall guarantee the installation of all required
improvements by posting a performance guarantee. The amount, form,
terms of release, etc. of the performance guarantee shall be the same as
those specified in the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
2. Dedication and Maintenance Guarantee.
A. All streets, recreational facilities, surface drainage, water and
sewer facilities, and other improvements shown on the final plan
shall be privately owned until such time as they have been offered
for dedication to the Township and accepted by resolution of the
Board.
B. Before accepting any such offer of dedication, the Board shall
require of the developer a maintenance guarantee. The amount,
form, duration, terms of release, etc. shall be the same as those
specified in the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
3. Permits.
A. Issuance of permits, and all matters pertaining to administration of
the plan as finally approved, shall be the responsibility of the
Township Zoning Officer.
B. Upon application of the landowner showing compliance with the
requirements of final approval, the Zoning Officer shall issue
permits for construction pursuant to the plan, or any section
thereof.
C. The provisions of Article VII, Administration, of the Township
Zoning Ordinance shall be fully applicable to the plan as finally
approved insofar as the provisions thereof are consistent with the
provisions of this chapter and the conditions of final approval. The
Zoning Officer shall review the progress and status of construction
of the plan and render monthly reports thereon to the Board in
order to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
the conditions of final approval.
§ 1310 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1311
1:769
§ 1312. Limited Application. [Added by Ord. 12-09-04; as amended
by Ord. 09-14-06B; and by Ord. 06-12-08]
The provisions of Part 13 entitled "Planned Residential Developments", of
Chapter 20 of the Township of Logan Code of Ordinances shall be applicable
to only those Planned Residential Developments approved by the Township
on or before December 31, 2007; thereafter, no further Planned Residential
Developments shall be permitted in the Township of Logan and Part 13,
except as to those Planned Residential Developments heretofore approved,
is hereby rescinded in its entirety.
4. Fees. The Board shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees to be
paid by the developer at the time of filing the tentative and final
applications.
5. Enforcement Remedies. Any person, partnership, corporation, who or
which has violated the planned residential development provisions of
any ordinance enacted under this act or prior enabling laws shall, upon
being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by a municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by a
municipality a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the district justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the appropriate rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
district justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there was
no such violation, in which even there shall be deemed to have been
only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the district justice, and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All
judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of planned residential development provisions shall be paid
over to the municipality whose ordinance has been violated.
The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
§ 1311 LOGAN CODE § 1312
1:770
Part 14
WIND ENERGY FACILITIES
§ 1401. Title. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as amended by Ord.
08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
This Part shall be known as the "Wind Energy Facility Overlay Zone
Ordinance for Logan Township."
§ 1402. Purpose. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as amended by Ord.
08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
The purpose of this Part is to provide for the construction and operation of
wind energy facilities in Logan Township.
§ 1403. Application. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as amended by Ord.
08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
§ 1404. Permitted Use and Overlay Zone Established. [Added by
Ord. 11-09-06; as amended by Ord. 08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and
by Ord. 08-27-09]
A wind energy facility shall be considered a permitted use in the Wind
Energy Facility Overlay Zone the location of which is set forth on the map
attached hereto as Exhibit A, which shall overlay, but not replace the zoning
in effect for the area at the time of enactment of this Part. Any other uses
proposed within the overlay zone shall comply with the existing underlying
zoning.38
§ 1405. Permitting Requirement. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as
amended by Ord. 08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
A. This Part applies to all wind energy facilities proposed to be
constructed after the effective date of this Part, except that this Part is
not intended to apply to stand-alone wind turbines constructed
primarily for residential or farm use.
B. Wind energy facilities constructed prior to the effective date of this Part
shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Part; provided
that any physical modification to an existing wind energy facility that
materially alters the size, type and number of wind turbines or other
equipment shall require a permit under this Part.
A. No wind energy facility, or addition of a wind turbine to an existing wind
energy facility, shall be constructed or located within Logan Township
unless a land development plan has been approved and recorded in
accordance with the Township's Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance and zoning and building permits, together with all fees
established by the Township for the same including, but not limited to,
38.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1401 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1405
1:771
§ 1406. Land Development Plan Application. [Added by Ord.
11-09-06; as amended by Ord. 08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by
Ord. 08-27-09]
fees for applications, reviews and inspections, have been issued to the
facility owner or operator approving construction of the facility under
this Part.
B. The permit application or amended permit application shall be
accompanied with a fee in accordance with the Township's fee
schedule.
C. Any physical modification to an existing and permitted wind energy
facility that materially alters the size, type and number of wind turbines
or other equipment shall require a land development plan and/or
building permit modification under this Part. Like-kind replacements
shall not require a permit modification.
A. All wind energy facilities shall be reviewed in accordance with the
Township's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and fees,
established by the Township, paid accordingly. In addition to the typical
land development requirements, the following information shall be
submitted to the Township:
(1) A narrative describing the proposed wind energy facility, including
an overview of the project; the project location; the generating
capacity of the wind energy facility; the number, representative
types and height or range of heights of wind turbines to be
constructed, including their generating capacity, dimensions and
respective manufacturers, and a description of ancillary facilities.
(2) An affidavit or similar evidence of agreement between the property
owner and the facility owner or operator demonstrating that the
facility owner or operator has the permission of the property owner
to apply for necessary permits for construction and operation of the
wind energy facility.
(3) Identification of the properties on which the proposed wind energy
facility will be located, and the properties adjacent to where the
wind energy facility will be located.
(4) A plan showing the planned location of each wind turbine, property
lines, setback lines, access road and turnout locations,
substation(s), electrical cabling from the wind energy facility to the
substation(s), ancillary equipment, buildings, and structures,
including permanent meteorological towers, associated
transmission lines, and layout of all structures within the
geographical boundaries of any applicable setback.
(5) Documents related to decommissioning.
§ 1405 LOGAN CODE § 1406
1:772
§ 1407. Design and Installation. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as
amended by Ord. 08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
(6) Any other relevant studies, reports, certifications and approvals as
may be requested by Logan Township to ensure compliance with
this Part.
B. As part of the land development plan review process, the Logan
Township Planning Commission will schedule a public meeting to
review the plan. The applicant shall participate in the meeting, present
the project to the public and municipal officials, and answer questions
about the project. The public shall be afforded an opportunity to ask
questions and provide comment on the proposed project.
A. Design Safety Certification. The design of the wind energy facility shall
conform to applicable industry standards, including those of the
American National Standards Institute. The applicant shall submit
certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment
manufacturers from Underwriters' Laboratories, Det Norske Veritas,
Germanishcer Lloyd Wind Energies, or other similar certifying
organizations.
B. Uniform Construction Code. To the extent applicable, the wind energy
facility shall comply with the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code,
34 Pa. Code §§ 403.1 - 403.142.
C. Controls and Brakes. All wind energy facilities shall be equipped with a
redundant braking system. This includes both aerodynamic overspeed
controls (including variable pitch, tip, and other similar systems) and
mechanical brakes. Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe
mode. Stall regulation shall not be considered a sufficient braking
system for overspeed protection.
D. Electrical Components. All electrical components of the wind energy
facility shall conform to relevant and applicable local, state and national
codes, and relevant and applicable international standards.
E. Visual Appearance; Power Lines.
(1) Wind turbines shall be a nonobtrusive color such as white, off-white
or gray.
(2) Wind energy facilities shall not be artificially lighted, except to the
extent required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other
applicable authority that regulates air safety.
(3) Wind turbines shall not display advertising, except for reasonable
identification of the turbine manufacturer, facility owner and
operator. Warning, equipment information, and ownership signage
may be placed at the base of each wind turbine.
§ 1406 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1407
1:773
§ 1408. Setbacks. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as amended by Ord.
08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
(4) On-site transmission and power lines between wind turbines shall,
to the maximum extent practicable, be placed underground.
F. Warnings.
(1) A clearly visible warning sign concerning voltage must be placed at
the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations.
(2) Visible, reflective, colored objects, such as flags, reflectors, or tape
shall be placed on the anchor points of guy wires and along the guy
wires up to a height of 10 feet from the ground.
G. Climb Prevention/Locks.
(1) Wind turbines shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above ground
surface.
(2) All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment shall be
locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by nonauthorized
persons.
H. Height. The Height to the wind turbine hub shall not exceed 335 feet.
I. Geological and Environmental Studies. Prior to obtaining a building
permit for any wind energy facility, the facility owner of the proposed
wind energy facility, at said facility owner's expense, shall conduct any
and all geological and environmental studies and/or obtain any and all
necessary permits required by any and all applicable commonwealth
and/or federal laws and/or agencies to ensure that said wind energy
facilities are appropriate for the proposed building site and said
facilities will not adversely impact the environment at and/or around
the proposed building site. The facility owner shall submit to the
Township, within 10 days of the date of receipt thereof, a copy of the
results of any such studies and/or permits and/or comments and/or
recommendations from all such agencies and in no case shall any land
development plan be approved prior to the Township receiving any and
all such copies.
A. Occupied Buildings.
(1) Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest occupied building
of a participating landowner, as measured from the center of the
wind turbine base to the nearest point on the foundation of the said
occupied building, and from the property line of a nonparticipating
landowner property NOT having erected thereon an occupied
building a distance of 1.5 times the turbine height.
(2) Wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest property line
located on a nonparticipating landowner's property having erected
thereon an occupied building a distance of not less than 2,500 feet.
§ 1407 LOGAN CODE § 1408
1:774
§ 1409. Waiver of Setbacks. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as amended
by Ord. 08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
The setback distance shall be measured from the center of the wind
turbine base to the nearest point on the property line.
(3) Wind turbines shall be set back a minimum of 3,000 feet from the
center of the railroad bed surrounding the Horseshoe Curve
National Historic Landmark. The applicant must also provide
computer modeling verifying/documenting that none of the
windmills or accessory structures will be able to be seen from the
grounds of the Horseshoe Curve Visitor Center or the Observation
Area (at the top of the funicular). If post construction any such wind
turbine(s) can be seen from the grounds of the said Horseshoe
Curve Visitor Center or the said Observation Area, the applicant
shall, upon written notice from the Township to said applicant,
dismantle any and all such offending wind turbine(s) within the
time period specified in such written notice.
B. Property Lines. All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest
property line a distance of 1.5 times the turbine height, whichever is
greater. The setback distance shall be measured to the center of the
wind turbine base.
C. Public Roads. All wind turbines shall be set back from the nearest
public road a distance of not less than 1.5 times the turbine height, as
measured from the right-of-way line of the nearest public road to the
center of the wind turbine base.
D. Wetlands. All wind turbines shall be setback a distance of 500 feet from
any wetlands listed on the National Wetland Inventory Map for the
Township.
A. Property owners may waive the setback requirements in § 1408A(2)
(Occupied Buildings on Nonparticipating Landowner's property) and
§ 1408B (Property Lines) by signing a waiver, that sets forth the
applicable setback provision(s) and the proposed changes.
B. The written waiver shall notify the property owner(s) of the setback
required by this Part, describe how the proposed wind energy facility is
not in compliance, and state that consent is granted for the wind energy
facility to not be setback as required by this Part.
C. Any such waiver shall be recorded in the Blair County Recorder of
Deeds Office. The waiver shall describe the properties benefited and
burdened, and advise all subsequent purchasers of the burdened
property that the waiver of setback shall run with the land and may
forever burden the subject property.
D. Upon written request, the Logan Township Board of Supervisors may
waive the setback requirement for public roads for good cause.
§ 1408 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1409
1:775
§ 1410. Use of Public Roads. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as amended
by Ord. 08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
§ 1411. Noise and Shadow Flicker. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as
amended by Ord. 08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
E. Landowners who execute waiver agreements become participating
landowners.
A. The applicant shall identify all state and local public roads to be used
within Logan Township to transport equipment and parts for
construction, operation or maintenance of the wind energy facility.
B. Logan Township's engineer or a qualified third party engineer hired by
Logan Township and paid for by the applicant, shall document road
conditions prior to construction. The engineer shall document road
conditions again 30 days after construction is complete or as weather
permits.
C. Logan Township may require bonding of the road/roads by the
applicant/owner in compliance with state regulations.
D. Any road damage caused by the applicant or its contractors shall be
promptly repaired at the applicant's expense.
A. Audible sound (noise) and/or vibration carry from one or more wind
energy facilities shall not exceed 45 dBA on the A scale and/or 60 dBc
on the C scale, as measured at the closest property line of a
nonparticipating landowner's property having thereon an occupied
building and/or at any point further from such closest property line,
using the Township's noise meter and/or noise consultant at the sole
cost of the facility owner. If there is a conflict on a reading between the
facility owner and the Township, the Township may hire a third-party
independent tester, agreed upon and paid for by the facility owner. The
time(s) for such testing shall be in accordance with Subsection C of this
§ 1411. Since at the time of the adoption of this Part, no conclusive
maximum noise level exists with regard to vibration carry from such
wind turbine(s), an applicant's compliance with this Part's regulations
shall not prevent the Township from seeking compliance from said
applicant pursuant to any other applicable ordinance and/or
commonwealth and/or federal law, including but not limited to, public
nuisance laws, should the actual noise/vibration carry adversely affect
the health, safety and/or welfare of the citizens as may be determined
by a court of competent jurisdiction. For purposes of this Part, noise/
vibration carry shall be either an audible sound heard and/or a physical
manifestation whereby an individual feels a vibration in or about the
body with or without hearing sound as a result of the operation of a
wind turbine or group thereof.
§ 1409 LOGAN CODE § 1411
1:776
§ 1412. Waiver of Noise and Shadow Flicker Provisions. [Added by
Ord. 11-09-06; as amended by Ord. 08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and
by Ord. 08-27-09]
B. The facility owner and operator shall eliminate shadow flicker to any
occupied building on a nonparticipating landowner's property unless
waived by the affected landowner.
C. The facility owner of any proposed and/or existing wind energy facility
shall, at the sole cost and expense of the facility owner, conduct noise
anticipated sound level(s) and projected noise/vibration carry tests.
Said tests shall be conducted at such time or times and/or distances
(which shall not be less than the property line of the closest
nonparticipating landowner) as may be directed by the Township in
writing. Such tests shall be required prior to issuance of a building
permit for one wind energy facility and/or group thereof consisting of
more than one such facility. Such tests shall also be required within 30
days after full operation thereof and at such other reasonable intervals
as may be requested by the Township in writing to the facility owner, as
set forth in this § 1411. Such testing shall be conducted and written
report thereof submitted to the Township, within 10 days of the date of
completion of such report, showing that each such wind energy facility
and/or group thereof consisting of more than one such facility, will
satisfy or currently satisfies the provisions of this Part with conclusions
that the noise/vibration carry levels set forth in this section will or are
not being exceeded.
D. In the event that any wind energy facility and/or group thereof
consisting of more than one such facility is noncompliant with the noise/
vibration carry levels and/or shadow flicker provisions set forth in this
Part, the facility owner shall take such corrective action as may be
necessary to bring such facility(ies) into compliance with this Part
including, but not limited to, cessation of operation of any offending
wind energy facility(ies) upon 10 days' written notice from the
Township to the facility owner to do so.
A. Property owners may waive the noise and shadow flicker provisions of
this Part by signing a waiver of their rights.
B. The written waiver shall notify the property owner(s) of the sound or
flicker limits in this Part, describe the impact on the property owner(s),
and state that the consent is granted for the wind energy facility to not
comply with the sound or flicker limit in this Part.
C. Any such waiver shall be recorded in the Blair County Recorder of
Deeds Office. The waiver shall describe the properties benefited and
burdened, and advise all subsequent purchasers of the burdened
property that the waiver of sound or flicker limit shall run with the land
and may forever burden the subject property.
§ 1411 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1413
1:777
§ 1413. Signal Interference. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as amended
by Ord. 08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
The applicant shall ensure that there will be no disruption or loss of radio,
telephone, television or similar signals. The facility owner and/or operator
will also utilize windmill industry standards to eliminate the impact, if any,
of stray voltage and/or EMF on adjacent property.
§ 1414. Liability Insurance. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as amended
by Ord. 08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
There shall be maintained a current general liability policy covering bodily
injury and property damage with limits of at least $1 million per occurrence
and $1 million in the aggregate. Certificates shall be made available to
Logan Township upon request.
§ 1415. Decommissioning. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as amended by
Ord. 08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
A. The facility owner and operator shall, at its expense, complete
decommissioning of the wind energy facility, or individual wind
turbines, within 12 months after the end of the useful life of the facility
or individual wind turbines. The wind energy facility or individual wind
turbines will presume to be at the end of its useful life if no electricity is
generated for a continuous period of 12 months.
B. Decommissioning shall include removal of wind turbines, buildings,
cabling, electrical components, roads, foundations to a depth of 36
inches, and any other associated facilities.
C. Disturbed earth shall be graded and reseeded, unless the landowner
requests in writing that the access roads or other land surface areas not
be restored.
D. An independent and certified professional engineer shall be retained to
estimate the total cost of decommissioning ("decommissioning costs")
without regard to salvage value of the equipment, and the cost of
decommissioning net salvage value of the equipment ("net
decommissioning costs").
E. The facility owner or operator shall post and maintain decommissioning
funds in an amount equal to net decommissioning costs; provided, that
at no point shall decommissioning funds be less than 50% of
decommissioning costs. The decommissioning funds shall be posted and
maintained with a bonding company or federal or commonwealth
chartered lending institution chosen by the facility owner or operator
and participating landowner posting the financial security, provided
that the bonding company or lending institution is authorized to
conduct such business within the commonwealth and is approved by
Logan Township. The decommissioning funds shall be posted prior to
§ 1413 LOGAN CODE § 1415
1:778
§ 1416. Public Inquiries and Complaints. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06;
as amended by Ord. 08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord.
08-27-09]
§ 1417. Remedies. [Added by Ord. 11-09-06; as amended by Ord.
08-23-07; by Ord. 07-24-08; and by Ord. 08-27-09]
final plan approval and shall be updated with a new estimate every five
years.
F. If the facility owner or operator fails to complete decommissioning
within the period prescribed by Subsection A, then the landowner shall
have six months to complete decommissioning.
G. If neither the facility owner or operator, nor the landowner complete
decommissioning within the periods prescribed by Subsection A and H,
then Logan Township may take such measures as necessary to complete
decommissioning. The entry into and submission of evidence of a
developer's agreement shall constitute agreement and consent of the
parties to the agreement, their respective heirs, successors and assigns
that Logan Township may take such action as necessary to implement
the decommissioning plan.
H. Decommissioning Funds may be in the form of a performance bond,
surety bond, letter of credit, corporate guarantee or other form of
financial assurance as may be acceptable to Township.
I. The escrow agent shall release the decommissioning funds when the
facility owner or operator has demonstrated and the municipality
concurs that decommissioning has been satisfactorily completed, or
upon written approval of the municipality in order to implement the
decommissioning plan.
A. The facility owner/operator shall maintain on file with the Township, a
phone number and responsible contact person for contact 24 hours a
day, seven days a week. If there is a problem, the facility owner/
operator shall begin to correct the problem within 24 hours and have it
correct within 10 business days from the time the complaint or inquiry
was received. If the problem has not been corrected within 10 business
days, the Township, may, at its discretion, instruct the facility owner/
operator to shut down the affected wind turbine generators until a
repair or correction is made to eliminate the problem.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate or fail
to comply with or take any action which is contrary to the terms of this
Part, or any permit issued under this Part, or cause another to violate or
fail to comply, or to take any action which is contrary to the terms of this
Part or any permit issued under this Part.
B. If Logan Township determines that a violation of this Part or the permit
has occurred, Logan Township shall provide written notice to any
§ 1415 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1417
1:779
person, firm, or corporation alleged to be in violation of this Part or
permit. If the alleged violation does not pose an immediate threat to
public health or safety, Logan Township and the parties shall engage
in good faith negotiations to resolve the alleged violation. Such
negotiations shall be conducted within 30 days of the notice of violation.
C. If after 30 days from the date of the notice of violation Logan Township
determines, in its discretion, that the parties have not resolved the
alleged violation, Logan Township may institute civil enforcement
proceedings or any other remedy at law, including but not limited to,
enforcement proceedings permitted before a district justice pursuant to
this Chapter 27, to ensure compliance with this Part and/or the permit.
§ 1417 LOGAN CODE § 1417
1:780
Part 15
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 1501. Title. [Added by Ord. 08-12-10]
This Part shall be known as "Small Wind Energy Systems."
§ 1502. Purpose. [Added by Ord. 08-12-10]
The purpose of this Part is to provide for the construction and operation of
small wind energy systems in Logan Township.
§ 1503. Application (Applicable to all Small Wind Energy Systems).
[Added by Ord. 08-12-10]
§ 1504. Land Development Plan Application (Applicable only for
more than two Small Wind Energy Systems on any one parcel).
[Added by Ord. 08-12-10]
A. Small Wind Energy Systems: Notwithstanding any provision in this
chapter to the contrary, small wind energy systems shall be permitted
only by special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board in all zoning
districts. A building permit shall be required for the installation and/or
modifications of all small wind energy systems.
B. If the applicant is granted a special exception for a small wind energy
system, the Township, at any time after the grant of the special
exception, may require the applicant to provide a form of surety (i.e.,
post a bond, letter of credit or establish an escrow account or other as
may be approved by the Township Solicitor) if the Township Zoning
Officer determines that the small wind energy system is not in
compliance with the terms of this chapter and/or any other applicable
federal, state or local law/regulation. The enforcement notice
provisions of this chapter shall govern any such notice of violation and
such notice shall require the applicant, within the time period stated in
the notice, to both correct the violation and provide the surety required.
Said surety shall be in an amount, as determined by the Township, to
cover costs of the removal in the event the Township must remove the
facility. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs
associated with the removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The
amount shall include a mechanism to accommodate the rate of inflation
over 15 years. The Township Zoning Hearing Board may also require
such security at the time of the approval of the application for special
exception.
C. All small wind energy systems installed prior to the enactment of this
Part are exempt from the conditions herein, however any such
previously installed small wind energy system shall be subject to the
nonconformity provisions of this chapter.
A. Procedure for Review After Obtaining Special Exception:
§ 1501 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1504
1:781
§ 1505. Meteorological (Met) Towers. [Added by Ord. 08-12-10]
(1) Building Permit. A building permit shall be required for the
installation or modification of a small wind energy system.
(2) Plan Review. All small wind energy facilities shall be reviewed in
accordance with the Township's Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and fees, established by the Township, and
paid accordingly. In addition to the typical land development
requirements, the following information shall be submitted to the
Township:
(a) Location of the proposed small wind energy system,
foundations, guy anchors and associated equipment
(b) Location of any overhead utility lines.
(c) Small wind energy system specifications, including
manufacturer, model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type
(freestanding or guyed).
(d) If the small wind energy system will be connected to the power
grid, documentation shall be provided regarding the
notification of the intent with the utility regarding the
applicant's installation of a small wind energy system.
(e) Sound level analysis prepared by the wind turbine
manufacturer or qualified engineer.
(f) Estimated costs of physically removing the small wind energy
system to comply with surety standards.
(g) Evidence of compliance or nonapplicability with Federal
Aviation Administration requirements.
A. Meteorological (Met) Towers. The construction of a met tower for the
purpose of collecting data to develop a small wind energy system, shall
abide with the following requirements:
(1) The construction, installation or modification of a met tower shall
require a building permit and shall conform to all applicable
sections of the state building code.
(2) Met towers shall be permitted on a temporary basis not to exceed
three years.
(3) Met towers shall adhere to the small wind energy system
standards.
(4) A special exception is not required to construct, install or modify a
met tower. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the building
inspector shall ensure the met tower complies with the small wind
energy system standards.
§ 1504 LOGAN CODE § 1506
1:782
§ 1506. Special Exception Standards. [Added by Ord. 08-12-10]
Through the special exception review process, the small wind energy
system shall be evaluated by the Township's Zoning Hearing Board for
compliance to the following standards:
A. Setbacks.
(1) A small wind energy system shall be set back a distance equal to
110% of the total small wind energy system height from:
(a) Any public road right-of-way, unless written permission is
granted by the governmental entity with jurisdiction over the
road.
(b) Any overhead utility lines.
(c) All property lines, unless the affected land owner provides
written permission through a recorded easement allowing the
small wind energy system's fall zone to overlap with the
abutting property.
(d) Any travel ways to include but not be limited to driveways,
parking lots, nature trails or sidewalks.
(2) If an abutting landowner disapproves on record during the special
exception hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board, of the
proposed small wind energy system, the said system shall be set
back a distance equal to 220% of the total height from all property
lines.
(3) The setback shall be measured to the center of the tower's base.
(4) Guy wires used to support the tower are exempt from the small
wind energy system setback requirements.
B. Tower.
(1) Small wind turbines may only be attached to freestanding or guy
wired monopole towers. Lattice towers are explicitly prohibited.
(2) The total small wind energy system height of a small wind energy
system shall not exceed 40 feet in residentially zoned districts and
150 feet in all other zoning districts. No small wind energy system
shall be permitted to be placed on a building in a residentially
zoned district.
(3) The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed tower
height does not exceed the height recommended by the
manufacturer of the wind turbine and that object on which the
proposed tower is to be placed is capable of supporting such
proposed tower.
§ 1506 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1506
1:783
(4) No small wind energy system shall be located in a front yard in a
residential district.
(5) There shall be no more than two small wind energy systems per
parcel containing a building, unless such parcel is in excess of two
acres, in which event two small wind energy systems shall be
permitted for every additional two acres.
(6) Small wind energy systems shall not be climbable up to 15 feet
above ground surface. All access doors to small wind energy
systems, if any, and electrical equipment shall be locked or fenced,
as appropriate, to prevent entry by nonauthorized persons.
C. Sound Level. The small wind energy system shall not exceed 45 dBA on
the A scale and/or 60 dBc on the C scale, except during short-term
events such as severe wind storms and utility outages, as measured at
the closest property line and/or at any point further from such closest
property line, using the Township's noise meter and/or noise consultant
at the sole cost of the applicant.
D. Shadowing/Flicker. Small wind energy systems shall be sited in a
manner that does not result in significant shadowing or flicker impacts.
The applicant has the burden of proving that this effect does not have
significant adverse impact on neighboring or adjacent uses either
through siting or mitigation.
E. Signs.
(1) All signs, both temporary and permanent, are prohibited on the
small wind energy system, except as follows:
(a) Manufacturer's or installer's identification on the wind turbine.
(b) Appropriate warning signs and placards.
F. Code Compliance. The small wind energy system shall comply with all
applicable sections of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code 34
Pa. Code §§ 403.1 - 403.142.
G. Insurance. There shall be maintained on a small wind energy system a
current general liability policy covering bodily injury and property
damage with limits of at least $1 million per occurrence and $1 million
in the aggregate. Certificates shall be made available to Logan
Township upon request.
H. Aviation. The small wind energy system shall be built to comply with all
applicable Federal Aviation Administration including but not limited to
regulations regarding installations close to airports, and the applicable
Pennsylvania Aviation regulations. Evidence of compliance or
nonapplicability shall be submitted with the application.
I. Visual Impacts. It is inherent that small wind energy systems may pose
some visual impacts due to the tower height needed to access the wind
§ 1506 LOGAN CODE § 1506
1:784
§ 1507. Abandonment. [Added by Ord. 08-12-10]
resources. The purpose of this section is to reduce the visual impacts,
without restricting the owner's access to the wind resources.
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate through project site planning and
proposed mitigation that the small wind energy system's visual
impacts will be minimized for surrounding neighbors and the
community. This may include, but not be limited to information
regarding site selection, turbine design or appearance, buffering,
and screening of ground mounted electrical and control equipment.
All electrical conduits shall be underground.
(2) The color of the small wind energy system shall either be the stock
color from the manufacturer or painted with a nonreflective,
unobtrusive color that blends in with the surrounding environment.
(3) A small wind energy system shall not be artificially lit unless such
lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). If
lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a copy of the FAA
determination to establish the required markings and/or lights for
the small wind energy system.
(4) A small wind energy system located in a residential zone, shall not
be so connected to the power grid to permit electricity to be sold
and/or transferred off the parcel on which it is erected.
J. Access:
(1) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be
labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
(2) The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step
bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum
height of 15 feet above the ground.
K. Approved Small Wind Turbines. The manufacturer and model of the
Small wind turbine to be used in the proposed small wind energy
system must have been approved by the California Energy Commission
or the New York State Energy Research and Development Authority, or
a similar list approved by the state of Pennsylvania, if available.
L. Clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is
necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the small
wind energy system and as otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations, and ordinances.
A. At such time that a small wind energy system is scheduled to be
abandoned or discontinued, the applicant will notify the Township
Zoning Officer by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of
abandonment or discontinuation of operations.
§ 1506 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1507
1:785
B. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall
physically remove the small wind energy system within 90 days from
the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. This period may be
extended at the request of the owner and at the discretion of the
Township Zoning Officer. "Physically remove" shall include, but not be
limited to:
(1) Removal of the small wind turbine and tower and related abovegrade
structures.
(2) Restoration of the location of the small wind energy system to its
natural condition, except that any landscaping, grading or belowgrade
foundation may remain in the after-conditions.
C. In the event that an applicant fails to give such notice, the system shall
be considered abandoned or discontinued if the system is out-of-service
for a continuous twelve-month period. After the 12 months of
inoperability, the Township Zoning Officer may issue a notice of
abandonment to the owner of the small wind energy system. The owner
shall have the right to respond to the notice of abandonment within 30
days from notice receipt date. The Township Zoning Officer shall
withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the owner that the
notice has been withdrawn if the owner provides information that
demonstrates the small wind energy system has not been abandoned.
D. If the owner fails to respond to the notice of abandonment or if after
review by the Township Zoning Officer it is determined that the small
wind energy system has been abandoned or discontinued, the owner of
the small wind energy system shall remove the small wind turbine and
tower at the owner's sole expense within three months of receipt of the
notice of abandonment. If the owner fails to physically remove the small
wind energy system after the notice of abandonment procedure, the
Township shall have the authority to enter the subject property and
physically remove the small wind energy system, in which event, the
Township shall, in addition to any and all other remedies it may have
available, have the authority to place a municipal lien against the
property on which the said small wind energy system was located.
§ 1507 LOGAN CODE § 1507
1:786
Part 16
SIGNS
§ 1601. Title. [Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
This Part shall be known as the "Logan Township Sign Regulations."
§ 1602. Purpose. [Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
§ 1603. General Regulations Applicable to all Signs. [Added by Ord.
10-24-13]
1. The purpose of this Part is to ensure that all signs, except as hereinafter
provided, shall be erected, constructed, assembled, rebuilt, altered,
relocated, enlarged, located, illuminated, maintained, repaired, or
operated in conformity with the provisions of this Part.
2. This Part will also promote the safety, health, and well-being of the
residents of the Township of Logan, and of those who utilize the roads
within the Township of Logan, by placing regulations and restrictions
on signs within the Township of Logan.
1. No sign, unless exempt, shall be erected, rebuilt, altered, relocated or
enlarged until a permit is issued by the Township of Logan.
2. No sign shall be located within 10 feet of a front, side or rear lot line.
3. In a zoning district designated as residential of any type, no signs shall
be permitted except:
A. Customary professional signs and rooming board house signs, not
larger than two square feet;
B. Signs appropriate to a public or quasi-public building;
C. Signs placed on properties offered for sale or rent;
D. Signs identifying a building or use permitted under Chapter 27;
and
E. Signs incidental to legal process and necessary to the public
welfare.
4. No sign shall be placed in such a position, or have such a source of
illumination, that it will cause any danger to pedestrians or vehicular
traffic.
5. At all street intersections and driveway entrances, no sign, except
traffic control signs, school warning signs, and similar signs as provided
for by other portions of this Part, shall be permitted within a clear sight
triangle established for a distance of 15 feet behind the edge of
pavement to the point 75 feet from the point of intersection of the
§ 1601 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1603
1:787
center lines of the intersecting streets. See the "clear sight triangle"
definition.
6. No sign, other than traffic control signs, school warning signs, and
similar signs (as determined and/or as permitted by the Township),
shall be erected within the right-of-way lines of any street or extend
over any street right-of-way.
7. No sign shall be utilized in a manner which produces a noxious glare at
or beyond the boundaries of the lot on which it is located. No direct
beams of light shall be directed toward adjacent properties or public
roads.
8. No sign shall be erected or located so as to prevent free ingress to or
egress from any window, door, or fire escape.
9. No sign that revolves is permitted.
10. No sign, which emits smoke, vapors or particulates, sound or odor shall
be permitted.
11. No portion of any sign shall project over a lot line.
12. The area immediately surrounding each sign shall be kept in a clean,
sanitary, and healthful condition. No accumulations of loose paper,
bottles, cans, garbage, or similar items shall be permitted. The lot must
remain in compliance with Township standards.
13. Every sign shall be constructed of durable material and kept in good
condition. Peeling paint shall be removed and replaced; broken letters
or other parts shall be repaired or replaced; broken lights shall be
replaced; and similar maintenance tasks shall be performed when
necessary. Any sign which becomes dilapidated, or which creates a
hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, as determined by the
Township Zoning or Code Enforcement Officer, upon 10 days' written
notice to the owner by the Township, shall be removed at the expense of
the owner or lessee. If not so removed, the Township may remove same
without prior notice to the owner, and the cost thereof shall be assessed
to the owner and/or the Township may lien the owner's property for the
cost thereof.
14. No vulgar, indecent or obscene signs may be displayed in any manner.
15. No signs shall be permitted which are posted, stapled, or otherwise
permanently attached to public utility poles or trees within a street
right-of-way.
16. All sign provisions of this Part shall apply to the use of silos,
smokestacks, water towers and other similar structures as signs.
17. With the exception of ground signs, no sign structure erected directly
upon the ground shall have less than three feet of clear space between
§ 1603 LOGAN CODE § 1603
1:788
§ 1604. Signs Requiring Permits. [Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
The following signs are permitted with issuance of a sign permit:
such sign and the ground; however, necessary supports may extend
through such space.
18. Signs which make use of words such as "STOP," "LOOK," "ONE-WAY,"
"DANGER," "YIELD," or any similar words, phrases, symbols, lights or
characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse
traffic are prohibited.
19. Signs are prohibited on public property or public rights-of-way, unless
erected by a governmental body and bearing no commercial
advertising.
20. Sign placement shall be limited to street frontage only.
21. Roof signs shall not be permitted.
22. From and after the effective date of this Part, LCD signs shall be
permitted only in the Business Corridor of Logan Township. In addition,
off-premises advertising signs existing on the date of the enactment of
this Part may be changed to LCD only in the Business Corridor of the
Township.
23. No LCD sign shall be operated (brightness, timing. . .) in such a manner
as to be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
A. Off-Premises Advertising Signs:
(1) Shall not be located in a residential zoning district.
(2) The total area on one side or facing any one street frontage of any
one premises shall not exceed 300 square feet.
(3) There cannot be more than three faces per sign.
(4) Each sign face cannot exceed 300 square feet.
(5) Each face can only be seen from one direction of traffic along the
adjacent roadways.
(6) Shall not be erected within 500 feet of any other off-premises
advertising sign on the same side of any street, road, or highway.
(7) Shall not be erected within 300 feet in a three-hundred-sixtydegree
radius of any other off-premises advertising sign.
(8) No more than one off-premises advertising sign shall be allowed on
any one street frontage of any one property.
B. On-Premises Business Signs:
(1) Freestanding Signs:
§ 1603 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1604
1:789
§ 1605. Permitted Signs Not Requiring Permits. [Added by Ord.
10-24-13]
(a) One permanent identifying freestanding business sign per
tenant or business may be erected on each street frontage.
(b) Within the I-99 Corridor, there shall be no maximum signage
height. The height will be determined by the tenant and/or
owner to be appropriate for visibility within the corridor. For a
regional or national tenant or business, the size of the
freestanding sign shall be based on the defined corporate
criteria for the size of the business; however, the size of the
freestanding sign shall not exceed 400 square feet per tenant
or business.
(c) Outside the I-99 Corridor, the maximum height of a
freestanding on-premises sign shall be 25 feet for a pole sign
and 35 feet for a ground sign. For every additional tenant
added to a ground sign, the maximum height may be increased
by five feet. The maximum area for freestanding signs is 400
square feet per tenant or business.
(2) Wall Signs:
(a) One permanent wall sign per tenant or business may be
attached to each wall of the building.
(b) The maximum area of a wall sign for a regional or national
tenant or business shall be based on the defined corporate
criteria for the size of the business; however, the size of the
wall sign shall not exceed 400 square feet.
(c) The maximum area of a wall sign for a nonregional or
nonnational tenant or business may not exceed 400 square
feet.
(d) Accessory incidental signage shall not be included in the fourhundred-
square-foot maximum calculation.
1. No sign shall hereafter be erected, rebuilt, altered, relocated or
enlarged until a permit is issued by the Township of Logan for such
purposes, except for signs listed below:
A. (Reserved)
B. Construction signs of 32 square feet or less.
C. Directional/informational signs of 12 square feet or less.
D. Holiday or special events decorations.
E. Nameplates, house numbers, address signs.
F. Public signs or notices, or any sign relating to an emergency.
§ 1604 LOGAN CODE § 1605
1:790
§ 1606. Nonconforming Signs. [Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
G. Real estate signs which advertise sale, rental or lease, provided
that signs shall not exceed 32 square feet per side; signs shall be
located on premises to be sold, leased or rented; no more than two
signs may face any one street frontage; and no sign shall be located
closer than five feet to any front, side, or rear lot line.
H. Window signs - when located on the inside of the building.
I. Incidental signs.
J. Temporary signs - for a period of 60 days or less in any one-year
period.
K. Any other sign which does not exceed 12 square feet in area.
L. Traffic control signs.
M. Political signs; however:
(1) They shall not exceed four feet by four feet.
(2) They shall not be posted prior to two months before the
general, municipal, special, or primary election and shall be
removed within two weeks following the election.
2. The fact that a permit is not required for a sign does not exempt that
sign from any of the other provisions of this chapter.
1. After the effective date of this Part, there exists or will exist signs which
do not conform to the requirements of this Part, which, if lawful before
this Part became effective, may be continued subject to certain
limitations, even though such nonconforming signs would be
prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Part.
2. Nonconforming signs are subject to the following regulations:
A. Subject to Subsection 2B and D below, nonconforming signs, once
removed from their location after the effective date of this Part,
shall be replaced only in conformity with this chapter.
B. Nonconforming signs destroyed by any means to 50% or more of
replacement value immediately prior to destruction shall be
removed and shall be replaced only with a sign that is no more
nonconforming than the sign that was destroyed.
C. Nonconforming signs destroyed by any means to less than 50% of
replacement value immediately prior to destruction may be
repaired, but no repairs shall make the sign more nonconforming
than the sign was at the time of destruction.
D. Nonconforming signs may be repainted, repaired, and similarly
maintained, and structures modernized, but no repair or
§ 1605 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1606
1:791
§ 1607. Sign Permits. [Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
maintenance shall make a sign more nonconforming than the sign
was prior to the painting, repair or maintenance. A property owner
may obtain a permit to remove and replace a sign for purposes of
modernizing an existing nonconforming sign. The modernized sign
may not be any more nonconforming than the previously existing
nonconforming sign. An application for a permit to modernize a
nonconforming sign must be submitted to the Township within 30
days of the removal of the previously existing nonconforming sign,
and failure to do so shall be an indication that the property owner
no longer desires to continue a nonconforming sign.
E. No nonconforming sign may be relocated.
F. No nonconforming sign shall be modified in any way which will
further violate any regulation imposed by this Part.
G. Nonconforming signs shall not be expanded.
H. Nonconforming signs (e.g., flashing, intermittent, etc.) that are
inoperative for one year or more shall not be reactivated.
1. When a sign permit is required, application shall be made in writing to
the Township on a sign permit application and shall contain the
following:
A. A detailed scale drawing of the sign.
B. A statement indicating the type of construction, the manner of
installation, and the materials to be used.
C. A scale drawing of the lot indicating the location of the sign. All
abutting street right-of-way lines shall be indicated.
D. A statement indicating all sources of light and methods of
illumination.
E. A statement indicating the distance from the ground to the lowest
portion of the sign and from the ground to the highest portion of
the sign.
F. For signs which will project from or be attached to buildings, a
diagram indicating the location of the sign with the respect to the
building facade to which it will be attached, including distance of
projection from the building.
G. A statement that all the requirements of this Part shall be adhered
to and that the sign will be erected according to the accompanying
plans and specifications.
H. The signature of the applicant/owner.
I. Such other provisions as deemed appropriate by the Township.
§ 1606 LOGAN CODE § 1607
1:792
2. Signs which include new electrical connections, or in the case of
freestanding signs, include footers, must comply with all Uniform
Construction Code and/or such other building requirements which may
be applicable. In this case, a building permit application, along with a
fee as established by the Township's fee resolution, will be required to
be submitted and reviewed and approved by the Township of Logan
prior to issuance of a sign permit.
3. If the application is denied, the Township of Logan shall attach a
statement to the application explaining the reasons for the denial and
return one copy of the application to the applicant. The Applicant may
appeal the denial to the Logan Township Zoning Hearing Board within
30 days of notice thereof, in accordance with the process below.
4. Within one year of the granting of approval of the application, the
applicant shall have erected the sign or undertaken a significant
portion (as determined in the sole discretion of the Township) of the
work thereof. If the applicant fails to erect a sign or undertake a
significant portion of the work thereof within one year of the date of
approval of the sign permit, the permit shall expire and a new sign
permit shall be required, along with a resubmission of the applicable
fees.
5. All applications for sign permits as provided for in this Part shall be
accompanied by the payment of an application fee to be determined in
accordance with the Township's fee resolution.
6. The Township Zoning Hearing Board will be the body responsible for
hearing and making decisions on all modification requests and appeals
regarding this Part.
7. When requesting a permit, or when a permit is denied, the applicant
may apply to the Township Zoning Hearing Board for a modification
from certain requirements of this Part.
A. A modification may be granted by the Township Zoning Hearing
Board where the literal application of the Part would create a
particular hardship for the sign user/applicant and the following
criteria are met:
(1) The granting of the requested modification would not be
materially detrimental to the property owners in the vicinity.
(2) The hardship caused under a literal interpretation of the Part is
due to conditions unique to the property and does not apply
generally to any other property in the Township.
(3) The granting of the modification would not be contrary to the
general objectives of this Part.
(4) The company proves that the requested sign meets its national
or regional standards, if any.
§ 1607 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § 1607
1:793
§ 1608. Stop-Work Orders. [Added by Ord. 10-24-13]
B. In granting a modification, the Township Zoning Hearing Board
may attach additional requirements or conditions necessary to
carry out the spirit and purpose of this Part in the public interest.
C. When requesting a sign modification or appeal, the applicant shall
submit an application on a form provided by the Township, together
with a fee as established from time to time by the Township's fee
resolution. All applications for modifications will be reviewed at a
scheduled meeting of the Township Zoning Hearing Board. The
application must be submitted a minimum of two weeks prior to the
Township Zoning Hearing Board meeting. Any appeal of the
Township Zoning Hearing Board decision shall be made to the Blair
County Court of Common Pleas.
1. A stop-work order shall be issued in the following instances:
A. If activities regulated by this Part are undertaken without an
effective sign permit being granted, when same is required.
B. If an activity undertaken under an effective sign permit deviates
from the approved application during construction of the sign.
C. If a sign is located, erected, rebuilt, illuminated, altered, relocated,
enlarged, repaired, maintained, or operated in a manner which is in
violation of the requirements of this Part.
D. If fees required to be paid by this chapter are not paid in the
amount and within the time periods as set forth in this chapter.
2. A stop-work order shall be issued by the Township and delivered to the
owner of the property on which the violation exists, the owner's agent,
or the lessee responsible for the sign. Delivery shall be construed to
include certified mail or posting on the property.
3. The stop-work order shall be in writing and state the nature of the
violation and under which conditions the sign may continue. A time, not
to exceed 10 days, may be permitted to effect the required corrections.
4. Any person, partnership, or corporation who shall continue in violation
of any stop-work order shall be in violation of this chapter and is subject
to the penalties set forth in this chapter.
5. An insecure or unsafe sign, or a sign which otherwise creates a hazard
to the public health, safety, or general welfare, if not removed within
the time specified in the stop-work order, may be removed by the
Township at the expense of the owner or lessee.
6. A stop-work order shall not prevent the Township from citing such
person or entity with a violation of this Part, thereby subjecting them to
the penalty provisions in this chapter.
§ 1607 LOGAN CODE § 1608
1:794
Appendix
Appendix A
ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
§ A-101. Annexation of Territory.
(Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
Appendix B
BONDS ISSUES AND LOANS
§ B-101. Bonds Issues and Loans.
Ord./Res. Date Subject Debt
Ord. 6-20-74 6/20/1974 Capital note for installing
sewer crossing
encasements
$140,000
Ord. 4-19-79 4/19/1979 Increase debt by issuing
capital note for the
purchase of a mix-paver
and ladder fire truck
$210,000
Ord. 3-26-81 3/26/1981 Increase debt by issuing
capital note for installing
of a sanitary sewer
system along 16th Street
$100,000
Res. 5-28-81 5/28/1981 Providing maximum
interest rate for capital
note that can be found in
Ord. 3-26-81
—
Ord. 12-26A-85 12/26/1985 Providing a bond for the
Township Manager and
Treasurer
$1,000,000
Ord. 01-25-93 01/25/1993 Financing sewer system I
& A District
$4,160,000
Ord. 10-09-97 10/09/1997 Refund 93 sewer bonds;
capital project
improvements; pay
expenses associated with
GOB
$9,000,000
Ord. 03-12-98 03/12/1998 Increase debt for
improvement of sewage
facilities and the
§ 1608 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § B-101
1:795
Ord./Res. Date Subject Debt
Ord. 03-12-98A 03/12/1998 Refund sewer revenue
bonds of 1989
$755,000
Ord. 01-21-99 01/21/1999 Purchase fire equipment
for Lakemont Volunteer
Fire Dept., Kittanning
Trail Fire Co. No. 1 and
Juniata Gap Fire Co. No.
1
$300,000
Ord. 4-8-99 04/08/1999 Purchase two emergency
fire vehicles for
Lakemont Volunteer Fire
Company and Logan
Township Fire Company
No. 1
$300,000
Ord. 8-15-02 08/15/2002 Refund a portion of 1997
general obligation bonds
and advance refund of
Series A 1998 general
obligation bond and
calling for redemption of
said 1997 bonds
$7,500,000
Ord. 7-14-05 07/14/2005 Refund outstanding 1997
series general obligation
bonds and refund the
Township's series A 1998
general obligation bonds
$3,920,000
Ord. 12-14-06B 12/14/2006 Purchase 2 emergency
fire protection vehicles
and related equipment
$250,000
Ord. 01-24-08 01/24/2008 Incurring nonelectoral
debt for capital
improvement project
$14,000,000
Ord. 09-13-12 9/13/2012 Incurring nonelectoral
debt for capital
improvement project
$10,000,000
Ord. 05-23-13 5/23/2013 Incurring nonelectoral
debt for capital
improvement project
$3,500,000
Ord. 08-08-13 8/8/2013 Requiring minimum
savings with respect to
the issuance of the
Township's general
obligation bonds, series
of 2013
§ B-101 LOGAN CODE § B-101
1:796
Ord./Res. Date Subject Debt
Ord. 09-24-15 9/24/2015 Authorizing and securing
the issuance of general
obligation bonds
$17,000,000
Res. 09-24-15 9/24/2015 Adopting post-issuance
bond procedures and
naming Compliance
Officer
Ord. 09-28-17 9/28/2017 Authorizing and securing
the issuance of general
obligation bonds
$11,500,000
Appendix C
FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
§ C-101. Franchises and Services.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 12-30-71 12/30/1971 Lakemont Light District – establish light
district and enter contract with Pa.
Electric Company
Res. 12-30-71A 12/30/1971 West Altoona Light District – establish
light district and enter contract with Pa.
Electric Company
Res. 1-1-75 1/1/1975 Lakemont Light District entered a
contract with Pennsylvania Electric
Company
Res. 12-4-75 12/4/1975 Westwood Park Light District petitioned
Township to establish a light district and
entered a contract with Pa. Electric
Company
Res. 12-27B-79 12/27/1979 Lakemont Light District petitioned
Township to establish a light district and
enter contract with Pa. Electric Company
Res. 12-27C-79 12/27/1979 West Altoona Light District petitioned
Township to establish a light district and
enter contract with Pa. Electric Company
Res. 12-27D-79 12/27/1979 Westwood Park Light District petitioned
Township to establish a light district and
enter contract with Pa. Electric Company
Ord. 10-27-83 10/27/1983 Establishment of a light district known
as Eldorado Springs Development -
Phase II to provide for street lights
§ B-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § C-101
1:797
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Ord. 11-14C-85 11/14/1985 Establishment of a light district known
as Eldorado Springs Development -
Phase III to provide for street lights
Ord. 4-24-86 4/24/1986 Establishment of a light district known
as Eldorado Springs Development -
Phase III, Section B, to provide for street
lights
Ord. 4-16-87 4/16/1987 Establishment of a light district known
as Eldorado Springs Development to
provide for street lights
Res. 3-30-89 3/30/1989 Approving a merger between Time, Inc.,
and Warner Communications, Inc.;
Warner will remain Warner Cable
Res. 1-23-92 1/23/1992 Authorizing and consenting to the
transfer of the franchise and related
cable television system from the existing
grantee, Time Warner, Inc., either
directly or through one or more wholly
owned subsidiaries, to Time Warner
Entertainment Company, L.P.
Res. 07-02-96 7/2/1996 Approving transfer of the cable television
Franchise for the Township of Logan
from Time Warner Entertainment
Company, L.P.
Ord. 12-5-96B 12/5/1996 Establishment of a light district in the
Hamilton Lane and Edinboro Drive area
of Logan Township known as Old
Dominion Development to provide for
street lights
Ord. 09-26-02 9/26/2002 Establishment of a light district in a
certain section of the Glades of
Stonehedge Development area of Logan
Township; establishing regulations for
said light district; assessing the cost and
expense of the maintenance of said
lights; and providing for the collection of
all assessments
Ord. 12-13-07A 12/13/2007 Amending Ord. 10-27-83 establishing
Eldorado Springs Development - Phase II
Light District; amending Res. 12-27B-79
establishing Lakemont Light District;
amending Res. 12-27C-79 establishing
West Altoona Light District; amending
Res. 12-27D-79 establishing Westwood
Park Light District
§ C-101 LOGAN CODE § C-101
1:798
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Ord. 01-23-14 1/23/2014 Establishing the Reiling Lane Light
District No. 1
Ord. 06-28-18 6/28/2018 Authorizing execution of cable franchise
agreement between the Township and
Atlantic Broadband (Penn), LLC
Appendix D
GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
§ D-101. Governmental and Intergovernmental Affairs.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
— — Authorization to purchase five buses for
Transportation and Motor Buses for
public use
Res. 1-3-72 1/3/1972 Adopting the Police Manual for the
Township of Logan Police Department.
Res. 11-29-73 11/29/1973 Adoption of the 1/3/1972 Police Manual
for Township Police Department
Res. 12-22-77 12/22/1977 Amendments to the 1/3/1972 Police
Manual
Res. 7-12-79 7/12/1979 Proposed Mill Run Channel Improvement
Project
Res. 6-19-80 6/19/1980 Prohibits discrimination of handicapped
and is in support of transition plan
Ord. 5-28A-81 5/28/1981 Join with City of Altoona under the
Municipality Authorities Act for the
purpose of providing medical emergency
services to the public
Ord. 7-9-81 7/9/1981 Providing for the institution and
implementation of an electric speed
timing device known as vascar
Res. 9-10-81 9/10/1981 Township has authority to sale surplus
personal property of less than $200
Res. 9-10-81A 9/10/1981 Amendments to the 1/3/1972 Police
Manual
Res. 2-11-82 2/11/1982 Leopold, Eberhardt & Goldstein is
retained to represent the Township as its
attorneys
Res. 2-3-83 2/3/1983 Township records may be destroyed due
to inadequate storage space
§ C-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:799
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 3-24-83 3/24/1983 Amendment to R-3-3-83 which adopted
the Township Police Pension Fund
Res. 4-28-83 4/28/1983 Township supports City of Altoona's
application to the Department of
Community Affairs
Res. 5-26-83 5/26/1983 City of Altoona would accept and take
over that portion of Necessity Drive
Res. 3-29-84 3/29/1984 Township to adopt a Money Purchase
Pension Plan for non-union employees
Res. 5-3-84 5/3/1984 Mutual Assistance Programs with fire
service of nearby municipalities
Res. 9-13-84 9/13/1984 Establish and adopt grievance procedures
to comply with the Federal Sharing rules
Res. 12-27-84 12/27/1984 Amends the Money Purchase Pension
Plan to comply with TEFRA
Res. 3-7-85 3/7/1985 AMTRAN without current level of funding
from the government will be forced to
raise fares
Ord. 11-14A-85 11/14/1985 Regulating use of temporary storage
facilities
Res. 11-21-85 11/21/1985 Reacquisition by Warner Communications
of 50% of ownership of Warner Amex
Cable Communication held by American
Express Co.
Res. 1-9-86 1/9/1986 Adopt Municipal Employers Insurance
Trust Plan
Ord. 1-9-86 1/9/1986 Regulating use of temporary storage
facilities
Res. 3-6-86 3/6/1986 Altoona-Logan Township Mobile Medical
Emergency Dept. Authority will operate a
cooperative project to purchase a
dispatch repeater
Res. 8-21-86 8/21/1986 Amendments to the 1/3/1972 Police
Manual
Res. 1-8-87 1/8/1987 Township to appoint training officers for
each department: police, highway,
sewerage department
Res. 2-19-87 2/19/1987 Volunteer Fire Cos. have been granted
the authority to nominate any of its
members as special fire police to the Bd.
of Supervisors
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:800
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 3-26-87 3/26/1987 Amendments to the 1/3/1972 Police
Manual
Res. 3-26-87A 3/26/1987 Establishing an affirmative action plan for
the Township
Res. 4-23-87 4/23/1987 Established a Pension Plan for the
exclusive benefit of the non-uniformed
employees of the Township
Res. 9-8-88 9/8/1988 Recognizing and commending Wilbur E.
Treese for advancing the causes and
concerns of the Township.
Res. 10-27-88 10/27/1988 Establishing rules, regulations and
content of announcement for activating
the Township Civil Emergency Alert
System.
Res. 11-10-88B 11/10/1988 Authorizing a traffic signal maintenance
agreement between the Township and the
Commonwealth
Res. 12-8-88A 12/8/1988 Authorizing the Dept. of Transportation to
transfer from State to Township control
the portion of S.R. 1007 to L.R. 07017, a
distance of 0.79 miles.
Res. 12-8-88A 12/8/1988 Authorizing the Dept. of Transportation to
transfer from State to Township control
the portion of S.R. 1007 to L.R. 07017, a
distance of 0.79 miles
Res. 12-8-88B 12/8/1988 Authorizing the Dept. of Transportation to
transfer from State to Township control
the portion of S.R. 1005 to L.R. 07045 a
distance of 0.28 miles
Res. 12-29-88 12/29/1988 Authorizing the close-out of the
Recreational Improvement and
Rehabilitation Act Grant, Contract No.
RIRA PRD-3-99
Ord. 2-9-89A 2/9/1989 Directing the elected Tax Collector of the
Township to be solely responsible for the
collection of those Township taxes
required by Pennsylvania law to be
collected by the elected Tax Collector of
the Township
Res. 2-2-89A 2/2/1989 Establishing the compensation for the Tax
Collector which shall not exceed 5% of
the amount collected. The Tax Collector
shall have a four-year term
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:801
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 2-23-89 2/23/1989 Authorizing the placing of the question as
to whether to permit the issuance for
small games of chance within the limits of
the Township to be placed on the primary
election ballet
Res. 2-23-89A 2/23/1989 Authorizing the reimbursement of
Township employees who use their cars
for official business
Res. 6-29-89 6/29/1989 Requiring that any property included in a
proposed rezoning request be posted to
notify interested citizens of the date, time
and place of the hearing
Res. 7/13/1989 7/13/1989 Authorizing the Dept. of Environmental
Resources to move gravel deposit and
installing 18 inches rip-rap in a certain
section of Spring Run. DEP will undertake
the costs to perform the work mentioned
Res. 8-24-89 8/24/1989 Designating the Township as the collector
of all Amusement Taxes collected in the
Township and the collector of the
Occupational Privilege Tax for the
Altoona Area School District
Res. 9-14-89 9/14/1989 Establishing a Township Police
Commission
Res. 12-28-89 12/28/1989 Imposing reasonable fees upon an
applicant requesting a hearing or appeal
before the Logan Township Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 1-04-90 1/04/1990 Assigning further duties to the Police
Coordinator of Logan Township
Res. 1-04-90A 1/04/1990 Recognizing 14 years of highly
meritorious, outstanding, and exemplary
service of Daniel D. Horner to the citizens
of Logan Township
Res. 1-04-89B 1/04/1989 Recognizing high caliber, meritorious,
and exemplary service of William E.
(Hank) Herman
Res. 7-12-90 7/12/1990 Endorsing the Rehabilitation Hospitals
Tour de Toona and permitting the
inclusion of certain streets and roads in
the route of the event
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:802
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 7-12-90A 7/12/1990 Authorizing completion and submission to
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of a
Road Closing Request Form to close Rout
220 for the purposes of the Armed Forces
Day Parade
Res. 9-27-90 9/27/1990 Agreeing to reimburse employees,
officers, and/or appointed or elected
officials upon written proof of payment
for special expenses incurred on behalf of
the Township
Res. 10-11-90 10/11/1990 Authorizing the Township of Logan
Zoning Officer to sign and date all
approved plans for minor subdivisions in
accordance with Chapter 22 of this Code
Res. 10-11-90A 10/11/1990 Discontinuing the practice of installing
drainage pipe between, along and/or
under the property lines of residents of
the Township and Township's rights-ofway
and authorizing the installation of
driveway drainage pipes between, along
and/or under driveways of Township
residents provided the residents purchase
at their sole cost and expense the
required drainage pipe
Res. 11-29-90 11/29/1990 Authorizing a grant application to be
prepared on behalf of the Township of
Logan for the joint curbside recycling
program
Res. 2-14-91 2/14/1991 Waiving interest on any sum of money
transferred in an inter-fund transfer from
one Township account to another
Res. 2-21-91 2/21/1991 Objecting to any increase in the current
size and weight limitations of tractor
trailer trucks on highways
Res. 5-2-91 5/2/1991 Authorizing a grant application be
amended on behalf of the Township of
Logan for a joint yard waste composting
operation and a joint curbside recycling
program for the City of Altoona, Borough
of Hollidaysburg, and Township of Logan
Res. 5-16-91A 5/16/1991 Township's approval and ratification of
intermunicipal police agreements
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:803
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 8-1-91 8/1/1991 Authorizing the Chief of Police and/or the
Police Fire Coordinator of Logan
Township to use designated unmarked
vehicles throughout the County Blair, 24
hours a day, in order to be on call at all
times and further authorizing the use of
said vehicles for de minimus personal use
only
Res. 1-16-92 1/16/1992 Amending Res. 1-3-72 to revise Chapter
1, Section 4 of the Police Manual to read
that appointments to the Logan Township
Police Department are for a probationary
period of 12 months
Res. 01-16-92-A 1/16/1992 Amending Res. 1-21-88 to provide that
Township employees will be evaluated
annually and evaluations shall be used to
grant pay adjustments, with any
employee receiving two unsatisfactory
performance evaluations within a 24
month period, ineligible to receive the
next annual pay adjustment
Res. 4-2-92 4/2/1992 Requesting permission from the
Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation to close State Route 4008,
known as Kittanning Point Road, to
enable the success of the dedication
ceremonies of the newly constructed
Horseshoe Curve Visitor Center
Res. 4-16-92 4/16/1992 Commending and recognizing Thomas W.
"Tim" Ingham for his 40 years of
dedicated, friendly, multi-talented and
loyal service to the Township
Res. 5-14-92 5/14/1992 Endorsing the 1992 U.S.C.F. Olympic
Road Trials and National Championships
and permitting the inclusion of Logan
Township in the route of the event on
Friday, June 19, 1992, and authorizing
assistance in securing the "special events
permit" from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:804
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 6-04-92A 6/4/1992 Proclaiming June 14,1992 as Flag Day in
the Township of Logan and urging all
citizens of the Township to pause at 7:00
p.m. Eastern Standard Time on this date
for the 13th annual Pause for the Pledge
of Allegiance to the Flag and join all
Americans in reciting the same
Res. 8-13-92 8/13/1992 Endorsing the Tour de' Toona and
permitting the inclusion of Oak Avenue
from Altoona City line to Allegheny
Township Line.
Res. 9-3-92 9/3/1992 Adopting trench backfilling and street
restoration in shoulder areas
specifications in accordance with the
Street Excavations ordinance of the
Township
Res. 9-3-92A 9/3/1992 Adopting specifications for trench backfill
and street restoration in accordance with
the Street Excavations ordinance of the
Township
Res. 9-10-92 9/10/1992 Adopting a policy prohibiting sexual
harassment and a complaint procedure to
be followed by any individual who
becomes a victim of the same
Res. 4-8-93B 4/8/1993 Authorizing the close-out of the
Recreational Improvement and
Rehabilitation Act (RIRA) Grant;
designated as the Peer-to-Peer Project
Res. 8-12-93 8/12/1993 Adopting the Board of Supervisors policy
for the conduct of public meetings for the
Township of Logan
Ord. 10-7-93A 10/7/1993 Township of Logan Approval of the
Central Blair County Park and recreation
Committee Intermunicipal Ordinance
Res. 12-09-93 12/9/1993 Designating the Intermunicipal Recycling
Committee to accept applications and
issue hauler's licenses in Logan Township
Res. 12-16-93 12/16/1993 Adopting specifications for sanitary
sewerage system construction
Res. 12-23-93 12/23/1993 Adoption of the 12/23/1993 Police Manual
for the Township Police Department
Res. 12-23-93A 12/23/1993 Amendments to the 12/23/1993 Police
Manual
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:805
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 1-20-94 1/20/1994 Establishing and adopting the Township's
Equal Employment Opportunity/Civil
Rights Compliance Plan
Res. 2-3-94 2/3/1994 Destruction of municipal records
Res. 2-3-94A 2/3/1994 Adopting Procedures for Reviewing and
Implementing Domestic Relations
Materials With Respect to the Pension
Fund
Res. 2-17-94 2/17/1994 Cancellation of ladder equipped fire truck
contract
Res. 3-10-94 3/10/1994 Destruction of municipal records
Res. 3-10-94A 3/10/1994 Appointment of accountant
Res. 3-10-94B 3/10/1994 Appointing the Secretary, Assistant
Secretary and/or Solicitor of the
Township as its authorized
representatives to make requests upon
and receive any and all tax information
and records from Berkheimer Associates,
relative to the collection of taxes for the
Township, as desired and deemed
necessary by the Township, to be used for
official purposes only
Res. 4-7-94 4/7/1994 Creation of Logan Township Volunteer
Fire Service Association
Res. 4-21-94 4/21/1994 Tourism awareness days
Res. 4-21-94A 4/21/1994 Defined contribution pension plan
Res. 4-28-94 4/28/1994 Creation of Logan Township Fire
Company Consolidation Study Committee
Res. 6-2-94 6/2/1994 Amendment to Logan Township Volunteer
Fire Service Association Resolution No.
4-7-1994
Res. 6-2-94A 6/2/1994 Amendment to Police Policy and
Procedures Manual
Res. 7-21-94A 7/21/1994 1994 Tour de 'Toona
Res. 10-6-94 10/6/1994 Transfer of assets from Money Purchase
Pension Plan to Pension Plan.
Res. 10-20-94 10/20/1994 Creation of Public Works Department
Res. 10-20-94A 10/20/1994 Appointment of Robert F. Hagemann, III,
as Manager of the Township of Logan
Res. 12-8-94 12/8/1994 Authorizing membership in the Corridor
Enterprise Zone Committee for the
proposed Corridor Enterprise Zone
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:806
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 12-8-94A 12/8/1994 Appointment of accountant
Ord. 1-19-95 1/19/1995 Enter into a joint bidding cooperative
between other municipalities, boroughs
and Townships within Blair County
Ord. 2-2-95 2/2/1995 Joining with other local government units
as a settlor of the Pennsylvania Local
Government Investment Trust
Res. 3-2-95 3/2/1995 Destruction of municipal records.
Res. 3-9-95A 3/9/1995 Development of Horseshoe Curve Road to
promote tourism.
Res. 3-9-95B 3/9/1995 Support for Chestnut Avenue Extension
Res. 3-16-95 3/16/1995 Recognition of Jeremy W. Yon
Res. 3-16-95A 3/16/1995 Recognition of Holly Becker
Res. 3-16-95B 3/16/1995 Retirement of Walter F. Coho, Jr.
Res. 4-7-95 4/7/1995 Retirement of Thomas J.E. Myers
Res. 4-13-95 4/13/1995 Solid waste management recycling,
composting and enforcement contingent
declaration of interest
Res. 4-21-95 4/21/1995 Retirement of Lawrence V. Carroll
Res. 4-21-95A 4/21/1995 Creation of non-uniform pension
committee
Res. 5-4-95 5/4/1995 Logan Township Police Commission
Res. 5-19-95 5/19/1995 Proclamation of recognition
Res. 5-19-95A 5/19/1995 Proclamation of recognition
Res. 5-19-95B 5/19/1995 Retirement of Franklin Shannon
Res. 5-19-95C 5/19/1995 1995 Tour de 'Toona
Res. 6-8-95 6/8/1995 Requesting permission to participate in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Cooperative Purchasing Program
Res. 6-15-95 6/15/1995 Proclamation of recognition of Drive H.
Joseph Fye
Res. 7-20-95 7/20/1995 Opposition to the Blair County
Commissioners' Proposed Revisions to the
Municipal Waste Management Plan
Res. 9-8-95 9/8/1995 Destruction of municipal records
Res. 9-8-95B 9-8-1995 Recommendation to amend Second Class
Township Code Transient Retail Merchant
License fee revision
Res. 9-8-95C 9-8-1995 Designation of IRC to Contract with
Recycling Centers
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:807
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 9-14-95 9/14/1995 Requesting amendment to the Second
Class Township Code Transient Retail
Merchants License fee provision
Res. 11-30-95 11/30/1995 Destruction of municipal records
Res. 12-7-95 12/7/1995 Appointment of accountant
Res. 12-21-95 12/21/1995 Amendment to Police Policy and
Procedures Manual
Res. 12-21-95A 12/21/1995 Blair County Planning Commission Fees
Res. 12-21-95B 12/21/1995 Setting of tax levy
Res. 12-21-95C 12/21/1995 Drug and alcohol testing policy and
procedures
Res. 02-01-96 2/1/1996 Destruction of municipal records
Res. 4-4-96 4/4/1996 Creation of task force for creation of
Council of Governments
Res. 4-11-96 4/11/1996 Creation of Assistant Manager position
Res. 4-18-96 4/18/1996 Creation of LERTA Zone
Res. 5-16-96B 5/16/1996 1996 Tour de 'Toona
Res. 06-06-96A 6/6/1996 Bid opening procedures
Res. 9-19-96 9/19/1996 Procedure for sale of Township owned
property with a fair market value of less
than $1,000
Res. 9-19-96A 9/19/1996 Payment of attorney's fees
Res. 9-19-96B 9/19/1996 Township personnel authorized to issue
violation notices and initiate civil
proceedings
Res. 9-19-96B 9/19/1996 Request for additional "Teener League"
baseball team
Ord. 12-12-96 12/12/1996 Entering into an Agreement by and
among the Intermunicipal Recycling
Committee, the City of Altoona, the
Borough of Tyrone, the Borough of
Hollidaysburg, the Township of Logan and
the County of Blair wherein the Recycling
Committee and said municipalities are
delegating the responsibility to
administer and assign to the County the
full cost of the Recycling Committee's
Solid Waste and Recycling Program
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:808
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Ord. 12-12-96 12/12/1996 Entering into an Agreement by and
among the City of Altoona, the Borough of
Tyrone, the Borough of Hollidaysburg and
the Township of Logan whereby said
municipalities are amending the recycling
agreement which formed the Recycling
Committee, to oversee and assign the
municipalities said delegation agreement
with the County and continue
intermunicipal cooperation
Res. 12-5-96 12/5/1996 Establishment of Ad Hoc Planning
Committee
Res. 1-6-97 1/6/1997 Appointment of certified public
accountant
Res. 2-13-97 2/13/1997 Regulations governing junk or salvage
yards
Res. 2-13-97A 2/13/1997 Tax collector compensation
Res. 4-3-97 4/3/1997 Prohibiting smoking in Township
municipal building
Res. 4-3-97A 4/3/1997 Destruction of municipal records
Res. 4-3-97B 4/3/1997 1997 Tour de 'Toona
Res. 4-3-97C 4/3/1997 Fair Housing
Res. 4-3-97D 4/3/1997 CDBG Authorization to Art Albright
Res. 6-19-97 6/19/1997 Volunteer Fire Service Promotion
Committee
Res. 8-21-97 8/21/1997 IRS Mileage Reimbursement Rate
Res. 9-4-97 9/4/1997 Recognition of 50th wedding anniversary
of Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Winkler
Res. 10-2-97 10/2/1997 Volunteer fire service standard operating
procedures
Res. 10-16-97 10/16/1997 Recognition of October 25, 1997, as make
a difference day
Res. 12-18-97 12/18/1997 Approval of Berkheimer 1998 Tax
Collection Agreement
Res. 1-5-98 1/5/1998 Appointment of certified public
accountant
Res. 2-12-98 2/12/1998 Authorization for 1998 General Obligation
Bonds
Res. 4-2-98 4/2/1998 Amendment to the Township of Logan
Police Pension Plan
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:809
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 5-7-98 5/7/1998 Proclamation of recognition of Richard J.
Irvin
Res. 5-7-98A 5/7/1998 Contract awards
Res. 5-14-98 5/14/1998 General Contract Specification - Form
Res. 6-11-98 6/11/1998 1998 Tour de'Toona
Res. 7-9-98A 7/9/1998 Approval of Agility Agreement with
PennDOT
Res. 08-06-98 8/6/1998 Proclamation of recognition of Newburg
Fire Department
Res. 10-1-98A 10/1/1998 Refinance part of 1997 General
Obligation Bonds with 1998 AAA General
Obligation Bonds
Res. 10-08-98 10/8/1998 Authorized and directed to sign PennDOT
Reimbursement Agreement
Res. 12-10-98 12/10/1998 Appoint Berkheimer Associates as Tax
Hearing Officer and incorporate Act 50
Res. 12-10-98A 12/10/1998 Keystone Opportunity Zone - Real
property tax exemptions
Res. 12-10-98B 12/10/1998 Seatbelt use in Township-owned
automobiles
Res. 01-04-99 01/04/1999 Fair Housing
Res. 4-8-99 4/8/1999 1999 Tour de'Toona
Res. 5-20-99A 5/20/1999 Proclamation of Blair County Community
Action Agency Day
Res. 06-03-99 6/3/1999 Destruction of Municipal Records-Police
Res. 06-17-99A 6/17/1999 Requesting permission to participate in
the Pennsylvania Department of General
Services Cooperative Purchasing
Program
Res. 09-02-99 09/02/1999 Approving Mill Run Flood Protection
Project.
Res. 11-04-99 11/04/1999 Approving 2001 Tax Collection
Agreement with the Altoona Area School
District
Res. 12-16-99 12/16/1999 Approving the Acceptance of Tyrone
Borough into AMED
Res. 12-16-99A 12/16/1999 Approving Tax Levy for Fire Protection
and Recreation
Res. 12-16-99B 12/16/1999 Delete references to "Ad Hoc" when
referring to the Logan Township Planning
Committee
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:810
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 01-04-00 01/04/2000 Appoint Certified Public Accountant
Res. 01-04-00A 01/04/2000 Appoint Altoona Area School District as
Tax Hearing Officer
Res. 01-04-00B 01/04/2000 Fair Housing
Res. 01-04-00C 01/04/2000 Appoint authorized signor for SEI
Investments
Res. 01-27-00B 01/27/2000 Conduct of Public Meetings
Res. 03-24-00 03/24/2000 Census 2000
Res. 05-11-00A 05/11/2000 Drainage Pipe Installation
Res. 05-25-00 05/25/2000 Tour de 'Toona
Res. 09-14-00 09/14/2000 Authorize Educational Training
Res. 09-28-00 09/28/2000 Recognition of "Employ the Older Worker
Week."
Res. 11-09-00 11/09/2000 Prohibit Harassment
Res. 01-02-01 01/02/2001 Appointment of Certified Public
Accountant
Res. 01-02-01A 01/02/2001 Appoint Member to Zoning Hearing
Board
Res. 01-02-01B 01/02/2001 Fair Housing
Res. 01-02-01C 01/02/2001 Appoint Alternates to Zoning Hearing
Board
Res. 01-02-01D 01/02/2001 Appoint Financial Businesses as
Depositories for Township Funds
Res. 02-08-01 02/08/2001 Designate two parcels as part of Keystone
Opportunity Expansion Zone
Res. 02-08-01A 02/08/2001 Destruction of Municipal Records - Police
Res. 02-08-01B 02/08/2001 Adopt Anti-Nepotism Hiring Policy
Res. 02-08-01C 02/08/2001 Set Tax Collector Compensation
Res. 02-08-01D 02/08/2001 Recognize 50th Wedding Anniversary of
Walter W. Sr. & Dorothy Clapper
Res. 03-08-01 03/08/2001 Tour de 'Toona
Res. 03-22-01 03/22/2001 Authorize Representative for CDBG
Funds Applications
Res. 03-22-01A 03/22/2001 Authorize Representative for DEP
Nutrient Removal Grant
Res. 03-22-01B 03/22/2001 Revise Keystone Opportunity Expansion
Zone to one parcel
Res. 05-24-01 05/24/2001 Recognize 55th Wedding Anniversary of
Mr. & Mrs. Howard Conahye
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:811
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 05-24-01A 05/24/2001 Shearer Malt Beverage Liquor License
Transfer Request
Res. 06-14-01 06/14/2001 Term Extension for Logan Township
Keystone Opportunity Zone
Res. 06-28-01 06/28/2001 Support of High Speed Ground Passenger
Transport
Res. 07-12-01 07/12/2001 Recognize 50th Wedding Anniversary of
Mr. & Mrs. James Yon
Res. 07-26-01 07/26/2001 Boston Concessions Group, Inc. License
Transfer
Res. 08-09-01 08/09/2001 Newburg Fire Co. Loan
Res. 09-27-01 09/27/2001 Expression of Sympathy
Res. 10-11-01 10/11/2001 Expression of Support for the President of
the United States
Res. 12-13-01 12/13/2001 Appointment of Animal Control Officer
Res. 12-13-01A 12/13/2001 Tax Levy Resolution
Res. 01-07-02 01/07/2002 Appointment of Certified Public
Accountant
Res. 01-07-02A 01/07/2002 Fair Housing Resolution
Res. 01-07-02B 01/07/2002 Appointment of Member to Zoning Board
Res. 02-13-02 02/13/2002 Recognize 50th Wedding Anniversary of
Mr. and Mrs. James Aveni
Res. 02-28-02 02/28/2002 Retirement of Martin L. Wilt
Res. 02-28-02C 02/28/2002 Destruction of Municipal Records
Res. 02-28-02D 02/28/2002 Approving final plan for Hampton Inn -
Phase 2 Land Development
Res. 02-28-02E 02/28/2002 Approving Application for Traffic Signals
Permit
Res. 03-28-02 03/28/2002 Retirement of Donald E. DeBolt
Res. 03-28-02A 03/28/2002 FGMA, Inc. Liquor License Transfer
Request
Res. 05-09-02 05/09/2002 International Bicycle Race
Res. 05-23-02 05/23/2002 Appointment of Pension Plan
Administrator
Res. 06-13-02 06/13/2002 Amendment to Police Policy and
Procedures Manual
Res. 06-13-02A 06/13/2002 Amendment to Conduct of Public
Meetings
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:812
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Ord. 07-25-02 07/25/2002 Authorization for the joinder of other
municipalities as a member of the Pa.
Intergovernmental Risk Management
Association ("Association") so as to enter
into an intergovernmental contract to
form a local government pool; provide for
joint or cooperative action by members
relative to their financial and
administrative resources for the purpose
of providing risk management services
and risk-sharing facilities to the members
and to the members' employees, and to
defend and protect, in accordance with
this agreement, any member of the pool
against liability as outlined in the
appendix to the intergovernmental
Agreement
Res. 07-25-02 07/25/2002 Retirement of Police Chief Steven D.
Jackson
Res. 07-25-02A 07/25/2002 Amendment to Police Policy and
Procedures Manual
Res. 09-12-02 09/12/2002 Approving Peak Flow Agreement with
Hollidaysburg Borough
Res. 10-24-02 10/24/2002 Retirement of Detective Sergeant Terry
Lingenfelter
Res. 12-12-02A 12/12/2002 Establishing a Written Open Records
Policy for Logan Township
Res. 01-06-03 01/06/2003 Appointment for Certified Public
Accountant
Res. 01-06-03A 01/06/2003 Amendment to Fee Resolution
Res. 01-06-03C 01/06/2003 Appointment of Member to Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 01-23-03 01/23/2003 Destruction of Municipal Records
Res. 02-13-03 02/13/2003 Conduct of Public Meetings
Res. 02-13-03A 02/13/2003 Destruction of Municipal Records
Res. 02-13-03B 02/13/2003 Recognition of Sally (Radwanski)
Klotkowski
Res. 03-27-03 03/27/2003 Vehicle Policy
Res. 04-13-03 04/13/2003 Extension of Cable Franchise
Res. 04-24-03 04/24/2003 Proclamation of Recognition of G. William
Ward
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:813
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 04-24-03A 04/24/2003 Burgi's Roundhouse Bar & Grill Approval
of Request to Transfer Liquor License No.
R11960
Res. 04-24-03B 04/24/2003 International Bicycle Race
Res. 05-22-03 05/22/2003 Emergency Operations Plan (EOP)
Res. 07-10-03 07/10/2003 Grant Policy for Recycling and Waste
Collection
Res. 08-14-03 08/14/2003 Appointment of Zoning Hearing Board
Res. 08-14-03A 08/14/2003 Destruction of Municipal Records
Res. 08-14-03B 08/14/2003 Extension of Cable Franchise
Res. 08-28-03 08/28/2003 Procedure for Adoption of Police Policies
Res. 09-11-03 09/11/2003 Amending the Pension Fund for the Police
Officers of Logan Township
Res. 11-13-03 11/13/2003 Rescission of Resolution 10-24-02A
Res. 01-05-04 01/05/2004 Appointment of Certified Public
Accountant
Res. 01-05-04A 01/05/2004 Appointment of Member to Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 01-22-04 01/22/2004 Conduct of Public Meetings
Res. 01-22-04A 01/22/2004 Destruction of Municipal Records
Res. 02-12-04 02/12/2004 Authorization to PennDOT political
subdivisions
Res. 03-11-04 03/11/2004 Police Liaison to Board of Supervisors
Res. 03-11-04A 03/11/2004 Recognition of Service by Donald R.
Chestney
Res. 03-11-04B 03/11/2004 Appointment of Member to Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 03-25-04 03/25/2004 Approving Final Subdivision Plan for Lot
14-10A-18A
Res. 04-08-04D 04/08/2004 Approving FAP Partners Subdivision Plan
for Tax Parcel 14-16A-9
Res. 04-08-04E 04/08/2004 Approving FAP Partners Lot
Consolidation/Subdivision for Tax Parcel
14-16A-9 and 14-16A-11
Res. 04-22-04A 04/22/2004 Approving Final Subdivision Plan for
Timberline Estates Lot 4
Res. 04-22-04B 04/22/2004 Approving Final Subdivision Plan and
Planning Module for Winkler & McKinney
Res. 04-22-04C 04/22/2004 Opposition to loss of acute care beds
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:814
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 04-28-04B 04/28/2004 Approval of Request to Transfer Liquor
License - Burgi's Round House Bar & Grill
Res. 05-13-04A 05/13/2004 Approving Burgi's Round House Bar &
Grill land development
Res. 05-13-04C 05/13/2004 Approving Simington South Development
Final Subdivision Plan for Tax Parcel
14-23-8-6
Res. 05-27-04 05/27/2004 International Bicycle Race
Res. 05-27-04A 05/27/2004 Subdivision Plan and Non-Building
Declaration for Dick and McTigue
Subdivision
Res. 05-27-04B 05/27/2004 Approving Final Subdivision Plan and
Non-Building Declaration for Todd
Coleman and Amy Perchy
Res. 05-27-04C 05/27/2004 Approving Final Subdivision Plan for The
Harkless Subdivision - The Glades Phase
II
Res. 05-27-04D 05/27/2004 Approving Kittaning Trails Phase I - Final
Subdivision Plan for Tax Parcel 14-10-79
Res. 06-10-04 06/10/2004 Designation of Entity to Administer and
Enforce UCC
Res. 06-10-04A 06/10/2004 Approving the Dunkin Donuts land
development plan
Res. 06-10-04B 06/10/2004 Final Subdivision Plan for Jack and
Constance Reiter
Res. 06-10-04C 06/10/2004 Approving Final Subdivision Plan for
Thomas Delozier
Ord. 06-10-04 06/10/2004 UCC Ordinance
Res. 06-24-04 06/24/2004 Amendment to Fee Schedule
Res. 06-24-04B 06/24/2004 Approving Lantz Final Subdivision Plan
Res. 06-24-04C 06/24/2004 Approving Tremmel Final Subdivision
Plan and Planning Module
Res. 07-08-04 07/08/2004 Approving Alwine Final Subdivision Plan
Res. 07-22-04A 07/22/2004 Approving Chapel Hill Estates Phase 2
Correction Plan
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:815
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Ord. 8-26-04A 08/26/2004 Approval of an intermunicipal agreement
between the Boroughs of Hollidaysburg,
Duncansville, Tyrone, the Townships of
Antis and Blair, and the Township of
Logan, wherein each of said Boroughs
and Townships (the "Municipalities")
approve the Joint Articles of Agreement
(the "Agreement") for the establishment
of a Blair Region Code Administration
Committee ("Code Committee") and
delegate and assign their respective
responsibility to administer the Uniform
Construction Code (the "Code") to the
Code Committee and further delegate and
assign their respective responsibility to
administer the Code to the Code
Committee, including the responsibility
for establishing a Blair Region Uniform
Construction Code Board of Appeals
("Board") and to appoint members to said
Board. The Agreement also provides for
the structure of the Board, terms of
members of the Board, and the manner of
financing the Board's activities.
Res. 08-26-04A 08/26/2004 Approving Marcelli Final Subdivision Plan
Res. 08-26-04B 08/26/2004 Approving Marcelli Dental Office and
Land Development Plan
Res. 08-26-04C 08/26/2004 Approving Eckels Storage Building Land
Development
Res. 08-26-04D 08/26/2004 Approving Final Subdivision Plan and
Non-Building Declaration for George and
Barbara Karl, Jr.
Res. 08-26-04F 08/26/2004 Approving Bellemeade Est. Phase 3 Final
Subdivision Plan
Res. 10-28-04 10/28/2004 Approving Wertz Final Subdivision Plan
Res. 10-28-04A 10/28/2004 Approving Lot Merger of Lots 14-18A-9
and 14-18A-8
Res. 10-28-04B 10/28/2004 Approving Lawruk Building Expansion
Land Development Plan
Res. 10-28-04C 10/28/2004 Home Program Applicant
Res. 10-28-04D 10/28/2004 Accepting Portions of Castle Farms Road
Res. 10-28-04E 10/28/2004 Establishing a telephone, computer and
internet usage policy
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:816
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 12-09-04 12/09/2004 2005 Budget/County Tax Form and Tax
Levy
Res. 12-09-04A 12/09/2004 Conduct of Public Meetings
Res. 12-09-04B 12/09/2004 Declaration of Snow Emergency
Res. 12-09-04C 12/09/2004 Amendment to Fee Resolution
Res. 12-09-04D 12/09/2004 Approving Burgi's Round House
Additional Parking and Land
Development Plan
Res. 12-09-04E 12/09/2004 Approving lot merger for RADD
Development Lots 14-15-C-33, 14-15AC-
30, 14-15A-C-28 and 14-15A-C-27
Res. 12-09-04F 12/09/2004 Approving RADD Development/Meineke
Muffer
Res. 01-03-05A 01/03/2005 Appointment of Member to Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 01-03-05B 01/03/2005 Adoption for Minor Act 537 Plan Update
Revision
Res. 01-03-05C 01/03/2005 Accepting Portions of Chapel Drive and S.
Pine Street
Res. 01-03-05D 01/03/2005 Federal Aid Reimbursement Agreement
Res. 01-27-05 01/27/2005 Destruction of Municipal Records
Res. 02-10-05A 02/10/2005 Authorizing a Fire Tax Referendum
Res. 02-10-05B 02/10/2005 Tax Collector Compensation
Res. 02-10-05D 02/10/2005 Final Kennedy Drive Subdivision Plan
Res. 02-17-05A 02/17/2005 Accepting Portions of Cayuga Avenue
Res. 02-24-05 02/24/2005 Fair Housing
Res. 02-24-05A 02/24/2005 Approving Lot Consolidation
Res. 02-24-05B 02/24/2005 Approving Brush Oaks Final Subdivision
Plan
Res. 02-24-05C 02/24/2005 Approving Corrective Final Subdivision
Plan for Timberline Estates Lot 4
Res. 03-10-05 03/10/2005 Approving Lot Merger of Lots 14-18E-40,
41 Morgan Lot Consolidation Plan
Res. 03-10-05A 03/10/2005 Approving Promoland Subdivision
Res. 03-24-05 03/24/2005 International Tour de Toona Bicycle Race
Res. 03-24-05A 03/24/2005 2005 CDBG Application Submittal
Res. 04-14-05 04/14/2005 Approving Burgmeier's Truck Wash and
Fueling Depot
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:817
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 04-14-05A 04/14/2005 Approving Giant Eagle Drive Thru
Pharmacy Land Development Plan
Res. 04-14-05B 04/14/2005 Approving B & D Properties Land
Development
Res. 04-14-05C 04/14/2005 Approving Timberline Estates Lots 1 and
2 Subdivision and Lot Consolidation Plan
Res. 04-14-05D 04/14/2005 Approving Winslow Subdivision/Lot
Consolidation
Res. 04-14-05E 04/14/2005 Rescinding Final Approval and Granting
Preliminary Approval of Brush Oaks
Subdivision
Res. 05-26-05 05/26/2005 Approving Greenlight Development Corp.
Final Subdivision Plan
Res. 05-26-05 05/26/2005 Approving Camelot Woods Consolidation
Plan
Res. 05-26-05B 05/26/2005 Approving Eyer Final Subdivision Plan
Res. 05-26-05C 05/26/2005 General Obligation Bonds
Res. 05-26-05D 05/26/2005 Amendment to Schedule of Fees
Res. 06-09-05 06/09/2005 Approving DeGol Final Subdivision Plan
Res. 06-09-05A 06/09/2005 Approving Clouse Final Subdivision and
Lot Consolidation Plan
Res. 07-14-05 07/14/2005 Approving Wilt/Mallow Final Subdivision
Plan
Res. 07-14-05A 07/14/2005 Approving the RADD Retail Development
Revised Land Development Plan
Res. 07-28-05 07/28/2005 Approving the Logan Town Centre
Revised Roadway Plan for Amelia Avenue,
Lynn Street and Osgood Drive (Park
Avenue)
Res. 07-28-05A 07/28/2005 Approving the Brush Oakes Final
Subdivision Plan
Res. 08-11-05 08/11/2005 Dedication of Bartek Sewer Line
Extension
Res. 08-11-05A 08/11/2005 Approving the LaRaia Final Subdivision
and Lot Consolidation Plan
Res. 08-11-05B 08/11/2005 Approving the Bathurst 1-Lot Final
Subdivision
Res. 08-11-05C 08/11/2005 Approving the Bathurst 5-Lot Final
Subdivision
Res. 09-22-05 09/22/2005 Liquor License Transfer - Request
Altoona Gourmet Buffet - Approval
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:818
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 09-22-05A 09/22/2005 Approving the Opida Final Subdivision
Plan with Non-Building Waiver
Res. 09-22-05B 09/22/2005 Approving the Bulliet Final Subdivision
Plan
Res. 09-22-05C 09/22/2005 Approving the Hurt Lot Consolidation
Plan
Res. 10-13-05 10/13/2005 Amending the Logan Township Police
Pension Fund
Res. 10-13-05A 10/13/2005 Amending the Logan Township Non-
Uniformed Employees Pension Plan
Res. 10-13-05C 10/13/2005 Approving the Barr Lot Consolidation/
Subdivision Plan
Res. 10-13-05D 10/13/2005 Approving the Siripala Subdivision and
Lot Consolidation
Res. 10-13-05F 10/13/2005 Approving the Logan Town Centre
Revised Land Development
Res. 11-10-05A 11/10/2005 Approving the Best Buy Land
Development
Res. 11-10-05B 11/10/2005 Approving the Colombo Subdivision Plan
Res. 11-10-05C 11/10/2005 Approving the Schwabenbawer
Subdivision Plan
Res. 11-10-05D 11/10/2005 Approving the Smith/Jaroneski
Subdivision Plan
Res. 11-10-05E 11/10/2005 Approving the Kittaning Trails
Preliminary Subdivision Plan
Res. 12-08-05 12/08/2005 Acceptance of Dedication of The Kittaning
Trails Phase I Sewer Line Extension
Res. 12-08-05A 12/08/2005 Permitted Street Tree Varieties
Res. 12-08-05B 12/08/2005 Tax Levy Resolution
Res. 12-08-05E 12/08/2005 Approving the Devorris/Walls Subdivision
Plan
Res. 12-08-05F 12/08/2005 Approving the Craine Lot Consolidation
Plan
Res. 12-08-05G 12/08/2005 Approving the Bellemeade Phase 3
Replot/Subdivision Plan
Res. 01-03-06 01/03/2006 Appointment of Certified Public
Accountant
Res. 01-03-06A 01/03/2006 Appointment of Member to Zoning Board
Res. 01-03-06B 01/03/2006 Appointment of Alternate of Zoning
Hearing Board
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:819
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 01-26-06 01/26/2006 PACC Resolution
Res. 01-26-06A 01/26/2006 Approving the McClellan Subdivision
Res. 01-26-06B 01/26/2006 Fee Resolution
Res. 02-09-06 02/09/2006 Approving the Eckard Subdivision Plan
Res. 02-09-06A 02/09/2006 Approving the McCulloch Subdivision
Plan
Res. 03-09-06 03/09/2006 2006 Fair Housing
Res. 03-09-06A 03/09/2006 Storm Sewer Line Extension
Res. 03-09-06B 03/09/2006 Committee to Study Number of
Supervisors
Res. 03-23-06A 03/23/2006 Castle Farms Phase 2 Preliminary
Subdivision
Res. 03-23-06B 03/23/2006 Approval of Penn Works Application
Res. 04-13-06 04/13/2006 40th Anniversary of Logan Township
Police Department
Res. 05-11-06 05/11/2006 Approval of Liquor License Transfer
Res. 05-11-06A 05/11/2006 Plan Revision for New Land Development
Res. 05-11-06B 05/11/2006 Approving the Burkholder Lot
Consolidation
Res. 05-25-06 05/25/2006 Joey's Only Seafood Liquor License
Transfer
Res. 05-25-06B 05/25/2006 Procedure to Accept Forfeited Property
Res. 06-08-06 06/08/2006 Approving the Colombo Subdivision Plan
Res. 06-08-06A 06/08/2006 Approving the Graystone Court Land
Development Plan
Res. 06-08-06B 06/08/2006 Approving the Joey's Only Seafood Land
Development Plan
Res. 06-08-06C 06/08/2006 Logan Town Centre Lot 5 Phase 2, Chilis,
McDonalds Land Development
Res. 07-18-06A 07/18/2006 Approving the Timberline Lots 1R, 2R 5
and Klock Lands Resubdivision Plan
Res. 07-18-06B 07/18/2006 Approving the Dan Klock, Eldorado
Springs Phase 6, Section 2, Lot 6
Subdivision and Lot Consolidation Plan
Res. 07-18-06C 07/18/2006 Approving the Castle Farms Phase 2A
Final Subdivision Plan
Res. 07-18-06D 07/18/2006 Approving the Gallace/Anderson
Subdivision Plan
Res. 07-18-06E 07/18/2006 Approving the Peterman Subdivision Plan
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:820
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 07-18-06F 07/18/2006 Resolution for Plan Revision for New
Land Development
Res. 07-18-06G 07/18/2006 Destruction of Municipal Records
Res. 07-18-06I 07/18/2006 Approving the Logan Town Centre
Resubdivision of Lots 4 and 5 Final
Subdivision Plan
Res. 07-18-06H 07/18/2006 Approving the Kittaning Trails Fund
Subdivision
Res. 08-10-06 08/10/2006 Condemnation of Crazy Zingo, Inc. Real
Estate (Mill Run Stream Improvement
Project)
Res. 08-10-06A 08/10/2006 Adoption of NIMS
Res. 08-10-06B 08/10/2006 Approving the Castle Farms Phase 3 Final
Subdivision Plan
Res. 08-10-06C 08/10/2006 Approving the Hilton Garden Plaza Land
Development Plan
Res. 09-14-06 09/14/2006 Approving Greenwood Center Plaza Lot
Consolidation Plan
Res. 09-14-06A 09/14/2006 Approving Greenwood Center Plaza Land
Development Plan
Res. 09-14-06B 09/14/2006 Approving Liebl Subdivision
Res. 09-14-06C 09/14/2006 Approving Boyles Subdivision Plan and
Non-Building Waiver for Lots off Gwin
Road
Res. 09-14-06D 09/14/2006 Amendment of Res. 05-25-06 - Joey's Only
Seafood Restaurant Liquor License
Res. 09-28-06 09/28/2006 October Designated as Firefighter
Recognition Month
Res. 10-12-06 10/12/2006 Approving Raymond Moyer Subdivision
Plan, Planning Module and Non-Building
Waiver
Res. 10-26-06 10/26/2006 Credit Card Policy
Res. 10-26-06A 10/26/2006 Approving Frederick Road as a public
road
Res. 11-09-06A 11/09/2006 Approving Bishop Subdivision and Lot
Consolidation Plan
Res. 11-09-06B 11/09/2006 Approving Forsht Subdivision and Lot
Consolidation Plan
Res. 11-09-06C 11/09/2006 Approving Kuhn Subdivision Plan
Ord. 12-14-06 12/14/2006 Amendment to Subdivision and Land
Development
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:821
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Ord. 12-14-06A 12/14/2006 Amendment to Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax/Local Services Tax
Res. 12-14-06 12/14/2006 Amending Telephone, Computer and
Internet Usage Policy
Res. 12-14-06A 12/14/2006 Approving 2007 Budget
Res. 12-14-06B 12/14/2006 Approving Kittanning Trails Final
Subdivision Plan
Res. 12-14-06C 12/14/2006 Granting Crimson Fire 45-day extension
for Corrective Tank Work on Greenwood
Rescue/Pumper
Res. 01-02-07 01/02/2007 Appointment of Certified Public
Accountant
Res. 01-02-07A 01/02/2007 Appointing member to Zoning Hearing
Board
Res. 01-25-07 01/25/2007 Interim Real Estate Tax Assessment
Res. 01-25-07A 01/25/2007 Condemnation of Portion of Property of
Hemlock Crossing, LLC
Res. 01-25-07C 01/25/2007 Approving Ravinia Subdivision and Lot
Consolidation Plan
Res. 02-22-07 02/22/2007 Dedication of Oakwood Acres Sewer Line
Extension
Res. 03-08-07 03/08/2007 2007 Fair Housing
Res. 03-08-07A 03/08/2007 Approving Caldwell Final Subdivision
Plan
Res. 03-22-07A 03/22/2007 Rejecting Hemlock Crossing Final
Subdivision Plan
Res. 04-12-07 04/12/2007 CDBG Grant Application
Res. 04-12-07B 04/12/2007 Approving the Bardell Subdivision Plan
Res. 04-26-07 04/26/2007 Citizen's Advisory Committee to Develop
Strategic Business Plan for Volunteer Fire
Service
Res. 04-26-07A 04/26/2007 Approving Locke Subdivision Plan
Res. 05-10-07 05/10/2007 Township Police Pension Plan Amendment
Res. 05-24-07 05/24/2007 Approving KD Land Six Lot Subdivision
Plan and Planning Module
Res. 06-14-07 06/14/2007 Park Avenue Improvements Project
Sidewalk Maintenance Agreement
Res. 06-14-07A 06/14/2007 Approving Balliet Final Subdivision and
Lot Consolidation Plan
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:822
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 06-20-07 06/20/2007 Building Code Official Certification for
Norman A. Bumbarger
Res. 06-28-07 06/28/2007 Expression of Sympathy to the Family of
PFC Larry Parks, Jr.
Res. 07-12-07 07/12/2007 Approving the Young Lot Consolidation
Plan
Res. 07-12-07A 07/12/2007 Approving Logan Town Centre Lot 5
Subdivision and Lot Consolidation Plan
Res. 07-12-07B 07/12/2007 Approving Logan Town Centre Lot 5 Land
Development Plan
Res. 08-09-07A 08/09/2007 Approving the Forsht Boundary Survey
and Planning Module Plot Plan
Res. 08-09-07B 08/09/2007 Approving Wilt Boundary Survey and
Planning Module Plot Plan
Res. 10-11-07 10/11/2007 Approving Huss Subdivision Plan and
Planning Module
Res. 10-11-07A 10/11/2007 Approving Shearer Subdivision Plan
Res. 10-11-07B 10/11/2007 Approving Sottile Subdivision/Lot
Consolidation Plan
Ord. 11-08-07 11/08/2007 Local Services Tax
Res. 11-08-07A 11/08/2007 Eric and Charlotte Cover Planning
Module
Res. 12-13-07A 12/13/2007 Setting of Tax Levy
Res. 12-13-07B 12/13/2007 Home Program Applicant
Res. 12-13-07C 12/13/2007 Approving Richard DeGol Subdivision
Plan
Res. 01-07-08 01/07/2008 Appointment of member to Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 01-07-08A 01/07/2008 Logan Township/South Hills Area Council
of Governments
Ord. 01-24-08 01/24/2008 Increase members of Planning
Commission
Res. 01-24-08A 01/24/2008 Appointing members to Planning
Commission
Res. 01-24-08B 01/24/2008 Adoption of Blair County Hazard
Vulnerability Assessment and Mitigation
Plan
Res. 01-24-08C 01/24/2008 Appointing Alternate to Zoning Hearing
Board
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:823
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 01-24-08G 01/24/2008 Minimum Unreserved Surplus in General
Fund
Res. 02-14-08 02/14/2008 Appointment of CPA
Res. 04-10-08B 04/10/2008 Recognition of Youth Firefighters
Ord. 04-24-08 04/24/2008 Unlawful Disordered Gatherings
Ord. 04-24-08A 04/24/2008 Adopting Loitering provisions
Ord. 04-24-08B 04/24/2008 Regulation of Outdoor Furnaces
Ord. 04-24-08C 04/24/2008 Amendment of Solid Waste and
Recyclables Storage, Collection, Disposal
and Processing
Ord. 04-24-08D 04/24/2008 Amendment of Collection and Recycling
of Waste
Res. 04-24-08 04/24/2008 Adopting Recycling Guidelines
Ord. 06-12-08A 06/12/2008 Intergovernmental Police Service
Agreement
Ord. 06-12-08B 06/12/2008 911 Property Addressing
Res. 06-12-08 06/12/2008 Supporting Participation in Rails-to-Trails
Conservancy's 2010 Campaign
Res. 06-12-08A 06/12/2008 Amending Drainage Pipe Installation
Ord. 08-28-08 08/28/2008 911 Property Addressing
Ord. 09-25-08 09/25/2008 Connection to Public Water System
Ord. 10-23-08 10/23/2008 Building Permit Renewals
Ord. 12-11-08 12/11/2008 Revisions to Subdivision and Land
Development
Ord. 12-11-08A 12/11/2008 Revision to rate of tax
Res. 12-11-08 12/11/2008 Adoption of new Open Records Policy
Res. 12-11-08A 12/11/2008 Approving 2009 Budget
Res. 01-05-09 01/05/2009 Appointment of Member to Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 01-05-09A 01/05/2009 Appointment of Alternates to Zoning
Hearing Board
Ord. 01-22-09A 01/22/2009 Revisions to Subdivision and Land
Development
Res. 02-12-09 02/12/2009 Appointment of CPA
Res. 02-12-09A 02/12/2009 Tax Collector Compensation
Res. 02-26-09 02/26/2009 Amending Emergency Operations Plan
(EOP)
Res. 03-26-09 03/26/2009 Records Retention Schedule
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:824
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 03-26-09A 03/26/2009 Destruction of Municipal Records
Res. 04-23-09 04/23/2009 Transfer of Liquor License from Antis
Township To 205 Charlotte Avenue, Logan
Township
Res. 05-28-09 05/28/2009 Transfer of Liquor License from Freedom
Township To 2906 Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
Res. 06-11-09 06/11/2009 Extending term of real property, earned
income Tax, net profits mercantile, and
business privilege taxes
Res. 07-09-09 07/09/2009 Prohibiting smoking in Township
municipal building
Res. 11-12-09C 11/12/2009 Appointment of David Pozgar as Interim
Manager
Res. 11-12-09D 11/12/2009 Re-designation of Bonnie T. Lewis as
Secretary/Treasurer
Res. 11-12-09E 11/12/2009 Retirement of Bonnie T. Lewis
Ord. 12-10-09A 12/10/2009 Merger of fire companies
Res. 12-10-09A 12/10/2009 Amending Exhibit A to Resolution
04-07-09A
Res. 12-10-09C 12/10/2009 Approving 2010 budget
Res. 08-12-10 08/12/2010 Approving Heavy Weight, Inc., transfer of
Liquor License No. R6482
Res. 08-12-10A 08/12/2010 Approving Altagheny, Inc., request to
transfer liquor license
Res. 08-12-10B 08/12/2010 Approving Chestnut Flats Substation
subdivision plans
Res. 08-12-10C 08/12/2010 Approving Chestnut Flats revised plan of
lots
Res. 08-12-10D 08/12/2010 Approving AWA Easterly Wastewater
Treatment Plant land development plan
Res. 08-12-10E 08/12/2010 Approving Health South Rehabilitation
Hospital revised land development plan
Res. 08-12-10F 08/12/2010 Authorizing Township Manager to
execute stormwater HOP
Res. 08-12-10G 08/12/2010 Amendment to Schedule of Fees
Res. 08-12-10H 08/12/2010 Opposition to forced local governmental
mergers and consolidations
Res. 10-14-10D 10/14/2010 October designated as Firefighter
Recognition Month
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:825
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 12-09-10 12/09/2010 Rescinding minimum unreserved surplus
in general fund
Res. 12-09-10A 12/09/2010 Approving 2011 budget
Res. 12-09-10B 12/09/2010 Amending recycling guidelines
Res. 01-03-11 01/03/2011 Appointing member to Zoning Hearing
Board
Res. 01-03-11A 01/03/2011 Appointment of certified public
accountant
Res. 01-27-11C 01/27/2011 Supporting PA Public Utility Commission
plan to split 814 area code
Res. 02-10-11 02/10/2011 Tax Collector compensation
Res. 02-10-11A 02/10/2011 Approving Bathurst-Bellemeade
subdivision/lot consolidation plan
Res. 02-10-11B 02/10/2011 Approving Penn State Altoona-Ritchey
Property lot consolidation plan
Res. 03-10-11 03/10/2011 Amending recycling guidelines
Res. 05-12-11 05/12/2011 Recognizing 61st wedding anniversary of
Lawrence and Catherine Maiolo
Res. 06-09-11 06/09/2011 Approving Casa Valadez, Inc., transfer of
Liquor License No. R-18254
Res. 07-14-11 07/14/2011 Approving Texas Roadhouse Holdings,
LLC, transfer of Liquor License No.
R-19037
Res. 07-14-11A 07/14/2011 Destruction of municipal records
Res. 10-27-11A 10/27/2011 Amendment of Police Pension Plan
Res. 10-27-11A 10/27/2011 Amendment of Non-Uniformed Employees
Pension Plan
Res. 11-10-11 11/10/2011 Intent to adopt head tax and flat rate
occupational tax
Res. 12-29-11 12/29/2011 Approving 2012 budget
Res. 12-29-11A 12/29/2011 Amendment to DCP
Res. 01-03-12A 01/03/2012 Appointment of member to Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 01-03-12B 01/03/2012 Appointment of alternates to Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 01-26-12 01/26/2012 Appointment of CPA
Res. 03-08-12 03/08/2012 Prevailing wage reform
Res. 03-22-12C 03/22/2012 Authorization to sign
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:826
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 04-12-12 04/12/2012 100th year anniversary of Lakemont Fire
Company
Res. 04-26-12 04/26/2012 Tour De'Toona
Res. 07-12-12 07/12/2012 Authorize Manager to assign fund
balances Standards Board Statement No.
54
Res. 10-25-12 10/25/2012 Transfer of cable franchise
Res. 12-13-12 12/13/2012 Amending Police Pension Fund
Res. 12-13-12E 12/13/2012 Tax levy and budget
Res. 12-13-12G 12/13/2012 Appropriations for 2012 budget
Res. 07-10-14 7/10/2014 Approving the Kelly Monument land
development plan
Res. 07-10-14A 7/10/2014 Approving the Newburg Fire Association
Social Hall land development plan
Res. 08-28-14 8/28/2014 Amending the Police Pension Fund
Res. 08-28-14A 8/28/2014 Appointing members to the Planning
Commission
Res. 08-28-14B 8/28/2014 Appointing a member to the Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 08-28-14C 8/28/2014 Appointing a member to the Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 09-11-14 9/11/2014 Approving the Deleo/Hufford subdivision
plan
Res. 09-11-14A 9/11/2014 Approving the Ciccarella/Bobetich
subdivision and lot consolidation plan
Res. 09-25-14 9/25/2014 Acknowledging the MS4 TDML Plan and
Chesapeake Bay Pollution Reduction Plan
and approving its submission to the PA
DEP for review and approval
Res. 09-25-14A 9/25/2014 Amending the Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan
Res. 10-09-14A 10/9/2014 Approving the Newburg Fire Association
lot consolidation plan
Res. 10-23-14 10/23/2014 Establishing residency requirements for
nonunion employees
Res. 11-13-14 11/13/2014 Approving the Yohn lot consolidation plan
Res. 11-13-14A 11/13/2014 Approving the Saletnik lot consolidation
plan
Res. 12-11-14 12/11/2014 Providing for supplemental
appropriations for the 2014 budget
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:827
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 12-11-14A 12/11/2014 Adopting the 2015 budget and tax rate
Res. 12-11-14B 12/11/2014 Approving the Toumayants/Caloustian
subdivision plan
Res. 12-11-14C 12/11/2014 Approving the Rott/Cusick subdivision
and lot consolidation plan
Res. 01-05-15 1/5/2015 Appointing a member and an alternate
member to the Zoning Hearing Board
Res. 01-22-15 1/22/2015 Appointing a certified public accountant
Res. 01-22-15A 1/22/2015 Congratulating the Bishop Guilfoyle
football team on its state championship
and proclaiming February 2015 as Bishop
Guilfoyle Marauders Football Team
Month in Logan Township
Res. 01-22-15B 1/22/2015 Approving the Cruthers lot consolidation
plan
Res. 01-22-15C 1/22/2015 Approving the Young subdivision and lot
consolidation plan
Res. 01-22-15D 1/22/2015 Approving the Markley subdivision and
lot consolidation plan
Res. 01-22-15E 1/22/2015 Approving the Edevane subdivision and
lot consolidation plan
Ord. 02-12-15 2/12/2015 Authorizing Township participation in the
PSATS Unemployment Compensation
Group Trust
Res. 02-12-15 2/12/2015 Approving Weis Markets, Inc., transfer of
Liquor License No. R-13177
Res. 02-12-15A 2/12/2015 Congratulating Cindy Updyke on her
retirement and thanking her for her many
years of service to the Township and the
79th Legislative District
Res. 02-26-15 2/26/2015 2015 Fair Housing Resolution
Res. 03-12-15 3/12/2015 Approving the Thomas/Michael
subdivision and lot consolidation plan
Res. 03-12-15A 3/12/2015 Approving the Red Robin land
development plan
Res. 03-12-15B 3/12/2015 Approving the Lakeview Estates final
subdivision plan
Res. 03-12-15C 3/12/2015 Indicating support for the Ken
Brumbaugh Memorial Race and
permitting the race to use Leopold Park
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:828
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 03-26-15 3/26/2015 Approving the Newburg Fire Association
Social Hall revised land development plan
Res. 03-26-15A 3/26/2015 Amending Res. 06-27-13 regarding
selection of professional services for
municipal pension plans
Res. 04-09-15 4/9/2015 Approving the Willett lot consolidation
plan
Res. 04-09-15A 4/9/2015 Approving the Betar subdivision plan
Res. 04-23-15 4/23/2015 Presenting a service weapon to Martin L.
Wilt in thanks for his many years of
exemplary service to the Township
Res. 04-23-15A 4/23/2015 Presenting a tribute to Chief Ronald C.
Heller acknowledging his retirement and
thanking him for his great service to the
Township and his country
Res. 04-23-15B 4/23/2015 Presenting a tribute to Carole Diehl
acknowledging her retirement and
thanking her for her dedicated service to
the Township
Res. 04-23-15C 4/23/2015 Approving the Ingham subdivision plan
Res. 05-14-15 5/14/2015 Amending the resolution approving Weis
Markets, Inc., transfer of Liquor License
No. R-13177
Res. 05-14-15A 5/14/2015 Approving the Rickabaugh subdivision
plan
Res. 05-14-15B 5/14/2015 Requesting minor adjustment of one
sewer manhole riser in the prime
construction contract for the
Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation
Res. 06-11-15 6/11/2015 Requesting minor adjustment of one
sewer manhole riser in the prime
construction contract for the
Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation
Res. 06-25-15 6/25/2015 Authorizing the Board Chair to sign
PennDOT agreements related to the
Township supplying sewer manhole risers
for state road projects in the Township
Res. 06-25-15A 6/25/2015 Approving the Ellwood Acres revised
subdivision plan
Res. 07-09-15 7/9/2015 Red Robin International, Inc., liquor
license transfer request
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:829
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 07-09-15A 7/9/2015 Appointment of Timothy J. Mercer as
Chief of Police
Res. 08-13-15A 8/13/2015 Approving the Snyder subdivision plan
Res. 08-13-15B 8/13/2015 Approving the North Terrace lot
consolidation plan
Res. 08-13-15C 8/13/2015 Approving the Colyer lot consolidation
plan
Res. 08-13-15D 8/13/2015 Destruction of municipal records
Res. 08-27-15A 8/27/2015 Residency requirements for employees
Ord. 09-10-15 9/10/2015 Authorizing participation in the Municipal
Services Joinder Agreement for the
provision of health and welfare benefits
pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law
Res. 09-10-15 9/10/2015 Approving the Thompson lot
consolidation plan
Res. 10-08-15 10/8/2015 La Fiesta Mexican Bar and Grille of
Altoona, Inc., liquor license transfer
request
Res. 10-22-15B 10/22/2015 CDBG compliance policies
Res. 10-22-15C 10/22/2015 2015 CDBG application submittal
Res. 11-12-15 11/12/2015 Noncorporate resolution - Pershing LLC
Res. 12-10-15 12/10/2015 Providing for supplemental
appropriations for the 2015 budget
Res. 12-10-15A 12/10/2015 Tax levy and budget
Res. 12-10-15B 12/10/2015 Approving the Barr subdivision and lot
consolidation plan
Res. 12-10-15C 12/10/2015 Approving the Diggins lot consolidation
plan
Res. 01-04-16A 1/4/2016 Appointing a member to the Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 01-04-16B 1/4/2016 Application for traffic signal approval
Res. 01-28-16 1/28/2016 Proclamation on BG Marauders football
championship
Res. 01-28-16B 1/28/2016 Approving the Promoland subdivision
plan
Res. 02-11-16 2/11/2016 Appointing a certified public accountant
Res. 02-11-16A 2/11/2016 Approving the DeGol/Neely subdivision
and lot consolidation plan
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:830
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 03-10-16 3/10/2016 Approving the JMH (Don DeGol) final
subdivision plan
Res. 03-24-16 3/24/2016 Grant agreement signature page
Res. 03-24-16A 3/24/2016 La Fiesta Mexican Bar and Grille of
Altoona, Inc., liquor license transfer
request
Res. 04-14-16 4/14/2016 Approving the Lakeview Estates final
subdivision plan
Res. 04-14-16A 4/14/2016 Designation of agent to execute for and in
behalf of the Township all forms and
documents for the purpose of obtaining
financial assistance under the Robert T.
Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency
Assistance Act
Res. 04-28-16 4/28/2016 Donation of bicycles to charitable
organizations
Res. 04-28-16A 4/28/2016 Supporting the Great Commission
Schools Fundraising Race
Res. 05-12-16A 5/12/2016 Supporting the Annual Northern Blair
County Rec Race
Res. 05-12-16B 5/12/2016 Approving the Carbonell lot consolidation
plan
Res. 05-12-16C 5/12/2016 Supporting the Annual Special Olympics
"Be a Fan" Torch Run
Res. 05-26-16 5/26/2016 Rescinding approval of Abundant Life
Assembly of God of Altoona, Inc., plan
approval and developer's agreement
Res. 06-09-16 6/9/2016 Approving the Bathurst/Linwood Road
subdivision plan
Res. 06-09-16A 6/9/2016 Approving the Sandy Run Farms/
Ferguson subdivision plan
Res. 06-09-16B 6/9/2016 Approving the Turchetta lot consolidation
plan
Res. 06-23-2016 6/23/2016 Request for GTRP grant from the
Commonwealth Financing Authority for
improvements to Leopold Park
Res. 07-14-16B 7/14/2016 Approving the Riley lot consolidation and
subdivision plan
Res. 08-02-16 8/2/2016 Approving the Ebner Elementary Modular
Classrooms land development plan
Res. 08-11-16 8/11/2016 Fair Housing Resolution
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:831
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 08-11-16A 8/11/2016 Application for traffic signal approval
Res. 08-11-16B 8/11/2016 Application for traffic signal approval
Res. 08-11-16C 8/11/2016 Application for traffic signal approval
Res. 08-11-16D 8/11/2016 Application for traffic signal approval
Res. 08-25-16A 8/25/2016 Providing for supplemental
appropriations for the 2016 budget
Res. 09-08-16 9/8/2016 Altoona Aki Sushi Corporation liquor
license transfer request
Res. 09-08-16A 9/8/2016 Authorizing application to the
Pennsylvania Municipal Assistance
Program
Res. 09-22-16 9/22/2016 Approving the Barr lot consolidation plan
Res. 09-22-16A 9/22/2016 Approving the Rhodes lot consolidation
plan
Res. 09-22-16B 9/22/2016 Approving the Dollar General land
development plan
Res. 10-13-16 10/13/2016 Approving the Link lot consolidation plan
Res. 10-13-16A 10/13/2016 Approving the Burgmeier Truck Wash lot
consolidation plan
Res. 10-13-16B 10/13/2016 Approving the Gibson subdivision plan
Res. 12-08-16 12/8/2016 Providing for supplemental
appropriations for the 2016 budget
Res. 12-08-16A 12/8/2016 Approving the Plank subdivision and lot
consolidation plan
Res. 12-08-16B 12/8/2016 Providing for supplemental
appropriations for the 2016 budget
Res. 12-08-16C 12/8/2016 Providing for supplemental
appropriations for the 2016 budget
Res. 12-08-16D 12/8/2016 2017 tax levy and budget (initial)
Res. 12-08-16E 12/8/2016 2017 tax levy and budget (final)
Res. 01-13-17 1/13/2017 Appointing a member to the Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 02-09-17 2/9/2017 Proclamation on BG Marauders football
championship
Res. 02-09-17A 2/9/2017 Approving the Ceglar subdivision plan
Res. 02-09-17B 2/9/2017 Approving the Patterson lot consolidation
plan
Res. 02-09-17C 2/9/2017 Approving the Logan Elementary Softball
Fields land development plan
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:832
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 02-09-17G 2/9/2017 Appointing a certified public accountant
Res. 02-23-17 2/23/2017 Approving the J Rae Storage Sheds
subdivision plan
Res. 02-23-17A 2/23/2017 Approving the J Rae Storage Facility land
development plan
Res. 02-23-17B 2/23/2017 Presenting a tribute to Patrolman First
Class Chris William Bender
acknowledging his retirement
Res. 02-23-17C 2/23/2017 Recognizing Donna Gority for her
outstanding accomplishments upon
receiving the Central Blair Recreation
and Park Commission 2017 Respected
Citizen Award and declaring "Donna
Gority Day" in the Township
Res. 03-23-17 3/23/2017 Application for traffic signal approval
Res. 03-23-17A 3/23/2017 Grant agreement signature page
Res. 03-23-17B 3/23/2017 Supporting the Great Commission
Schools Fundraising Race
Res. 04-13-17A 4/13/2017 Approving the McCloskey subdivision
plan
Res. 04-27-17 4/27/2017 Supporting the Family Services, Inc., 10K
Race/Walk
Res. 04-27-17A 4/27/2017 Supporting the Five Star Mitsubishi
Dealership Race/Walk
Res. 05-25-17 5/25/2017 Supporting the Law Enforcement Torch
Run for Special Olympics
Res. 06-22-17 6/22/2017 Approving the Stotler subdivision plan
Res. 06-22-17A 6/22/2017 Approving the Wertz subdivision plan
Res. 06-22-17B 6/22/2017 Approving the Ratchford lot consolidation
plan
Res. 07-13-17 7/13/2017 Recognizing 100th anniversary of Young,
Oakes, Brown and Company, PC
Res. 07-13-17A 7/13/2017 Destruction of municipal records
Res. 09-14-17A 9/14/2017 Approving the Mueller Auto Recycling
and Sales land development plan
Res. 09-14-17B 9/14/2017 Approving the Hennaman lot
consolidation plan
Res. 09-14-17C 9/14/2017 Approving the Petrusky subdivision and
lot consolidation plan
Res. 09-14-17D 9/14/2017 Approving the Butler subdivision plan
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:833
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 09-14-17E 9/14/2017 Approving the Diane Eyer subdivision and
lot consolidation plan
Res. 09-14-17F 9/14/2017 Approving the Chirdon lot consolidation
plan
Res. 09-28-17 9/28/2017 Support of nuclear energy in
Pennsylvania
Res. 09-28-17A 9/28/2017 Signature authorization
Res. 09-28-17B 9/28/2017 Appointment of Zoning Hearing Board
Solicitor
Res. 09-28-17C 9/28/2017 Fair Housing Resolution
Res. 11-19-17 11/9/2017 CDBG compliance policies
Res. 11-19-17A 11/9/2017 CDBG application submittal
Res. 11-09-17B 11/9/2017 Approving the O'Reilly Auto Parts Store
land development plan
Res. 11-09-17C 11/9/2017 Approving the Fischer subdivision and lot
consolidation plan
Res. 12-14-17 12/14/2017 Approving the Books lot consolidation
plan
Res. 12-14-17A 12/14/2017 Approving the Socie lot consolidation
plan
Res. 12-14-17B 12/14/2017 Providing for supplemental
appropriations for the 2017 budget
Res. 12-14-17C 12/14/2017 Tax levy and budget resolution
Res. 01-02-18A 1/2/2018 Appointment of members to Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 01-02-18B 1/2/2018 Opposition to House Bill 1620 (PN 2146)
entitled "Wireless Infrastructure
Deployment Bill"
Res. 01-25-18 1/25/2018 Approving the Johnson subdivision plan
Res. 01-25-18A 1/25/2018 Approving the Panda Express land
development plan
Res. 02-08-18 2/8/2018 Appointment of certified public
accountant
Res. 02-08-18A 2/8/2018 Request for PA Small Water and Sewer
Program grant
Res. 02-08-18B 2/8/2018 Approving the Clapper subdivision plan
Res. 02-08-18C 2/8/2018 Approving the David subdivision plan
Res. 02-08-18D 2/8/2018 Approving the Roebuck lot consolidation
plan
Res. 03-08-18 3/8/2018 Retirement of LaMarr Dively
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:834
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 03-08-18A 3/8/2018 Retirement of Chief of Police Timothy J.
Mercer
Res. 03-08-18B 3/8/2018 Approving the Beers lot consolidation
plan
Res. 03-08-18C 3/8/2018 Approving the DeBernardis lot
consolidation plan
Res. 03-22-18 3/22/2018 Great Commission Schools fundraising
race
Res. 04-12-18 4/12/2018 Appointment of Chief of Police
Res. 04-12-18A 4/12/2018 Family Services, Inc. 10K race/walk
Res. 04-12-18B 4/12/2018 Approval of pension calculations
Res. 05-10-18 5/10/2018 Approving the Harned subdivision plan
Res. 05-10-18A 5/10/2018 Approving the Hoover subdivision plan
Res. 05-10-18 5/10/2018 Destruction of municipal records
Res. 05-24-18 5/24/2018 Approval of request to transfer liquor
license
Res. 06-14-18 6/14/2018 Approving the Klaiber lot consolidation
plan
Res. 06-14-18A 6/14/2018 Approving the Brouse lot consolidation
plan
Res. 06-14-18B 6/14/2018 Approving the Clapper subdivision plan
Res. 07-12-18 7/12/2018 Approving the Stevens/Hancuff
subdivision and lot consolidation plan
Res. 07-12-18A 7/12/2018 Approving the Burk/Hicks subdivision and
lot consolidation plan
Res. 08-09-18 8/9/2018 Approving the Schroeder lot
consolidation plan
Res. 08-09-18A 8/9/2018 Approving the Picciotti lot consolidation
plan
Res. 09-27-18 9/27/2018 Approving the Park Hills Plaza revised
land development plan
Res. 09-27-18A 9/27/2018 Approving the Madden revised
subdivision and land development plan
Res. 10-11-18 10/11/2018 Approving the John Moyer subdivision
plan
Res. 11-08-18 11/8/2018 Retirement of Solicitor, Larry C. Clapper,
Esq.
Res. 11-08-18A 11/8/2018 Approval of Intermunicipal Stormwater
Committee agreement
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § D-101
1:835
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 12-13-18 12/13/2018 Approving the Kordwitz lot consolidation
plan
Res. 12-13-18A 12/13/2018 Providing for supplemental
appropriations for the 2018 budget
Res. 12-13-18B 12/13/2018 Tax levy and budget resolution
Res. 01-07-19 1/7/2019 Appointment of member to Zoning
Hearing Board
Res. 01-07-19A 1/7/2019 Appointment of certified public
accountant
Res. 01-24-19 1/24/2019 Approval of request to transfer liquor
license
Res. 01-24-19A 1/24/2019 Approving the Motsic lot consolidation
plan
Res. 01-24-19B 1/24/2019 Approving the Haines subdivision plan
Res. 01-24-19C 1/24/2019 Approving the Porta subdivision plan
Res. 01-24-19D 1/24/2019 Approving the AMED lot consolidation
plan
Res. 01-24-19E 1/24/2019 Approving the AMED land development
plan
Res. 02-14-19 2/14/2019 Approving the John Moyer subdivision
plan
Res. 03-14-19 3/14/2019 Approving the Kimberly/Mallow
subdivision and lot consolidation plan
Res. 03-14-19A 3/14/2019 Approving the Lawhead land development
plan
Res. 03-14-19B 3/14/2019 Recognition of members of the Lakemont
Volunteer Fire Company No. 1 who have
achieved more than 50 years of service
Res. 03-28-19 3/28/2019 Grant agreement signature page
Ord. 03-28-19A 3/28/2019 Intergovernmental joint leasing
arrangement
Res. 04-11-19 4/11/2019 Destruction of municipal records
Res. 04-11-19A 4/11/2019 Approving the Eilenberger lot
consolidation plan
Res. 04-11-19B 4/11/2019 Approving the Ritchey land development
plan
Res. 04-25-19 4/25/2019 Family Services, Inc. 10K race/walk
Res. 05-09-19A 5/9/2019 Approving the Kerr subdivision and lot
consolidation plan
§ D-101 LOGAN CODE § D-101
1:836
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 05-09-19B 5/9/2019 Approving the Socie lot consolidation
plan
Res. 05-09-19C 5/9/2019 Approving the Leberfinger lot
consolidation plan
Res. 05-23-19 5/23/2019 Supporting the Law Enforcement Torch
Run for Special Olympics
Appendix E
PLAN APPROVAL
§ E-101. Plan Approval.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 12-02-99 12/02/1999 Adoption of Township Comprehensive
Plan
Res. 10-12-00 10/12/2000 Amend and Restate Township
Comprehensive Plan - First Amendment
Res. 01-04-16 1/4/2016 Adoption of Township Comprehensive
Plan
Appendix F
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ F-101. Public Property.
Ord./Res. Date Location Buyer Price
Ord. 4-18-96 4/18/1996 Off Good's Lane Morris
Management,
Inc.
$1,499
Ord.
11-04-10
11/04/2010 Irregular parcel
consisting of
0.469 acres off
Frankstown
Road
LG
Frankstown,
LLC
$125,000
Appendix G
SEWERS
§ D-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § G-101
1:837
§ G-101. Sewers.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 4-16-81 4/15/1981 Cost of construction of the sewer line in
the Newburg Sewer District to serve the
premises identified in Contract 80-3
Res. 4-30-81 4/30/1981 Authorized to enter into a contract for
and to proceed with the construction of a
sewer line in the area designated
Res. 11-29-84 11/29/1984 Township authorizes the establishment of
a Maintenance Reserve Fund for the
Lakemont District for the purpose of
repairs and maintenance of sewer lines
Res. 12-13-84 12/13/1984 Township adopts a procedure for
handling sewage complaints
Res. 6-5-86 6/5/1986 Township adopts and submits to DER for
approval as a revision to the "Official
Plan" of the municipality's Facility Plan
Ord. 08-31-89 08/31/1989 Authorize first supplemental lease
agreement with Central Blair County
Sewer Authority
Res. 10-25-90 10/25/1990 Authorizing extension of the public
sanitary sewer in the Greenwood Sewer
District in accordance with the Plan of
Construction No. 90-1 and estimated cost
submitted by the Authority to the
Township
Res. 3-28-91 3/28/1991 Township adopts an official sewage
facilities plan update which the Borough
of Hollidaysburg has prepared
Res. 3-28-91A 3/28/1991 Township shall submit an official sewage
facilities plan update to the Department
for its approval by March 22, 1992, and
that a plan of study be submitted by April
30,1991
Res. 7-14-94 7/14/1994 Brush Run Interceptor Report
Res. 2-2-95 2/2/1995 Third interim status report of Lakemont
Collection System
Res. 3-9-95 3/9/1995 Act 537/Improvements to Brush Run
Interceptor
Res. 02-15-96 2/15/1996 Abandonment of Newburg combined
sanitary sewer
Res. 5-16-96C 5/16/1996 Sewer Fund reimbursement
§ G-101 LOGAN CODE § G-101
1:838
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 06-06-96 6/6/1996 Sanitary sewer billing/collection and
permit office procedures
Res. 12-19-96A 12/19/1996 I & A System - lease agreement rental
payments
Res. 3-20-97 3/20/1997 Condemnation of Ted J. Will property for
Newburg storm sewer
Res. 10-09-97 10/09/1997 Approve Lease Termination Agreement
Res. 3-12-98 3/12/1998 1998 General Obligations Bonds -
Authorizing and approving lease
termination and conveyance agreement
Res. 07-09-98 7/9/1998 I & A District - Sackandy sewer service
Res. 01-04-99A 01/04/1999 Condemnations for North Lakemont
Sanitary Sewer System Construction
Res. 07-15-99A 07/15/1999 Authorization to Execute Intermunicipal
Pretreatment Agreement for
Hollidaysburg Interceptor
Ord. 12-11-03A 12/11/2003 Increase of Sewer Rates Lakemont,
Greenwood
Ord. 01-22-04 1/22/2004 Pretreatment Program for Sewers and
Sewage Disposal
Ord. 01-03-05 01/03/2005 Sewer District Ordinance
Res. 01-25-07B 01/25/2007 Sewer Line Extension for Carol Z. Smith
Res. 07-12-07C 07/12/2007 Act 537 Sewage Facilities Plan Revision
Ord. 08-23-07B 08/23/2007 Alternate Sewage System Management
Res. 11-08-07 11/08/2007 Park Avenue Sewer Cost Allocation
Ord. 11-08-07A 11/08/2007 Specifications
Res. 12-13-07 12/13/2007 Specifications
Ord. 01-07-08 01/07/2008 Increase of Sewer Rates Frankstown
District
Res. 02-14-08C 02/14/2008 Accepting Dedication of Brush Oakes
Subdivision Sewer Line Extension
Res. 02-12-09E 02/12/2009 Accepting Dedication of The Simington
South Development Subdivision Sewer
Line Extension
Res. 08-27-09A 08/27/2009 Accepting Dedication of Glades at
Stonehedge Sewer Line Extension
Res. 09-10-09A 09/10/2009 Accepting Dedication of Ivyside Estates
Sewer Line Extension
Ord. 12-10-09 12/10/2009 Increase in Sewer Rates beginning 01/01/
2010
§ G-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § G-101
1:839
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Ord. 12-09-10 12/09/2010 Adopt regulations of AWA
Res. 03-11-10 03/11/2010 Accepting Dedication of Burgmeier Sewer
Line Extension
Ord. 03-10-11C 03/10/2011 Adjusting Sewer Service Rates in
Frankstown District
Res. 05-26-11 05/26/2011 Temporary administration fee reduction
in Frankstown Township Sewer District
Res. 12-08-11B 12/08/2011 Revisions to Township's Facility Plan
Res. 04-12-12A 04/12/2012 Accepting dedication of Hooper sewer
line extension – 1508 N. 3rd Street
Res. 04-12-12B 04/12/2012 Accepting dedication of Durbin sewer line
extension – Penn Avenue
Res. 04-12-12C 04/12/2012 Accepting dedication of Durbin sewer line
extension – Lawn Lane
Res. 10-09-14 10/9/2014 Accepting dedication of the Rossman
sewer line extension – Oak Street
Res. 07-09-15B 7/9/2015 Accepting dedication of the Broadrick
sewer line extension – 31st Avenue
Res. 08-13-15 8/13/2015 Accepting dedication of the C&C sewer
line extension – off Kittanning Point Road
Res. 10-22-15 10/22/2015 Authorizing construction of sanitary
sewer for portions of Frankstown Road,
Beverly Hills and City View Street areas
Res. 10-22-15A 10/22/2015 Authorizing the Chairman's signature on
all necessary PennDOT documents
related to Phase II of the Township's
sewer extension project
Res. 01-28-16A 1/28/2016 Accepting dedication of the Promoland
sewer line off S.R. 4005, Mill Run Road
Res. 02-25-16 2/25/2016 Accepting dedication of the Ellwood
Acres sewer line extension off Township
Route 961 – Dixie Lane Extension
Res. 05-12-16 5/12/2016 Adopting a revision to the official sewage
facilities plan
Res. 07-14-16A 7/14/2016 Accepting dedication of the DeGol sewer
line
Res. 02-09-17E 2/9/2017 Accepting dedication of the Reighard
sewer line (Lakeview Estates)
Res. 04-13-17 4/13/2017 Accepting dedication the Thompson
sewer line extension – Oak Street
§ G-101 LOGAN CODE § G-101
1:840
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 01-02-18 1/2/2018 Accepting dedication of the Yorkshire
Group, L.P., sewer line extension and
easement for Camelot Woods formerly
known as "Clairmont Estates"
Res. 04-26-18 4/26/2018 Authorizing construction of sanitary
sewer for portions of East Hudson
Avenue, Robin Avenue, Orchard Avenue
and Gage Avenue areas
Res. 04-26-18A 4/26/2018 Sinisi sewer condemnation
Appendix H
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ H-101. Streets and Sidewalks.
This appendix contains an alphabetical listing of streets, and under each
street a chronological listing of all ordained activities.
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Airforce Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly line of Fordham
Circle and northwesterly
corner of Lot #28
6-23-98B 6/23/1998
Airforce Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly line of Fordham
Circle
Res. 11-3-94A 11/3/1994
Alta Vista Drive Accepted From intersection with Fourth
Street and said Beverly
Boulevard to 5th Street
2-70 2/5/1970
Alta Vista Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly right-of-way of
Alta Vista Drive to the place of
beginning
9-9-76 9/9/1976
Atlantic Avenue Accepted Extending from a street or
road known as E. Caroline
Avenue in a southerly
direction a distance of 1030
feet to a cul-de-sac
7-3-75 7/3/1975
Atlantic Avenue
Ext.
Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southerly right-of-way of
Walton Avenue to place of
beginning
5-20-76 5/20/1976
§ G-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:841
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Avalon Road Traffic Signal Agreement for Installation of
Traffic Signal at Avalon Road
(T-476) and SR 0036
Res. 09-14-00B 09/14/2000
Avalon Road Vacated Between Juniata Gap Road and
160 feet west of Juniata Gap
Road
12-12-13 12/12/2013
Barron Street Accepted Extending from said Atlantic
Avenue in a northwesterly
direction a distance of 305
feet to said East Caroline
Avenue
7-3-75 7/3/1975
Barry Court Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northerly side of Hillside
Avenue to a point on the
northerly side Hillside Avenue
808 7/7/1966
Beale Avenue Accepted Extension southwest of Fifty-
Eighth Street
12-1-60 12/1/1960
Beale Avenue Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southerly right-of-way line of a
proposed Township road
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
Bell Street Accepted Extending from the
northeasterly right-of-way line
of Erin Drive to the
southeasterly right-of-way line
of Dixie Lane
10-19-78 10/19/1978
Beverly Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northern side of Beverly
Boulevard at the intersection
of Beverly Boulevard and
Third Street
Res. 12-5-96A 12/5/1996
Briarcliff Road Accepted Extending from a
southeasterly right-of-way of a
public street or road known as
Sterling Road to the
southeasterly right-of-way line
in a northeasterly direction a
distance of 305 feet
4-24-75 4/24/1975
Broad Avenue Accepted Extending from the
southwesterly line of a street
or road known as 16th Street
in an easterly direction to the
City line of Altoona
11-6-69 11/6/1969
Bridge Street Accepted From Sprankle Avenue, east
135 feet
12-24-87C 12/24/1987
§ H-101 LOGAN CODE § H-101
1:842
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Brookside Drive Accepted Beginning at the intersection
of the eastern side of Juniata
Springs Drive with the
western side of Brookside
Drive to the northwestern side
of South Park Drive
780 6/3/1965
Brush Oaks Drive Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the easterly
right-of-way line of Princeton
Road to place of beginning
11-18-82 11/18/1982
Brush Oakes
Drive
Extension Beginning at an iron pin, lying
in the northerly right-of-way
line of existing Brush Oakes
Drive
Res. 02-14-08B 02/14/2008
Canary Drive Accepted Beginning at a point at the
southeast corner of Lot No. 92
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
Catherine Street Accepted From the southerly line of
Rosehill Drive to the southerly
line as extended of a 15-foot
alley
11-12-70 11/12/1970
Clairmont Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northeasterly most
intersection of Earnhardt
Drive and Clairmont Drive
Res. 01-27-00 01/27/2000
Clairmont Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northeasterly most
intersection of Earnhardt
Drive and Clairmont Drive
Res. 01-27-00 01/27/2000
Clapper Road Accepted Dedicated land from Walter W.
Clapper and Dorothy M.
Clapper
Res. 10-28-83 10/28/1983
Clapper Road Accepted From westerly right-of-way of
Kettle Road
12-6-84 12/6/1984
Clark Street Accepted Extending from the
northwesterly right-of-way line
of Erin Drive to the
southeasterly right-of-way line
of Dixie Lane
10-19-78 10/19/1978
Claybrooke Drive Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the easterly
line of Necessity Drive to
place of beginning
8-4-83 8/4/1983
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:843
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Clemson Road Temporarily
Closed
Temporarily closed until such
time as roadway is needed to
serve owners along Clemson
Road
03-09-00 03/09/2000
Cogan Road,
Extension
Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northwesterly right-of-way line
of a public street or road
known as Cogan Road
10-10-74 10/10/1974
Creekside Lane Accepted Beginning at a 5/8-inch rebar
and cap set on the intersection
of the common line of
Creekside Lane and Lot No. 6
of the JMH Subdivision and
the northeasterly line of Lotz
Avenue
Res. 07-14-16 7/14/2016
Dartmouth Lane Accepted Extending from Leg. Route
07027 to Township Route 482
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Dartmouth Lane Accepted Extending from Township
Route 482 to Township Route
951
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Davis Road Accepted Beginning at Pennsylvania
Highway Route No. 860 and
continuing for approximately 2
miles to State Leg. Route No.
07026
Res. 10-4-62 10/4/1962
Deer Run Road Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeast corner of Lot #80
Res. 12-05-96B 12/6/1996
Deer Run Road Accepted Beginning at a point at the
southeast corner of Lot #80
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
Dixie Lane Accepted Extending from the
southwesterly right-of-way line
of Bell Street to the
northeasterly right-of-way line
of Erin Drive
10-19-78 10/19/1978
Dixie Lane
Extension
Accepted Beginning at a rebar with cap
set at the intersection of the
northeasterly right-of-way line
of Bell Street and the
northwesterly right-of-way line
of the Dixie Lane Extension
Res. 02-25-16A 2/25/2016
Dove Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeast corner of Lot #80
12-05-96B 12/5/1996
§ H-101 LOGAN CODE § H-101
1:844
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Duquesne Lane Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly right-of-way line
of Old Dominion Drive
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
Earnhardt Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southerly most legal right-ofway
line of Sandy Run Road
(T-482)
Res. 01-27-00 01/27/2000
East Caroline
Avenue
Accepted Extending from said Atlantic
Avenue in a southwesterly
direction a distance of 899
feet
7-3-75 7/3/1975
East Hamilton
Lane
Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly side of East
Hamilton Lane to a 20-foot
turnaround at the end
Res. 5-20-74 5/20/1974
East Hamilton
Lane
Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly right-of-way line
of Olde Dominion Drive
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
East Hamilton
Lane
Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly right-of-way line
of Old Dominion Drive
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
East Hamilton
Lane
Accepted Portion consisting of a
0.049-acre of right-of-way
along East Hamilton Lane
Res. 07-12-18B 7/12/2018
East Logan
Avenue
Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the center lines
of East Caroline Avenue and
East Logan Avenue to a point
at the intersection of said
center line of East Logan
Avenue and the boundary line
separating Logan Township
from the City of Altoona
10-12-78 10/12/1978
East Logan
Avenue
Condemnation Condemnation of Howard and
Jeanette Gates and David and
Deborah Burgmeier properties
for roadway construction in
Logan Heights Development
Res. 06-08-00 06/08/2000
Edinboro Drive Accepted Beginning at a point located
on the eastern corner of Lot
159
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
Eighth Street Take Over From 19th Avenue to Vicars
Lane
5-24-73 5/24/1973
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:845
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Eldon Avenue Accepted Beginning at a point on the
westerly right-of-way line of
Eldon Avenue from its
previous terminus through its
intersection with Rebecca
Street
9-9-76A 9/9/1976
Eleventh Street Accepted From 6th Avenue to the
eastern side of 6th Avenue
5-69 5/-/1969
Eleventh Street Accepted Extending from Township
Route 618 to the Altoona City
line
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Eleventh Street Accepted Extending from Leg. Route
07011 to a dead end
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Eleventh Street Accepted Extending from Township
Route 307 to Township Route
539
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Elm Street Accepted Beginning at Township Route
529 extending to Township
Route 426
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Elm Street Accepted Beginning at Township Route
426 extending to Township
Route 427
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Ensbrenner Drive Accepted From the easterly right-of-way
line of a street or road known
as Mary Lane to the westerly
right-of-way line, as extended,
of a street or road known as
Jayne Lane
11-3-73 11/3/1973
Ensbrenner Drive Accepted From Jayne Lane to Laurie
Lane
11-7-75 11/7/1975
Ensbrenner Drive Accepted From Jayne Lane to Laurie
Lane
11-7-77 11/7/1977
Erin Drive Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the
southwesterly right-of-way line
of Erin Drive to place of
beginning
10-19-78 10/19/1978
Fernway Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwesterly side of Fernway
Drive
Res. 08-27-09 08/27/2009
Fifteenth Avenue Accepted From Second Street to Fourth
Street
5-4-61 5/4/1961
§ H-101 LOGAN CODE § H-101
1:846
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Fifteenth Street Accepted From Polk Alley on City line, to
Filmore Avenue
7-5-62 7/5/1962
Fifth Street Accepted From the northeasterly rightof-
way line of a street or road
known as 3rd Avenue to the
northeasterly right-of-way line
of a public street or road
known as 5th Avenue as
extended
1-20A-72 1/20/1972
Fire Hall Road Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwestern right-of-way line
of Pa. State Highway Route
07-024
3-23-78 2/23/1978
Fordham Circle Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly line of Fordham
Circle and northwesterly
corner of Lot #28
6-23-94B 6/23/1994
Fordham Circle Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northeasterly right-of-way line
of Fordham Circle
Res. 11-3-94 11/3/1994
Fordham Circle Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly line of Fordham
Circle
Res. 11-3-94A 11/31/1994
Fourth Avenue Opened Runs northward from
Greenwood Street
Res. 4-2-53 4/2/1953
Fourth Street Accepted Extending from the
northwesterly line of a street
or road, known as 31st Avenue
in a generally westerly
direction through the
intersection of said Fourth
Street with a street or road
known as Unnamed Street and
a street or road known as
Beverly Boulevard
2-70 2/5/1970
Fourth Street Accepted Extending from Township
Route 545 to a dead end
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Fourth Street,
Extension
Accepted Beginning at the northeast
line of Second Avenue to the
Lakemont Consolidated
Sportsmens Association
Clubhouse
750 6/3/1965
Fourteenth
Avenue
Accepted From 32nd Street to the
southwestern side of Mill Run
829 3/27/1969
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:847
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Franklin Drive Accepted That certain piece of land
situate in Logan-Dale
Development
780 6/3/1965
Front Street Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwesterly right-of-way line
of Locust Avenue intersecting
to the southeasterly right of
way line of Front Street then
crossing Front Street going
north then south 16 degrees
46 minutes east, 40 feet to the
point of beginning
6-8-89 6/8/1989
Grandview Road Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northwesterly side of State
Highway Route No. 07026 to
the point and place of
beginning
11-1-62 11/1/1962
Glennwood Drive Accepted Beginning at the intersection
of the eastern side of Juniata
Springs Drive and said
Glennwood Drive to the
northwest side of South Park
Drive
780 6/3/1965
Glennwood Drive Accepted Beginning at a P.K. spike on
the northern side of Leg.
Route 860 to point of
beginning
7-9-87 7/9/1987
Good Shepard
Road
Accepted Extending from the terminus
of the existing portion of Good
Shepard Road
7-19A-73 7/19/1973
Hench Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northeastern line of Pa. Route
No. 07053
827 5/16/1968
Hill Street Accepted Beginning at a point at the
southern intersection of Kettle
Street with Hill Street to the
southern side of property of
Mary R. Pearce
12-5-63 12/5/1963
Hillside Avenue Accepted From intersection of Hillside
and Poland Avenue
5-4-61 5/4/1961
Hillside Drive Accepted All that certain parcel of
ground or roadway located in
the Avalon Road Section
6-8-62 6/8/1962
§ H-101 LOGAN CODE § H-101
1:848
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Homewood Drive Accepted Beginning at the intersection
of the southeastern of
Parkside Drive and
southwestern side of
Homewood Drive to the
southeastern side of Parkside
Drive
780 6/3/1965
Hope Lane Accepted A 33-foot unnamed road,
beginning at the center line of
Avalon Road
824 6/6/1967
Howard Avenue Accepted Beginning at a point on the
easterly right-of-way of
Howard Avenue to extending
from its previous terminus
through its intersection with
Rebecca Street
9-9-76A 9/9/1976
Ibis Drive Accepted Renamed from Wren Drive Res 5-20-99 5/20/1999
Ingham Drive Accepted From Avalon Road to Jayne
Lane
11-3-73 11/3/1973
Ingham Drive Accepted From Jayne Lane to Laurie
Lane
11-7-75 11/7/1975
Ingham Drive Accepted From Jayne Lane to Laurie
Lane
11-7-77 11/7/1977
Irwin Drive Accepted Runs at right angles to Russell
Drive and connects the same
with Sunset Drive
7-2-62 7/2/1962
Ivyside Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northerly right-of-way line of
Shannon Road
Res 09-10-09 09/10/2009
Jayne Lane Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the center line
of a street or road known as
Ingham Drive to said Jayne
Lane
11-3-73 11/3/1973
John Koeck Tract Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwestern line of Pa. Route
No. 36
826 12/8/1967
Johns Court Accepted Shown in the Koeck
Subdivision
12-3-70 12/3/1970
Juniata Road Accepted Beginning at a point on the
westerly right-of-way line of
Ore Hill Road to place of
beginning
10-18-79 10/18/1979
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:849
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Juniata Springs Accepted Beginning at the intersection
of the northern Drive side of
Pa. State Highway Route No.
860 to the northern side of
Brookside Drive
780 6/3/1965
Juniata Street Opened From Bellwood Road to City of
Altoona line
Res. 6-17-49 6/17/1949
Kennedy Drive Accepted Beginning at an iron pin on
the easterly side of a public
road, Leg. Route 07026
8-25-71 8/25/1971
Kenyon Road Accepted Beginning at a point of
intersection of the
southeasterly right-of-way line
of Ruskin Drive to place of
beginning; being an extension
5-20-82 5/20/1982
Kettle Street Accepted Right-of-way for Sections F7A
and Go8 of the proposed
relocation and reconstruction
of U.S. Route 220
Res. 5-3-84 5/3/1984
Koeck Drive Accepted Road being 40-foot-wide street 12-3-70 12/3/1970
Lafayette Lane Accepted Located in Greenwood Area of
Logan Township; beginning at
the southeast side of Pa. State
Highway Route No. 220 to
Princeton Road
9-6-62 9/6/1962
Lake Vista Drive Accepted Beginning at a rebar with cap
set on the southerly right-ofway
line of Parrish Street
02-09-17F 2/9/2017
LaSalle Lane Accepted Located in Bellemeade Estates Res. 5-7-74A 5/7/1974
Laurie Lane Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the center line
of a street or road known as
Ingham Drive to a point on the
center line of a street or road
known as Ensbrenner Drive
11-7-75 11/7/1975
Laurie Lane Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the center line
of Ingham Drive to a point on
the center line of Ensbrenner
Drive
11-7-77 11/7/1977
§ H-101 LOGAN CODE § H-101
1:850
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Lecrone Road Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the easterly
right-of-way line of Pa. State
Highway Route 36 to the place
of beginning
11-17-77 11/17/1977
Lewis Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwestern right-of-way line
of Leg. Route 07053 known as
Kettle Road to the point of
beginning
5-4-72 5/4/1972
Liberty Street Opened Beginning on the east side of
Pleasant Valley Boulevard to a
point on the east side of Pitt
Road
9-7-61 9/7/1961
Liberty Street Accepted From Pleasant Valley
Boulevard to a point on the
western side of Pleasant Valley
Boulevard
4-5-62 4/5/1962
Linwood Road Accepted Beginning on the westerly line
of old U.S. Route 220 to a line
projected from the northern
line to the southern line of
said Linwood Road
803 12/2/1965
Locust Street Accepted Beginning at a point formed by
the intersection of the eastern
line of 61st Street and the
northern line of this street to
the point and place of
beginning
826A 8/10/1967
Locust Street Accepted Beginning at the dead end of
Township Route 623 extending
to Township Route 489
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Lycoming Lane Accepted Located in Bellemeade Estates Res. 5-7-74A 5/7/1974
Mardorf Drive Take Over Located in the Juniata Gap
section of Logan Township
5-5-60 5/5/1960
Mary Lane Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the center line
of a street or road known as
Ingham Drive to said Avalon
Road
11-3-73 11/3/1973
McMan Road Accepted Beginning at a dead end of
Township Route 320 extending
to Leg. Route 07076
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:851
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Miller Road Opened From the northwestern side of
State Highway 36
1-4-62 1/4/1962
Mountain Avenue Accepted Extending between 9th and
10th Streets a distance of 340
feet more or less
8-3-61A 8/3/1961
Mountainside
Drive
Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northeasterly line of Hillside
Drive
- -66 -/-/1966
Mountain View
Drive
Accepted Extending from Leg. Route
07053 to a dead end
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Necessity Drive Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the property
line of Necessity Drive and the
boundary line between the
Township and City of Altoona
8-4-83 8/4/1983
Necessity Drive Accepted Portion that lies within the
City of Altoona also has been
excepted as a Township Road
Res. 9-1-83 9/1/1983
Ninth Street Accepted Extending from Township
Route 619 to the Altoona City
line
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Ninth Street Accepted Extending from Township
Route 307 to Township Route
539
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
North Terrace
Drive
Accepted Beginning on the westerly side
of North Terrace Drive and
being the intersection point of
the City of Altoona-Logan
Township corporate line to
place of beginning
Res. 2-19-81 2/19/1981
Notre Dame Road Accepted From its intersection with the
eastern side of Lafayette Lane
to Temple Lane
9-6-62 9/6/1962
Notre Dame Road Accepted Northeasterly corner of land of
Eugene R. Pine et ux and
being north 52 degrees 20
minutes east to the point and
place of beginning
Res. 5-22-69 5/22/1969
North Second
Street
Traffic Signal Agreement for installation of
traffic signal at North 2nd
Street and SR 4013
Res. 09-14-00A 09/14/2000
§ H-101 LOGAN CODE § H-101
1:852
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
North Third
Street
Traffic Signal Agreement for installation of
traffic signal at North 3rd
Street and SR 4013
Res. 09-14-00A 09/14/2000
Novak Road Opened Connecting Valley Avenue with
Poland Avenue a distance of
approximately 700 feet
Res. 6-26-53 6/26/1953
Oak Hill Terrace Accepted Extending from said Briarcliff
Road in a southeasterly
direction a distance of 345
feet to a cul-de-sac
4-24-75 4/24/1975
Oak Knoll Drive Accepted Beginning at a P.K. spike on
the northern side of Leg.
Route 860 to point of
beginning
7-9-87 7/9/1987
Old Dominion
Drive
Accepted Beginning at a point located
on the southeasterly right-ofway
line of Olde Dominion
Drive
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
Old Dominion
Drive
Accepted Beginning at a point located
on the eastern corner of Lot
159
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
Old Dominion
Lane
Accepted Extending from Township
Route 944 to Township Route
952
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Oriole Drive Accepted Beginning at a point at the
southeast corner of Lot #56
Res. 12-05-96B 12/5/1996
Overland Pass Accepted Beginning at a point on the
Easterly right-of-way line of
Sharror Drive (Township Road
926)
Res. 02-12-09A 02/12/2009
Park Avenue Laid Out Beginning at the intersection
of Park Avenue and
Frankstown Road continuing
along said West Fourth Avenue
to a point and the end of the
road
Res. 4-14-47 4/14/1947
Park Avenue Accepted Located in Lakemont Area;
beginning at the intersection
of Lake Avenue and Park
Avenue and extending
northerly to a point on the said
Park Avenue
1-7-63 1/7/1963
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:853
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Park Avenue Accepted From the northerly line of Linn
Street to the southerly line of
Mulberry Street
6-1-69 6/1/1969
Park Avenue Improvements Phase 3 - widening of Park
Avenue to Lake Street
05-11-00 05/11/2000
Parkside Drive Accepted Beginning at the intersection
of the northwestern side of
Logandale Subdivision and the
northwestern side of said
Parkside Drive to a point
780 6/3/1965
Parkside Drive
Ext.
Accepted Beginning at an iron pin at the
southeast corner of Lot No. 32
to place of beginning and can
be found in Plot Book 9 on
page 11
9-4-86 9/4/1986
Peters Drive Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the easterly
right-of-way line of Russell
Drive to place of beginning
Res. 9-15-83 9/15/1983
Pierce Drive Accepted Beginning at a dead end of
Township Route 949 and
extending to Leg. Route 07053
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Pinewood Road Accepted Connecting Linwood Road and
the 33-foot unnamed road
803 12/2/1965
Pinewood Road Accepted From Sherwood Road to the
western property line of land
now or formerly of Joseph Lee
Wentzel
803 12/2/1965
Pitt Road Accepted From the south side of Liberty
Street to the north side of
Plateau Street
9-7-61 9/7/1961
Pitt Road Accepted Beginning on the northeastern
line of Rutgers Lane to the
southwestern line of Yale Lane
802 12/2/1965
Pitt Road Accepted From Liberty Street to
Pottsgrove Road
825 8/24/1967
Pitt Road Accepted Extending from Township
Route 456 to Township Route
539
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Plateau Street Accepted Beginning at a point on the
east side of Pleasant Valley
Boulevard to the east side of
Pitt Road
9-7-61 9/7/1961
§ H-101 LOGAN CODE § H-101
1:854
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Plateau Street Accepted Beginning at Township Route
305 and extending to a
temporary turnaround
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Poland Avenue Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwestern line of Poland
Avenue to the point and place
of beginning
8-1-63 8/1/1963
Poland Avenue Accepted Beginning at the northern
terminus of Logan Township
Road No. 308 and extending
north 52 degrees 24 minutes
west
815 12/1/1966
Porta Road Accepted Located in the Cobum Section
of Logan Township
1-4-62A 1/4/1962
Pottsgrove Road Opened Beginning at the northeastern
terminus of that part of
Pottsgrove Avenue to a point
on Pa. State Highway Route
No. 220
Res. 7-16-45 7/16/1945
Queens Way Accepted Beginning at a point along the
northerly right-of-way of
Windsor Drive
Res. 01-07-08B 1/07/2008
Rebecca Street Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northerly right-of-way of
Rebecca Street to Eldon
Avenue
9-9-76A 9/9/1976
Rice Road Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly right-of-way line
of a street or road known as S.
Carlisle Lane to the place of
beginning
5-7-74 5/7/1974
Rider Road Accepted All that certain piece or parcel
of land lying owner William
Elmer Rider and Luella Irene
Rider
12-4-69 12/4/1969
Russell Drive Accepted Beginning at the intersection
of Goods Lane extending
southerly direction a distance
of 600 feet
7-2-62 7/2/1962
Russell Drive Accepted Beginning at the southern
terminus of Logan Township
Route No. 708 to the southern
line of Penelec right-of-way
820 2/2/1967
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:855
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Second and Third
Avenue Alley
Vacated Beginning at the intersection
of the alley and Second
Avenue and extending to the
intersection of the alley and
Third Avenue
4-10-03 4/10/2003
Second Street Accepted From 16th Avenue to 17th
Avenue
1-20-72 1/20/1972
Second Street Accepted In Juniata, from where City's
and Township's boundaries
coincide, northwest 419 feet
5-4-61 5/4/1961
East Second
Avenue
Accepted Beginning on the
northeasterly side of Wilson
Street
9-26-73 9/26/1973
Service Road Accepted Beginning at the dead end of
Township Route 946 extending
to Leg. Route 07019
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Service Road "E" Vacation Located off Goods Lane in
Logan Township
11-09-95 11/9/1995
Seventh Street Take Over From Vicars Lane to 19th
Avenue
5-24-73 5/24/1973
Seventh Street
(Greenwood)
Accepted Beginning the northeastern
right-of-way line of Pa. State
Highway Route 07027
3-23-78 3/23/1978
Seventeenth
Avenue
Accepted Extending from the
northeasterly right-of-way line
of a street or road known as
2nd Street in a southwesterly
direction to the boundary line
between Logan Township and
the City of Altoona
1-20-72 1/20/1972
Seventeenth
Street
Accepted All that certain parcel or
ground located in the
Newburg Section of Logan
Township
2-1-62A 2/1/1962
Sharon Avenue Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly side of East
Hamilton Lane to a 20-foot
turnaround at the end
Res. 5-20-74 5/20/1974
Sharrar Drive Accepted Dedicated by deed from
Benjamin R. Sharrar and
Leona N. Sharrar a parcel of
land
10-20-70 10/20/1970
§ H-101 LOGAN CODE § H-101
1:856
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Sharrar Drive Vacation Located and attached to the
eastern portion of Sharrar
Drive having approximate
dimensions of 40 feet wide by
116 feet long (more or less)
08-23-07C 08/23/2007
Sherwood Road Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southern line of a 33-foot road
to a line projected at right
angles between the eastern
and western lines of said
Sherwood Road
803 12/2/1965
Sherwood Road Take Over Located in Greenwood Section
of Logan Township
10-7-93 10/7/1993
Sixth Street Accepted Extending from Logan
Township-City of Altoona line
in a northwesterly direction to
the end of the cul-de-sac being
the terminus of said street
11-15-84 11/15/1984
Sixteenth Avenue Accepted From Second Street southwest 5-4-61 5/4/1961
Sixteenth Avenue Accepted All that certain piece or tract
of land known as 16th Avenue
5-4-61A 5/4/1961
Sixtieth Street Accepted Beginning on the northerly
line of Broad Avenue to the
point and place of beginning
812 9/1/1966
Sixtieth Street Accepted Intersecting with and
extending in a northerly
direction from a public street
or road known as Oak Avenue
and also known as Broad
Avenue Ext. Road
8-69 8/-/1969
Skyline Drive Traffic Signal Agreement for Installation of
traffic signal at Skyline Drive
(SR 4012) and SR 0036
Res. 09-14-00B 09/14/2000
South Carlisle
Lane
Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly right-of-way line
of a public street or road
known as Bellemeade Drive to
Utah Road
5-7-74 5/7/1974
South Hudson
Avenue
Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeasterly right-of-way line
of South Hudson Avenue to a
place of beginning
5-20-76 5/20/1976
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:857
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
South Park Drive Accepted Beginning at the intersection
of the northern side of
Glennwood Drive and the
southeastern side of said
South Park Drive to the
southwestern side of Parkside
Drive
780 6/3/1965
South Tenth
Avenue
Accepted Extending from the
southwesterly terminus of
South 10th Avenue at the
boundary line between the
City of Altoona and the
Township of Logan to the
northeasterly terminus of
South 10th Avenue
11-1-73 11/1/1973
South Tenth
Avenue
Accepted At the easterly corner of the
intersection of said South 10th
Avenue and 33rd Street
10-31-74 10/31/1974
South Terrace
Drive
Accepted Beginning on the westerly side
of N. Terrace Drive and being
the intersection point of the
City of Altoona-Logan
Township corporate line
Res. 2-19-81 2/19/1981
Sprankle Avenue Accepted Extending in a northerly
direction 100 feet from the
northerly line of a street or
road known as Rebecca Street
8A-69 8/28/1969
Sprankle Avenue Accepted From the southerly line of
Rebecca Street to Brush Run
Stream
4-30-71 4/30/1971
Sprankle Road Accepted Beginning at Township Route
612 extending to a dead end
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Spring Run Accepted From Creekside Drive to
Lakeside Drive
Res. 1-7-88A 1/7/1988
Spring Run Accepted From Creekside Drive, east
174 feet
Res. 1-7-88B 1/7/1988
St. Francis Lane Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwesterly right-of-way line
of Orr Hill Road
10-12-78A 10/12/1978
St. Francis Lane Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northwesterly right-of-way line
of St. Francis Lane
Res. 1-20-83 1/20/1983
§ H-101 LOGAN CODE § H-101
1:858
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
St. Francis Lane Vacated Beginning at a point on the
line of the plot of Olde
Dominion to the place of
beginning
12-5-85 12/5/1985
St. Francis Lane Accepted Beginning at a dead end of
Township Route 952 extending
to Township Route 957
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
St. Francis Lane Vacated Certain numerous portions of
St. Francis Lane
6-28-90A 6/28/1990
St. Francis Lane Accepted Beginning at a point on the
western corner of Lot No. 111
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
Starling Drive Accepted Renamed from Mountain View
Drive
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
Starling Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeastern side of Starling
Drive
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
Sterling Street Accepted Entire length 5-19-88 5/19/1988
Stonehedge Road Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwesterly side of Fernway
Drive, formerly known as Lynn
Drive, in the plot of The
Glades at Stonehedge
Res. 08-27-09 08/27/2009
Stoney Lane Opened Beginning at the terminus of
Pa. State Highway Route 55
running eastwardly to
terminus of Potts Grove
Avenue
Res. 3-22-43 3/22/1943
Sycamore Street Opened Beginning at a point on the
westerly side of State Leg.
Route 493 to Greenwood
Street in the plot of lots of said
section
Res. 3-22-55 3/22/1955
Sycamore Street Accepted Beginning at a point at the
southeasterly corner of land of
W.J. Inlow and Viola M. Inlow
9-9B-76 9/9/1976
Sylvan Oaks Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwest corner of Lot #77
Res. 12-05-96B 12/5/1996
Sylvan Oakes
Drive
Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwest corner of Lot No. 77
Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
Teal Drive Accepted Renamed from Dove Drive Res. 5-20-99 5/20/1999
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:859
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Temple Lane Accepted Beginning on the northerly
line of Princeton Road to the
southerly line of Notre Dame
Road
807 7/7/1966
Tenth Avenue Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the
northeasterly right-of-way of
37th Street
4-13-78 4/13/1978
Terrace Drive Accepted Dedicated land from Robert G.
Pennington and Marjorie J.
Pennington (Deed Book 1062,
pg 510)
Res. 1-14-82 1/14/1982
Third Street Accepted Beginning at the
northwesterly side of Ridge
Road to the southeasterly side
of River Road
750 6/3/1965
Third Street Accepted From the southeasterly rightof-
way line of a public street or
road known as Beverly
Boulevard to the
northwesterly right-of-way line
of public street or road known
as 31st Avenue
12-14-72 12/14/1972
Third Street Accepted Extending from Township
Route 472 to Township Route
806
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Third Street Accepted Beginning at Township Route
806 extending to the Altoona
City line
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Thirteenth Street Opened Beginning at the center line of
an alley on 13th Street to the
Altoona City line northwest of
28th Avenue
Res. 4-21-47 4/21/1947
Thirteenth Street Opened Beginning at a point on 13th
Street at the Altoona (Juniata)
City line to near 14th Avenue
Res. 12-17-51 12/17/1951
Thirtieth Accepted Extending from Township
Route 412 to Township 620
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Thirtieth Accepted Extending from Township
Route 618 to the Altoona City
line
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Thirty-First
Avenue
Accepted Beginning at Township Route
921 and extending to
Township Route 716
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
§ H-101 LOGAN CODE § H-101
1:860
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Thirty-First Street Accepted Between Third and Fourth
Streets
2-1-62 2/1/1962
Thirty-Second
Street
Accepted Beginning at a point at the
intersection of the
southeasterly right-of-way line
of 14th Street to place of
beginning
4-13-78 4/13/1978
Thunderbird Drive
(opened and
unopened)
Accepted Consisting of a 40-foot-wide
permanent road right-of-way
being 20 feet to the east of the
as-built center line of the road
and 20 feet to the west of the
as-built center line of the road
Res. 01-27-00 01/27/2000
Thunderbird Drive
(unopened)
Accepted Consisting of a 50-foot-wide
permanent road right-of-way
being 25 feet to the east of the
as-built center line of the
proposed road and 25 feet to
the west of the as-built center
line of the proposed road
Res. 01-27-00 01/27/2000
Timberline Road Accepted Beginning at T-311 extending
to T-598
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Timberline Road Accepted From Poland Avenue,
southwest approximately
1,066 feet
Res. 7-88C 1/7/1988
Timberline Road Accepted Beginning at a point located
on the southeasterly right-ofway
line of Timberline Road
Res. 11-3-94A 11/3/1994
Township Road
715
Accepted Beginning at T-715 to T-718 Res. 6-12-86 6/12/1986
Township Road
718
Accepted Beginning at T-484 to T-592 Res. 6-12-86 6/12/1986
Township Road
592
Accepted Beginning at T-715 to T-456 Res. 6-12-86 6/12/1986
Tulane Lane Accepted From the northerly line of U.S.
Highway Route 220 to
southerly line of land of
General Dealers Acceptance
Corporation
9-24-70 9/24/1970
Twentieth Street Accepted Beginning at a point of the
northeasterly right-of-way line
of 20th Street to place of
beginning
4-2-87 4/2/1987
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:861
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Twenty-First
Avenue
Accepted From the northeasterly rightof-
way line of Twenty-First
Street to place of beginning
11-21-91A 11/21/1991
Twenty-Ninth
Avenue
Accepted Extending from Township
Route 604 to Township Route
531
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Twenty-Ninth
Avenue
Accepted Beginning at Township Route
531 extending to Township
Route 710
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Twenty-Ninth
Avenue
Accepted Beginning at Township Route
710 extending to Township
Route 608
Res. 1-2-86 1/2/1986
Township Road
801
Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northeasterly line of Hillside
Drive
-/-/1966
Township Road
801
Vacated Beginning at a point on the
northeasterly line of Hillside
Drive to point and place of
beginning; for plan see Blair
County Plan Book 2 on pg. 151
823 7/27/1967
Unnamed Alley Vacated Connecting Second Avenue
(formerly Third Avenue) and
Third Avenue (formerly Fourth
Avenue), running parallel with
Seventh Street
04-10-03 04/10/2003
Unnamed Road Opened Shown upon the plot and
found in Plot Book 2 on page
165
Res. 10-9-47 10/9/1947
Unnamed Road Opened Provided for in the plot of
Locust Park Site
Res. 11-8-50 11/8/1950
Unnamed Road Opened Provided for in the plot of
Samuel Sprankle Addition to
Lakemont and found in Plot
Book 2 on page 165
Res. 5-14-51 5/14/1951
Unnamed Road Opened Provided for in the plot of
Locust Park Site
Res. 10-22-51 10/22/1951
Unnamed Road Opened Provided for in the Annie J.
Jaggard plot and Baker Estate
and found in Plot Book 2 on
pages 172-173
Res. 2-25-52 2/25/1952
§ H-101 LOGAN CODE § H-101
1:862
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Unnamed Road Opened Beginning at a intersection of
southwestern line of Blair
Avenue and northeastern line
of land Leo C. Kelley back to
the beginning
Res. 4-7-52 4/7/1952
Unnamed Road Opened Beginning at a point known as
Station 132-00 to a point
known as Station 158-53
Res. 6-16-52 6/16/1952
Unnamed Road Opened It is 33 feet in width lying
solely in Logan Township
Res. 6-22-53 6/22/1953
Unnamed Road Take Over Provided in plot of Lakemont,
Section 2 and found in Plot
Book 4 on page 91
Res. 9-20-54 9/20/1954
Unnamed Road Opened Located in Lakemont section
of Logan Township
12-2-54 12/2/1954
Unnamed Road Opened Provided for in plot of the
Samuel Sprankle Addition to
Lakemont and found in Plot
Book 2 on page 165
Res. 11-3-58 11/3/1958
Unnamed Road Opened All that certain area in the
Juniata section beginning at a
point at the intersection of the
southeastern side of 19th
Avenue to the southeast side
thereof and point of beginning
11-5-59 11/5/1959
Unnamed Road Opened All that certain are in the
Logan Township beginning at
a point on the eastern side of
5th Avenue to Fern Street a
distance of 60 feet to a point
10-1-59 10/1/1959
Unnamed Road Accepted All that certain parcel of
ground located in the
Lakemont Area of Logan
Township
5-5-60A 5/5/1960
Unnamed Road Accepted All that certain parcel of
ground located in the
Greenwood Section of Logan
Township
5-5-60B 5/5/1960
Unnamed Road Accepted All that certain piece or tract
of land beginning at a point
where the City of Altoona and
Logan Township boundary
lines coincide
5-4-61A 5/4/1961
Unnamed Road Accepted Located in Greenwood section 7-6-61 7/6/1961
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § H-101
1:863
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Unnamed Road Accepted Located in Lakemont section 8-3-61 8/3/1961
Unnamed Street Opened Shown upon the plot or plan of
the Kinsel Tract and found in
Plot Book 5 on page 39
Res. 12-31-45 12/31/1945
Unnamed Street Accepted Dedicated land from Daniel
Klock and Mary Ann Klock
found in Deed Book 1060 on
page 653
Res. 7-7-80 7/7/1980
Unnamed Street Accepted Dedicated land from Daniel
Klock and Mary Ann Klock
found in Deed Book 1065 on
page 24
Res. 5-11-81 5/11/1981
Unnamed Street Accepted Dedicated land from Daniel W.
Klock and Mary Ann Klock and
found in Deed Book 1099 on
page 54
Res. 3-13-84A 3/13/1984
Unnamed Street Accepted Dedicated land from Daniel W.
Klock and found in the Deed
Book
Res. 7-3-84 7/3/1984
Unnamed Street Accepted Dedicated land from Daniel W.
Klock and found in the Deed
Book
Res. 3-8-85 3/8/1985
Unnamed Street Accepted Dedicated land from Daniel W.
Klock and found in the Deed
Book 1132 on page 979
Res. 4-2-87 4/2/1987
Unnamed Street Accepted Dedicated land from James R.
Weston and June L. Weston, et
al., found in the Deed Book
Res. 12-21-89 12/21/1989
Utah Road Accepted Located in Bellemeade Estates Res. 5-7-74A 5/7/1974
Vassar Lane Accepted Located in the plan of Olde
Dominion Development
5-14-92 5/14/1992
Vicars Lane Take Over From 8th Street to 7th Street 5-24-73 5/24/1973
Victoria Court Accepted A road having a cul-de-sac at
the end
12-3-70 12/3/1970
West Point Circle Accepted Beginning at a point on the
northeasterly right-of-way line
of Fordham Circle
Res. 11-3-94 11/3/1994
Wildwood Circle Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwesterly side of Fernway
Drive, formerly known as Lynn
Drive, in the plot of The
Glades at Stonehedge
Res. 08-27-09 08/27/2009
§ H-101 LOGAN CODE § H-101
1:864
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Willow Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
easterly line of Pa. State
Highway Route No. 07024
6-17-71 6/17/1971
Windsor Drive Extension Beginning at a point along the
northerly right-of-way of
Windsor Drive and the
southerly line of Lot 35 of
Castle Farm Subdivision Phase
I
Res. 01-07-08B 01/07/2008
Windsor Drive Vacation Temporary easement for culde-
sac and drainage located
on Lot No. 35
02-26-09A 02/26/2009
Winston Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwesterly most
intersection of the westerly
most right-of-way line of South
Dartmouth Lane and the
proposed southerly most rightof-
way line of Winston Drive
Res. 01-27-00 01/27/2000
Winston Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southwesterly most
intersection of Clairmont Drive
and Winston Drive
Res. 01-27-00 01/27/2000
Wren Drive Accepted Beginning at a point on the
southeast corner of Lot #68
Res. 12-05-96B 12/5/1996
Youngs Crossing Opened Beginning at the intersection
of Lotz Avenue and the Brush
Mountain Road to the
intersection of Wharton
Avenue
Res. 10-7-46 10/7/1946
Appendix I
WATER
§ I-101. Water.
(Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
Appendix J
ZONING: PRIOR ORDINANCES
§ H-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § J-101
1:865
§ J-101. Zoning: Prior Ordinances.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
08-23-07 08/23/2007 Amending § 1408 D - Wetlands
06-12-08 06/12/2008 Amending Chapter 27, Part 13
07-24-08 07/24/2008 Amending Chapter 27, Part 14
08-14-08 08/14/2008 Amending Chapter 27, Part 12
11-13-08 11/13/2008 Amending Chapter 27, Parts 3 and 10
11-13-08A 11/13/2008 Amending Chapter 27, Part 12
01-22-09 01/22/2009 Amending Chapter 27, Part 10
08-27-09 08/27/2009 Amending Chapter 27, Part 14
09-24-09 09/24/2009 Amending Chapter 27, Parts 9.5 and 10
03-10-11A 03/10/2011 Amending Chapter 27, Parts 3, 4, 5, 9.5
and 10
03-24-11 03/24/2011 Amending Chapter 27, Part 12
Disposition of All Ordinances and Resolutions
Chapter KO
KEY TO DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCES AND SIGNIFICANT
RESOLUTIONS
§ KO-101. Key to Disposition of Ordinances and Significant
Resolutions
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
4LS Repealed by 6-28-73
5LS Repealed by 6-28-73
6 Superseded by 102
10 Repealed by 1062
14 Repealed by 10-27-88 Trailer Tax
50 Repealed by 11-4D-85
102 Superseded by 12-30A-86
103 Repealed by 8-6-87
104 Chapter 1 §§ 101-107 Township Manager
106 Repealed by 8-24-78
107 Repealed by 5-70A
107A Repealed by 5-70A
750 Appendix H Streets
§ J-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:866
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
780 Appendix H Streets
800 Repealed by 8-24-78
802 Appendix H Streets
803 Appendix H Streets
804 Chapter 24 §§ 601-609 Occupation Tax
806 Reenacted 804 Occupation Tax
807 Appendix H Streets
808 Appendix H Streets
812 Appendix H Streets
815 Appendix H Streets
816 Chapter 13 §§ 201-210 Junkyards
820 Appendix H Streets
821 Superseded by 10-27-88
823 Appendix H Streets
824 Appendix H Streets
825 Appendix H Streets
826 Appendix H Streets
826A Appendix H Streets
827 Appendix H Streets
829 Appendix H Streets
1062 Chapter 2 §§ 101-107 Dogs at Large
3-22-43 Appendix H Streets
7-16-45 Appendix H Streets
12-31-45 Appendix H Streets
10-7-46 Appendix H Streets
4-14-47 Appendix H Streets
4-21-47 Appendix H Streets
10-9-47 Appendix H Streets
6-17-49 Appendix H Streets
11-8-50 Appendix H Streets
5-14-51 Appendix H Streets
10-22-51 Appendix H Streets
12-17-51 Appendix H Streets
2-25-52 Appendix H Streets
4-7-52 Appendix H Streets
6-16-52 Appendix H Streets
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:867
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
4-2-53 Appendix H Streets
6-22-53 Appendix H Streets
6-26-53 Appendix H Streets
9-20-54 Appendix H Streets
12-2-54 Appendix H Streets
3-22-55 Appendix H Streets
11-3-58 Appendix H Streets
11-6-58 Repealed by 10-27-88 Trailer Tax
10-1-59 Appendix H Streets
11-5-59 Appendix H Streets
5-5-60 Appendix H Streets
5-5-60A Appendix H Streets
5-5-60B Appendix H Streets
12-1-60 Appendix H Streets
5-4-61 Appendix H Streets
5-4-61A Appendix H Streets
7-6-61 Appendix H Streets
8-3-61 Appendix H Streets
8-3-61A Appendix H Streets
9-7-61 Appendix H Streets
1-4-62 Appendix H Streets
2-1-62 Appendix H Streets
2-1-62A Appendix H Streets
4-5-62 Appendix H Streets
6-8-62 Appendix H Streets
7-2-62 Appendix H Streets
7-5-62 Appendix H Streets
9-6-62 Appendix H Streets
Res. 10-4-62 Appendix H Streets
11-1-62 Appendix H Streets
1-7-63 Appendix H Streets
1-7-63B Chapter 1 § 103 Township Manager
8-1-63 Appendix H Streets
12-5-63 Appendix H Streets
—66 Appendix H Streets
5-69 Appendix H Streets
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:868
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
5-22-69 Appendix H Streets
6-1-69 Appendix H Streets
6-69 Chapter 10 §§ 101-104 Public Nuisances
8-69 Appendix H Streets
8A-69 Appendix H Streets
11-6-69 Appendix H Streets
Res. 12-4-69 Appendix H Streets
2-70 Appendix H Streets
5-70A Superseded by 12A-30-71
9-24-70 Appendix H Streets
Res.
10-20-70
Appendix H Streets
11-12-70 Appendix H Streets
11-12A-70 Repealed by 10-27-88 Maintain Peace
12-3-70 Appendix H Streets
4-1-71 Superseded by 10-27-88
Res. 6-7-71 Superseded by 10-27-88
6-17-71 Appendix H Streets
Res. 8-25-71 Appendix H Streets
9-30-71 Appendix H Streets
12-30-71 Superseded by 12-18-86
12A-30-71 Repealed by 12-27-90
Res.
12-30-71
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-30-71A
Appendix C Franchises and
Services
Res. Chapter 18 Sewers
Res. Appendix D Governmental Affairs
1-20-72 Appendix H Streets
1-20A-72 Appendix H Streets
Res. 1-3-72 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 5-1-72 Superseded by 10-27-88
5-4-72 Appendix H Streets
12-14-72 Appendix H Streets
12-28-72 Repealed by 6-28-73
5-24-73 Appendix H Streets
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:869
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
6-28-73 Chapter 18 §§ 101-119 Sewers
7-19-73 Repealed by 8-24-78
7-19A-73 Appendix H Streets
8-30-73 Repealed by 5-17-79
Res. 9-26-73 Appendix H Streets
Res. 10-73 Chapter 18 § 106 Sewers
11-1-73 Appendix H Streets
11-1-73A Appendix H Streets
Res. 11-3-73 Appendix H Streets
Res. 11-7-73 Appendix H Streets
Res.
11-29-73
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 5-7-74 Appendix H Streets
Res. 5-7-74A Appendix H Streets
Res. 5-20-74 Appendix H Streets
6-6-74 Chapter 21 §§ 101-106 Streets and Sidewalks
6-20-74 Appendix B Bonds Issues and
Loans
9-26-74 Superseded by 12-30C-86
9-26A-74 Superseded by 11-6-80
Res.
10-10-74
Appendix H Streets
10-31-74 Appendix H Streets
Res. 1-75 Appendix C Franchises and
Services
4-24-75 Appendix H Streets
7-3-75 Appendix H Streets
9-25-75 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers
9-25A-75 Repealed by 10-27-88 Sewers
Res. 11-7-75 Appendix H Streets
Res. 12-4-75 Appendix C Franchises and
Services
5-20-76 Appendix H Streets
9-9-76 Appendix H Streets
9-9-76A Appendix H Streets
9-9B-76 Appendix H Streets
Res. 1-5-77 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:870
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 1-6-77 Repealed by 10-27-88 Employees Benefits
9-8-77 Repealed by 1-2-92 Burning of Garbage
10-13-77 Repealed by 5-17-79
Res. 11-7-77 Appendix H Streets
11-17-77 Appendix H Streets
Res. 3-23-78 Appendix H Streets
4-13-78 Appendix H Streets
6-29-78 Chapter 27 Part B Zoning
8-24-78 Superseded by 10-27-88
10-12-78 Appendix H Streets
10-12-78A Appendix H Streets
10-19-78 Appendix H Streets
12-28-78 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers
- -79 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
2-22-79 Chapter 4 § 101-110 Buildings
4-19-79 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
5-17-79 Chapter 22 §§ 101-102, 201,
301-310
Subdivision
Res. 7-12-79 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
10-18-79 Appendix H Streets
11-15-79 Chapter 27 §§ 101-102, 201,
301, 401-404,
501-503, 601,
701-704, 801-805,
901-902,
1001-1012,
1101-1106
Zoning
12-27-79 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers
12-27A-79 Superseded by 12-30C-86
12-27B-79 Appendix C Franchises and
Services
12-27C-79 Appendix C Franchises and
Services
12-27D-79 Appendix C Franchises and
Services
Res. 3-10-80 Appendix H Streets
6-19-80 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 7-7-80 Appendix H Streets
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:871
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
11-6-80 Superseded by 12-30B-86
Res. 2-19-81 Appendix H Streets
3-26-81 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
Res. 4-16-81 Appendix G Sewers
Res. 4-30-81 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
5-7-81 Superseded by 10-27-88
Res. 5-11-81 Appendix H Streets
Res. 5-28-81 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
5-28A-81 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
7-9-81 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
7-23-81 Chapter 22 § 201 Subdivision
Res. 9-10-81 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
9-10-81A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
1-14-82 Repealed by 11-4D-85
Res. 2-11-82 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
5-20-82 Appendix H Streets
6-10-82 Chapter 27 §§ 501-502, 601 Zoning
11-18-82 Appendix H Streets
12-30-82 Chapter 13 §§ 401-413 Amusemt Dev. License
2-3-83 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 3-24-83 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
3-31-83 Superseded by 10-27-88
Res. 4-28-83 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 5-26-83 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
6-16-83 Chapter 27 §§ 301, 501, 1001 Zoning
6-23-83 Chapter 24 § 306 Coin Operated Tax
6-30-83 Chapter 22 § 305 Subdivision
Res. 8-4-83 Appendix H Streets
Res. 9-1-83 Appendix H Streets
9-15-83 Chapter 27 Part B Zoning
Res. 9-15-83 Appendix H Streets
10-27-83 Appendix C Franchises and
Services
10-28-83 Appendix H Streets
12-22-83 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:872
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 3-13-84 Appendix H Streets
Res.
3-13-84A
Appendix H Streets
Res. 3-29-84 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 4-19-84 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
5-3-84 Appendix H Streets
Res. 5-3-84 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 7-3-84 Appendix H Streets
Res. 9-13-84 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
9-13-84 Chapter 22 §§ 301, 305 Subdivision
9-20-84 Superseded by 02-09-12 Floodplains
11-15-84 Appendix H Streets
Res.
11-29-84
Appendix G Sewers
12-6-84 Appendix H Streets
Res.
12-13-84
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
12-27-84
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12-27-84 Chapter 18 §§ 102, 106,
111-112, 115, 118
Sewers
Res. 3-7-85 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 3-8-85 Appendix H Streets
6-20-85 Chapter 7 §§ 201-211 Fireworks Permit
7-25-85 Chapter 27 §§ 501, 702, 806,
1013
Zoning
Res. 7-25-85 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
10-31B-85 Chapter 27 § 501 Zoning
10-31C-85 Chapter 27 Part B Zoning
10-31D-85 Chapter 27 § 1013 Zoning
Res.
11-14A-85
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
11-14C-85 Appendix C Franchises and
Services
11-14D-85 Chapter 4 §§ 201-207 Buildings
Res.
11-21-85
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12-5-85 Appendix H Streets
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:873
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
12-26A-85 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
Res. 1-2-86 Appendix H Streets
1-9-86 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 1-9-86 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 1-23-86 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
1-23-86A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 3-6-86 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
4-24-86 Appendix C Franchises and
Services
Res. 6-5-86 Appendix G Sewers
6-12-86 Appendix H Streets
Res. 8-21-86 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
9-4-86 Appendix H Streets
10-16-86 Superseded by 02-09-12 Floodplains
12-18-86 Chapter 13 §§ 401-407 License of Merchants
12-18A-86 Chapter 21 §§ 201-206 Streets and Sidewalks
12-30A-86 Chapter 24 §§ 201-209 Amusement Tax
12-30B-86 Repealed by 11-9-89 Business Tax
12-30C-86 Chapter 24 §§ 501-510 Mercantile Tax
1-8-87 Chapter 27 Part B Zoning
Res. 1-8-87 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2-19-87 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 3-26-87 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
3-26-87A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
4-2-87 Appendix H Streets
Res. 4-2-87 Appendix H Streets
4-16-87 Appendix C Franchises and
Services
Res. 4-23-87 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
5-7-87 Chapter 13 §§ 102-112 Alarm Devices
5-21-87 Repealed by 10-27-88 Hazardous Chemicals
Res. 5-28-87 Superseded by A.R. Fees
7-9-87 Appendix H Streets
7-9-87A Chapter 6 §§ 201-205 Alcoholic Beverages
8-6-87 Chapter 24 §§ 101-118 Real Estate Tax
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:874
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
12-24-87A Chapter 18 § 113 Sewer Rate
Adjustment
12-24-87B Chapter 5 §§ 101-105 Fire Prevention Code
12-24-87C Appendix H Street Acceptance
Res. 1-7-88A Appendix H Street Acceptance
Res. 1-7-88B Appendix H Street Acceptance
Res. 1-7-88C Appendix H Street Acceptance
3-31-88 Chapter 13 §§ 501-506 Electric Fences
4-14-88 Chapter 16 §§ 101-109 Park Rules and
Regulations
5-19-88 Appendix H Street Acceptance
Res. 9-8-88 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
10-27-88 Introduction pg. ix Adopting Ordinance
Res.
10-27-88
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
11-10-88
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-8-88A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-8-88B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-15-88
Fee Resolution
Res.
12-29-88
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 2-2-89A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 2-2-89B Fee Resolution
2-9-89 Chapter 15 § 209 Motor Vehicles
2-9-89A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Chapter 24 §§ 103, 502, 602 Taxation
Res. 2-23-89 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
2-23-89A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 3-30-89 Appendix C Franchise
6-8-89 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
6-15-89 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning Map
6-15-89A Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning Map
Res. 6-29-89 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:875
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Fee Resolution
6-29-89 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning Map
Res. 7-13-89 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 8-24-89 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
8-24-89 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning Map
8-31-89 Appendix G Sewers
9-14-89 Chapter 2 §§ 201-204 Animals
Res. 9-14-89 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
11-9-89 Chapter 24 §§ 401-412 Business Tax
11-16-89 Chapter 15 §§ 213, 403 Stop Intersections
11-30-89 Repealed by 1-04-90 Holding Tanks
11-30-89A Chapter 18 § 113 Sewer Charges
1-04-90 Chapter 18 §§ 201-210 Holding Tanks
2-1-90 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning Map
3-29-90 Chapter 21 §§ 301-305 Skateboards
5-31-90 Chapter 21 §§ 303, 304 Skateboards
6-7-90 Chapter 15 § 213 Stop Intersections
6-28-90 Chapter 10 §§ 201-206 Chemical Clean-Up
6-28-90A Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
7-12-90 Superseded by 02-09-12 Floodplains
Res.
12-21-89
Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
Res.
12-28-89
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 1-04-90 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
1-04-90A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
1-04-90B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 7-12-90 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
7-12-90A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
9-26-90 Chapter 20 §§ 201-213 Solid Waste
Res. 9-27-90 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-11-90
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
10-11-90 Chapter 15 § 213 Motor Vehicles
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:876
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
10-11-90A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-25-90
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
11-29-90
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
11-29-90A
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
12-27-90
Chapter 20 §§ 221-224 Solid Waste
12-27-90 Chapter 20 §§ 101-147 Solid Waste
1-7-91 Chapter 1 §§ 401, 402 Compensation of
Board
Res. 1-10-91 Chapter 20 §§ 222, 223 Solid Waste
Res. 2-14-91 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 2-21-91 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 3-28-91 Appendix G Sewers
Res.
3-28-91A
Appendix G Sewers
Res. 5-2-91 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
5-16-91 Chapter 15 §§ 409, 410 Motor Vehicles
5-16-91A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
8-1-91 Chapter 15 § 201 Motor Vehicles
Res. 8-1-91 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-31-91
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res. 11-7-91 Chapter 20 §§ 222, 223 Recycling Guidelines
11-21-91A Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
12-19-91 Chapter 20 §§ 113, 117, 126,
133-135
Solid Waste
1-2-92 Chapter 7 §§ 101-107 Open Burning
Res. 1-16-92 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-16-92-A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:877
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
1-23-92 Chapter 27 §§ 103, 301,
402-404, 501-503,
701, 703, 801,
902, 1001, 1002,
1010, 1012,
1102-1110
Subdivision
1-23-92A Chapter 22 §§ 201, 301, 302,
306-314
Zoning
Res. 1-23-92 Appendix C Franchises and
Services
Res. 4-2-92 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 4-16-92 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
5-14-92 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
Res. 5-14-92 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
5-21-92 Chapter 5 §§ 101, 102 Fire Prevention Code
6-4-92 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning
Res.
6-04-92A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
6-11-92 Chapter 15 §§ 701-706 Cruising
Res. 8-13-92 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
9-3-92 Chapter 4 §§ 202, 203, 207 Building Permits
9-3-92A Chapter 21 §§ 104, 105 Street Excavations
Res. 9-3-92 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 9-3-92A Repealed by Res 12-22-94A Governmental Affairs
Res. 9-3-92B Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res. 9-10-92 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
1-25-93 Appendix B Bonds Issues and
Loans
2-18-93 Chapter 18 Part 1 Sewers
Res.
3-18-93B
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res. 4-8-93B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
4-15-93 Chapter 20 § 111 Licensing of Haulers
4-22-93 Chapter 7 § 103 Open Burning
6-17-93 Chapter 15 §§ 403, 407, 410 Motor Vehicles
6-17-93A Chapter 15 §§ 601, 603 Motor Vehicles
6-24-93 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewer Service Charge
7-15-93 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning Map
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:878
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
7-22-93 Chapter 15 § 301 Motor Vehicles
Res. 8-12-93 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 8-26-93 Chapter 16 § 103 Parks and Recreation
Res. 9-2-93 Chapter 20 § 222 Recycling of Waste
10-7-93 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
10-7-93A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12-2-93 Chapter 20 § 223 Recycling of Waste
12-02-93A Chapter 15 § 301 Motor Vehicles
12-02-93B Chapter 20 §§ 103, 111, 114,
117, 122, 124,
131-133, 136, 143
Solid Waste
Res. 12-9-93 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-16-93
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12-16-93A Chapter 18 § 208 Holding Tanks and
Regulations
Res.
12-23-93
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-23-93A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 1-20-94 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 1-27-94 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 2-3-94 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 2-3-94A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 2-17-94 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 3-10-94 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
3-10-94A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
3-10-94B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-07-94
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-21-94
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-21-94A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 4-28-94 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 6-2-94 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:879
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 6-2-94A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
6-23-94 Chapter 24 Part 7 Taxation, Special
6-23-94A Chapter 24 Part 3 Taxation, Special
6-23-94B Appendix H Streets
7-7-94 Chapter 22 Part 2 Subdivision
Res. 7-14-94 Appendix G Brush Run Report
Res. 7-21-94 Chapter 22 Part 4 Specifications for
Public Improvements
Res.
7-21-94A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
9-15-94 Chapter 15 Part 3 Motor Vehicle Code
9-15-94A Chapter 18 Part 1 Sewers
Res. 10-6-94 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-6-94A
Chapter 20 § 222 Recycling Guidelines
Res.
10-20-94
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-20-94A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 11-3-94 Appendix H Streets
Res.
11-3-94A
Appendix H Street
Res.
11-3-94A
Appendix H Streets
12-1-94 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning Map
12-1-94A Chapter 18 Part 1 Sewers
Res. 12-8-94 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-8-94A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12-22-94 Chapter 20 Part 1 Solid Waste
12-22-94A Chapter 15 Part 2 Motor Vehicles
12-22-94B Chapter 10 Part 3 Health and Safety
Res.
12-22-94
Chapter 20 §§ 222,223 Recycling Guidelines
Res.
12-22-94A
Chapter 22 Part 4 Specifications for
Public Improvements
1-19-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2-2-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:880
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 2-2-95 Appendix G Sewers
02-09-95 Chapter 18 Part 1 Sewers
3-2-95 Chapter 20 Part 1 Solid Waste
Res. 3-2-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 3-9-95 Appendix G Sewers
Res. 3-9-95A Appendix D Sewers
Res. 3-9-95B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 3-16-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
3-16-95A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 4-7-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 4-13-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 4-21-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
4-21-95A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
4-21-95B
Chapter 1 Part 3 Amendment of Fees
Res. 5-4-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 5-19-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
5-19-95A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
5-19-95B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
5-19-95C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 6-8-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 6-15-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
8-17-95 Chapter 15 §§ 201, 213 Streets
Res. 9-8-95B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 9-8-95C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 9-14-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
9-21-95 Chapter 18 Part 3 Sewers
11-09-95 Appendix H Streets
Res.
11-30-95
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-7-95 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12-21-95 Chapter 6 Part 3 Curfew
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:881
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
12-21-95
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-21-95A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-21-95B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-21-95C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
01-18-96 Chapter 20 Part 1 Solid Waste
01-18-96A Chapter 20 Part 2 Collection and
Recycling of Waste
Res.
02-01-96
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-01-96A
Chapter 22 Part 4 Specifications for
Public Improvements
Res.
02-15-96
Appendix G Sewers
3-14-96 Chapter 4 Part 3 Key Boxes
4-4-96 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning Map
Res. 4-4-96 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 4-11-96 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
4-18-96 Appendix F Public Property
Res. 4-18-96 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
5-16-96 Chapter 18 Part 1 Sewers
Res. 5-16-96 Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
5-16-96A
Chapter 20 Part 2 Recycling Guidelines
Res.
5-16-96B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
5-16-96C
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
06-06-96
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
06-06-96A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
6-20-96 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning Map
Res.
07-02-96
Appendix C Franchises and
Services
8-8-96 Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:882
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
8-15-96 Chapter 27 Part 2 Zoning
Res. 9-19-96 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
9-19-96A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
9-19-96B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
9-19-96C
Appendix D Baseball Team Request
Res.
9-19-96D
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
12-5-96 Chapter 13 Part 3 Transient License
12-5-96B Appendix C Franchises and
Services
Res. 12-5-96 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-5-96A
Appendix H Streets
Res.
12-5-96B
Appendix H Streets
Res.
12-5-96C
Chapter 1 Part 3 Transient License
12-12-96 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12-19-96A Appendix G Sewers
Res. 1-6-97 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2-13-97A Chapter 13 Part 2 Junk and Salvage
Yards
Res. 2-13-97 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
2-13-97A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
3-13-97 Chapter 27 Part 2 Zoning Map
Res. 3-20-97 Appendix G Sewers
Res. 4-3-97 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 4-3-97A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 4-3-97B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 4-3-97C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
4-3-97D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 6-19-97 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
8-7-97 Chapter 5 Part 1 BOCA Code
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:883
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
8-7-97A Chapter 7 Part 3 Fire Insurance
Proceeds
Res. 8-7-97 Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res. 8-21-97 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 9-4-97 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
10-2-97 Chapter 7 Part 4 Operating Procedures
10-2-97A Chapter 5 Part 1 BOCA Code
Res. 10-2-97 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
10-9-97 Appendix B Bonds Issues and
Loans
Res. 10-9-97 Appendix G Sewers
Res.
10-16-97
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
11-6-97 Chapter 15 § 207 Streets
Res.
12-18-97
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 1-5-98 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
1-15-98 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers
2-12-98 Chapter 15 Part 3 Streets
Res. 2-12-98 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
3-12-98 Appendix B Bonds Issues and
Loans
3-12-98A Appendix B Bonds Issues and
Loans
Res. 3-12-98 Appendix G Sewers
3-19-98 Chapter 27 Part 10 Zoning
4-2-98 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
5-7-98A Chapter 21 Part 4 Befouling Ditches, etc.
Res. 5-7-98 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 5-7-98A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 5-14-98 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 6-11-98 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-09-98
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
07-09-98A
Appendix D Streets
Res.
08-06-98
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:884
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
9-17-98 Chapter 7 Part 5 Recovery of Costs for
Fire Services
Res. 9-17-98 Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res. 10-1-98 Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
10-1-98A
Appendix B Bonds
Res. 10-8-98 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
10-15-98 Chapter 7 Part 6 Fire Districts
Res.
12-10-98
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-10-98A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-10-98B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
01-21-99 Appendix B Bonds Issues and
Loans
2-11-99A Chapter 16 § 103 Parks and Recreation
3-4-99 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers
4-8-99 Appendix B Bonds Issues and
Loans
Res. 4-8-99 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
5-20-99 Chapter 18 Part 4 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
Res. 5-20-99 Appendix H Streets
Res.
05-20-99A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-03-99
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-17-99A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-15-99
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
07-15-99A
Appendix D Sewers
7-15-99 Chapter 18 Part 5 Industrial
Pretreatment
7-15-99A Chapter 18 § 113 Connection Fee
7-15-99B Chapter 4 Part 4 Property Maintenance
Res. 9-2-99 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:885
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 9-16-99 Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
9-16-99 Chapter 13 Part 6 Sexually Oriented
Businesses
Res. 1-4-00 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 1-4-00A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 1-4-00B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 1-4-00C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-27-00
Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
Res.
1-27-00A
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
1-27-00B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
02-10-00 Chapter 27 Parts 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10
Zoning
02-10-00A Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning
Res.
03-09-00
Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
Res. 3-24-00 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
04-13-00 Chapter 27 Parts 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10
Zoning
4-13-00A Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning
4-27-00 Chapter 16 Part 1 Parks and Recreation
5-11-00 Chapter 12 Part 1 Swimming Pools
Res.
05-11-00
Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
Res.
5-11-00A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-25-00
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
6-8-00 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning
09-14-00 Chapter 27 Parts 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
9.5, 10
Zoning
Res.
09-14-00
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
09-28-00
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
10-12-00 Chapter 22 Parts 1, 2, 3 Subdivision and Land
Development
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:886
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
10-12-00
Appendix E Plan Approval
11-9-00 Chapter 27 Part 10 Zoning
Res.
11-09-00
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-02-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-02-01A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-02-01B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-02-01C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-02-01D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-08-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-08-01A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-08-01B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-08-01C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-08-01D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-08-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-22-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-22-01A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-22-01B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
05-24-01 Chapter 27 Parts 4, 9 Zoning
Res.
05-25-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-14-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
6-14-01A
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:887
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
06-14-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-28-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-12-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-26-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-09-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Ord.
08-23-01
Chapter 10 Part 4 911 Property
Addressing/Street
Renaming
Ord. 9-13-01 Chapter 27 §§ 301, 401, 501,
901, 902.5, 1001,
1008, 1018, 1019
Zoning
Res.
09-27-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-11-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12-13-01 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers
Res.
12-13-01
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-13-01A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-07-02
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-07-02A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-07-02B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-13-02
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-28-02
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-28-02C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-28-02D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-28-02E
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:888
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
03-28-02
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-28-02A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-09-02
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-23-02
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-13-02
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-13-02A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-27-02
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
07-25-02 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-25-02
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-25-02A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
09-12-02
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-24-02
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-12-02A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-06-03
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-06-03A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-06-03C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-23-03
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-13-03
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-13-03A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-13-03B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-27-03
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:889
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
04-10-03 Appendix H Streets
Res.
04-13-03
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-24-03
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-24-03A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-24-03B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-22-03
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-10-03
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-14-03
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-14-03A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-14-03B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-28-03
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
09-11-03
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
10-09-03 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning
Res.
11-13-03
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12-11-03 Chapter 27 §§ 904, 908.5,
1007
Zoning
12-11-03A Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers
Res.
01-05-04
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-05-04A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-22-04
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-22-04A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-12-04
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:890
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
03-11-04
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-11-04A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-11-04B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-25-04
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-08-04D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-08-04E
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-22-04A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-22-04B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-22-04C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-28-04B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-13-04A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-13-04C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-27-04
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-27-04A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-27-04B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-27-04C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-27-04D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-10-04
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-10-04A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-10-04B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:891
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
06-10-04C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
06-10-04 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-24-04
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
06-24-04B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-24-04C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-08-04
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
07-08-04 Chapter 1 Part 5 Planning Commission
07-08-04A Chapter 22 Parts 2, 3 Subdivision
Res.
07-22-04A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
08-26-04 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning
8-26-04A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
8-26-04A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-26-04A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-26-04B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-26-04C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-26-04D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-26-04F
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-28-04
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-28-04A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-28-04B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-28-04C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-28-04D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-28-04E
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:892
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
12-09-04
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-09-04A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-09-04B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-09-04C
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
12-09-04D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-09-04E
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-09-04F
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
01-03-05 Chapter 18 Part 2 Sewers
Res.
01-03-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-03-05B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-03-05C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-03-05D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-27-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-10-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-10-05B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-10-05D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-17-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-24-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-24-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-24-05B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-24-05C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:893
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
03-10-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-10-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-24-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-24-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-14-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-14-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-14-05B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-14-05C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-14-05D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-14-05E
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
04-28-05 Chapter 10 Part 4 Streets
Res.
05-26-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-26-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-26-05B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-26-05C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-26-05D
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
06-09-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-09-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-14-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-14-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-28-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:894
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
07-28-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-11-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-11-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-11-05B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-11-05C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
09-22-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
09-22-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
09-22-05B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
09-22-05C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-13-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-13-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-13-05C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-13-05D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-13-05F
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
11-10-05 Chapter 21 Part 5 Sidewalks
11-10-05B Chapter 27 § 1018 Sidewalks
Res.
11-10-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
11-10-05B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
11-10-05C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
11-10-05D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
11-10-05E
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:895
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
12-08-05
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-08-05A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-08-05B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-08-05E
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-08-05F
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-08-05G
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-03-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-03-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-03-06B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-26-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-26-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-26-06B
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
02-09-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-09-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-09-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-09-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-09-06B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
03-09-06 Chapter 1 Part 1 Township Manager
03-09-06A Appendix G Sewers
Res.
03-23-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-23-06B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:896
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
04-13-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-11-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-11-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-11-06B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-25-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-25-06A
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
05-25-06B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-08-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-08-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-08-06B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-08-06C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-18-06
Chapter Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
07-18-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-18-06B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-18-06C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-18-06D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-18-06E
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-18-06F
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-18-06G
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-18-06I
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:897
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
07-18-06H
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-10-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-10-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-10-06B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-10-06C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
09-14-06 Chapter 24 Part 1 Realty Transfer Tax
09-14-06B Chapter 27 Part 3, Part 13 Zoning
09-14-06C Chapter 10 Part 4 Street Name Changes
Res.
09-14-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
09-14-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
09-14-06B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
09-14-06C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
09-14-06D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
09-28-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-12-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-26-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-26-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
11-09-06
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
11-09-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
11-09-06B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
11-09-06C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
11-09-06 Chapter 27 Part 1, Part 14 Zoning
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:898
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
12-14-06 Chapter 22 §§ 201, 404, 405 Subdivision and Land
Development
12-14-06A Chapter 24 Part 6 Taxation
12-14-06B Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
Res.
12-14-06
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-14-06A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-14-06B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-14-06C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-02-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-02-07A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-02-07B
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
01-02-07C
Chapter 10 Part 3 Noise Nuisance
Res.
01-25-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-25-07A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-25-07B
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
01-25-07C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-22-07
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
03-08-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-08-07A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-08-07B
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
03-22-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-22-07A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:899
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
04-12-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-12-07A
(now Res.
04-26-07A)
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-12-07B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-26-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-26-07A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-10-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-24-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-14-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-14-07A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-20-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-28-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
06-28-07 Repealed by 10-24-13 Signs and Billboards
07-12-07 Chapter 27 Part 10 Zoning
Res.
07-12-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-12-07A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-12-07B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-12-07C
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
08-09-07
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
08-09-07A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-09-07B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:900
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
08-23-07
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
08-23-07 Chapter 27 § 1408 Zoning
08-23-07A Chapter 4 Part 1 Buildings
08-23-07B Chapter 18 Part 2 Sewers
08-23-07C Appendix H Streets
Res.
10-11-07
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-11-07A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-11-07B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
11-08-07
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
11-08-07A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
11-08-07 Chapter 24 Part 6 Local Services Tax
11-08-07A Chapter 18 § 106 Sewers
12-13-07 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers
12-13-07A Appendix C Franchises and
Services
Res.
12-13-07
Chapter 18 § 106 Sewers
Res.
12-13-07A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-13-07B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-13-07C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
01-07-08 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers
Res.
01-07-08
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-07-08A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
01-24-08 Chapter I Part 5 Administration and
Governmental
Res.
01-24-08A
Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
Res.
01-24-08A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:901
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
01-24-08C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-24-08G
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-14-08
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-14-08B
Appendix H Streets
Res.
02-14-08C
Appendix H Streets
Res.
04-10-08B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
04-24-08 Chapter 6 Part 4 Conduct
04-24-08A Chapter 6 Part 5 Conduct
04-24-08B Chapter 10 Part 5 Health and Safety
04-24-08C Chapter 20 Part 1 Solid Waste
04-24-08D Chapter 20 Part 2 Solid Waste
Res.
04-24-08
Chapter 20 Part 2B Solid Waste
06-12-08 Chapter 27 Part 13 Zoning
06-12-08A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
06-12-08B Chapter 10 Part 4 Health and Safety
Res.
06-12-08
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-12-08A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
07-24-08 Chapter 27 Part 14 Zoning
08-14-08 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning
08-28-08 Chapter 10 Part 4 Health and Safety
09-25-08 Chapter 4 Part 2 Buildings
10-23-08 Chapter 4 Part 2 Buildings
11-13-08 Chapter 27 Part 3, Part 10 Zoning
11-13-08A Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning
12-11-08 Chapter 22 Part 4 Subdivision and Land
Development
12-11-08A Chapter 24 Part 4 Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-11-08
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:902
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
12-11-08A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-05-09
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-05-09A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
01-22-09 Chapter 27 Part 10 Zoning
01-22-09A Chapter 22 Part 4 Subdivision and Land
Development
Res.
02-12-09
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-12-09A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-12-09D
Appendix H Streets
Res.
02-12-09E
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
02-26-09
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
02-26-09A Appendix H Streets
Res.
03-26-09
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-26-09A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
04-09-09 Chapter 10 Part 5 Health and Safety
Res.
04-23-09
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-28-09
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
06-11-09
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-09-09
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
07-09-09 Chapter 15 Parts 1 and 3 Motor Vehicles
07-09-09A Chapter 15 Part 5 Motor Vehicles
Res.
08-27-09
Appendix H Streets
Res.
08-27-09A
Appendix G Sewers
08-27-09 Chapter 27 Part 14 Zoning
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:903
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
09-10-09
Appendix H Streets
Res.
09-10-09A
Appendix G Sewers
09-24-09 Chapter 27 Parts 9.5 and 10 Zoning
Res.
11-12-09C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
11-12-09D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
11-12-09E
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12-10-09 Chapter 18 Part 1 Sewers
12-10-09A Chapter 7 Part 6 Fire Prevention
Res.
12-10-09A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-10-09C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-11-10
Appendix G Sewers
08-12-10 Chapter 27 Parts 3 and 15 Zoning
Res.
08-12-10
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-12-10A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-12-10B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-12-10C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-12-10D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-12-10E
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-12-10F
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
08-12-10G
Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res.
08-12-10H
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-14-10D
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:904
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
11-04-10 Appendix F Public Property
12-09-10 Chapter 18 Part 5 Sewers
Res.
12-09-10
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-09-10A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-09-10B
Chapter 20 §§ 221-224 Solid Waste
Res.
01-03-11
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-03-11A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-27-11C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-10-11
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-10-11A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
02-10-11B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
03-10-11A Chapter 27 Parts 3, 4, 5, 9,
5,10
Zoning
03-10-11C Chapter 18 Part 1 Sewers
Res.
03-10-11
Chapter 20 Part 2 Solid Waste
03-24-11 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning
05-12-11 Chapter 18 Part 4 Sewers
Res.
05-12-11
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
05-26-11
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
06-09-11
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-14-11
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
07-14-11A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
08-11-11 Chapter 18 Part 1 Sewers
09-22-11 Chapter 15 Part 4 Motor Vehicles
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:905
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
10-27-11A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
10-27-11A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
11-10-11 Chapter 24 Part 3 Taxation
Res.
11-10-11
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-08-11B
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
12-29-11
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-29-11A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-03-12A
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
01-03-12B
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
01-26-12 Chapter 24 Part 8 Taxation
01-26-12B Chapter 18 § 117 Sewers
01-26-12C Chapter 7 Part 7 Fire Prevention/
Protection
Res.
01-26-12
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
02-09-12 Superseded by 11-08-18 Floodplains
02-23-12 Chapter 24 Part 9 Taxation
Res.
03-08-12
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
03-22-12C
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-12-12
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
04-12-12A
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
04-12-12B
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
04-12-12C
Appendix G Sewers
Res.
04-26-12
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:906
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res.
07-12-12
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
09-13-12 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
Res.
10-25-12
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-13-12
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-13-12E
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res.
12-13-12G
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
01-07-13 Chapter 18 § 113 Sanitary Sewer
Regulations
02-14-13 Chapter 15 § 403 Motor Vehicles
03-28-13 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning Map
05-09-12 Repealed by 10-24-13 Signs and Billboards
05-23-13 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
08-08-13 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
10-24-13 Chapter 19 Repealer Signs and Billboards
Chapter 27 § 301, Part 16 Zoning
12-12-13 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
01-23-14 Appendix C Franchises and
Services
02-13-14 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
02-13-14A Chapter 11 Part 1 Student Rental Unit
Occupancy
Regulations
Res.
05-08-14
Chapter 18 Part 6 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
05-22-14 Chapter 24 § 103 Realty Transfer Tax
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Ord. 06-12-14 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning Map
Res. 07-10-14 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 07-10-14A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 08-28-14 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 08-28-14A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 08-28-14B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:907
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 08-28-14C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 09-11-14 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 09-11-14A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Ord. 09-25-14 Chapter 18 Part 4 Logan Township
Industrial
Pretreatment/
Hollidaysburg Sewage
Collection System
Res. 09-25-14 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 09-25-14A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 10-09-14 Appendix G Sewers
Res. 10-09-14A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Ord. 10-23-14 Chapter 1 Part 1 Township Manager
Res. 10-23-14 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 11-13-14 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 11-13-14A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-11-14 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-11-14A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-11-14B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-11-14C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 01-05-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 01-22-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 01-22-15A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 01-22-15B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 01-22-15C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 01-22-15D Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 01-22-15E Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Ord. 02-12-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-12-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-12-15A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-26-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Ord. 03-12-15 Chapter 27 Part 12 Zoning Map
Res. 03-12-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 03-12-15A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 03-12-15B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 03-12-15C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 03-26-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:908
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 03-26-15A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 04-09-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 04-09-15A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Ord. 04-23-15 Chapter 15 § 403 Motor Vehicles
Res. 04-23-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 04-23-15A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 04-23-15B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 04-23-15C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 05-14-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 05-14-15A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 05-14-15B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 05-28-15 Chapter 18 Part 6 Sanitary Sewer
Construction
Specifications
Res. 06-11-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 06-25-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 06-25-15A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 07-09-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 07-09-15A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 07-09-15B Appendix G Sewers
Res. 08-13-15 Appendix G Sewers
Res. 08-13-15A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 08-13-15B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 08-13-15C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 08-13-15D Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 08-27-15 Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res. 08-27-15A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Ord. 09-10-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 09-10-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Ord. 09-24-15 Appendix B Bond Issues and
Loans
Res. 09-24-15 Appendix B Bond Issues and
Loans
Res. 10-08-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 10-22-15 Appendix G Sewers
Res. 10-22-15A Appendix G Sewers
Res. 10-22-15B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:909
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 10-22-15C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 11-12-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-10-15 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-10-15A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-10-15B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-10-15C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 01-04-16 Appendix E Plan Approval
Res. 01-04-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 01-04-16B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 01-28-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 01-28-16A Appendix G Sewers
Res. 01-28-16B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-11-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-11-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-25-16 Appendix G Sewers
Res. 02-25-16A Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
Res. 03-10-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 03-24-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 03-24-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 03-24-16B Chapter 20 § 224 Recycling Guidelines
Res. 04-14-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 04-14-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 04-28-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 04-28-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 05-12-16 Appendix G Sewers
Res. 05-12-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 05-12-16B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 05-12-16C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 05-26-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 06-09-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 06-09-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 06-09-16B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 06-23-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 07-14-16 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
Res. 07-14-16A Appendix G Sewers
Res. 07-14-16B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:910
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 08-02-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Ord. 08-11-16 Chapter 27 § 1201 Zoning
Res. 08-11-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 08-11-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 08-11-16B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 08-11-16C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 08-11-16D Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 08-25-16 Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res. 08-25-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 09-08-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 09-08-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 09-22-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 09-22-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 09-22-16B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Ord. 10-13-16 Chapter 6 Part 6 Public Gatherings
Ord. 10-13-16A Chapter 13 Part 3 Transient License
Ord. 10-13-16B Chapter 15 § 411 Motor Vehicles
Res. 10-13-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 10-13-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 10-13-16B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-08-16 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-08-16A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-08-16B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-08-16C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-08-16D Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 12-08-16E Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 01-03-17 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-09-17 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-09-17A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-09-17B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-09-17C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-09-17D Chapter 1 Part 3 Schedule of Fees
Res. 02-09-17E Appendix G Sewers
Res. 02-09-17F Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
Res. 02-09-17G Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-23-17 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:911
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 02-23-17A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-23-17B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 02-23-17C Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 03-23-17 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 03-23-17A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 03-23-17B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 04-13-17 Appendix G Sewers
Res. 04-13-17A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 04-27-17 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 04-27-17A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 05-25-17 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Ord. 06-08-17 Chapter 7 § 702 Fire Prevention/
Protection
Res. 06-22-17 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 06-22-17A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 06-22-17B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 07-13-17 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Res. 07-13-17A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Ord. 09-14-17 Chapter 18 § 113 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
Ord. 09-14-17A Chapter 20.5 Stormwater
Management
Res. 09-14-17A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 09-14-17B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 09-14-17C Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 09-14-17D Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 09-14-17E Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:912
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 09-14-17F Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Ord. 09-28-17 Appendix B Bonds Issues and
Loans
Res. 09-28-17 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 09-28-17A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 09-28-17B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 09-28-17C Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Ord. 10-12-17 Chapter 15 § 404 Motor Vehicles:
General Parking
Regulations
Res. 11-09-17 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 11-09-17A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 11-09-17B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 11-09-17C Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 12-14-17 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 12-14-17A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 12-14-17B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:913
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 12-14-17C Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 01-02-18 Appendix G Sewers
Res. 01-02-18A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 01-02-18B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 01-25-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 01-25-18A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 02-08-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 02-08-18A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 02-08-18B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 02-08-18C Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 02-08-18D Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 03-08-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 03-08-18A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 03-08-18B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 03-08-18C Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:914
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. 03-22-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 04-12-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Ord. 04-26-18 Chapter 7 Part 2 Fire Prevention and
Fire Protection: Public
Display of Fireworks
Res. 04-12-18A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 04-12-18B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 04-26-18 Appendix G Sewers
Res. 04-26-18A Appendix G Sewers
Res. 05-10-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 05-10-18A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 05-10-18B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 05-24-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 06-14-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 06-14-18A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. 06-14-18B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Ord. 06-28-18 Appendix C Franchises and
Services
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:915
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. No. 07-12-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 07-12-18A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 07-12-18B Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
Res. No. 08-09-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 08-09-18A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 09-27-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 09-27-18A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 10-11-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Ord. No. 11-08-18 Ch. 8 Pts. 1
through 7
Floodplains
Ord. No. 11-08-18A Ch. 10 Pt. 4 Health and Safety
Ord. No. 11-08-18B Ch. 18 Pt. 4 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
Res. No. 11-08-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 11-08-18A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 12-13-18 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 12-13-18A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 12-13-18B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:916
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. No. 01-07-19 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 01-07-19A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 01-24-19 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 01-24-19A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 01-24-19B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 01-24-19C Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 01-24-19D Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 01-24-19E Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 01-24-19F Ch. 1 Pt. 3 Administration and
Government
Res. No. 02-14-19 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 03-14-19 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 03-14-19A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 03-14-19B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Ord. No. 03-28-19 Ch. 7 Pt. 1 Fire Prevention and
Fire Protection
Ord. No. 03-28-19A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
§ KO-101 ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT § KO-101
1:917
Ord./Res. Disposition Section Subject
Res. No. 03-28-19 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 04-11-19 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 04-11-19A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 04-11-19B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 04-25-19 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 05-09-19 Ch. 1 Pt. 3 Administration and
Government
Res. No. 05-09-19A Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 05-09-19B Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Res. No. 05-09-19C Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Ord. No. 05-23-19 Ch. 7 Pt. 2 Fire Prevention and
Fire Protection
Res. No. 05-23-19 Appendix D Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
§ KO-101 LOGAN CODE § KO-101
1:918