Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 702, Clause XLI.1 (53 P.S. § 65741.11) of the Second
Class Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation
for the Township of Limerick, County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters
1 through 184, together with an Appendix, is hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Limerick,
which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the
Township of Limerick," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of legislation in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such legislation and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Limerick, and
it is the intention of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision
contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears
in said Code. Only such provisions of former legislation as are omitted from
this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below,
shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as
provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All legislation or parts of legislation of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Limerick and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of legislation provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following legislation, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of legislation pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of legislation pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
1. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. 66601.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to September 6, 1988.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the Township, or other instruments
or evidence of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance, or part of an ordinance, providing for laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other
public place or property or designating various streets as public
highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; or providing for a
system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
§ 1-4 LIMERICK CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All legislation of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any
part of a system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance regarding garbage and refuse deposits or collections.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
legislation of the Township for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more items of legislation. It is the intention of the Board
of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if
the legislation so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various legislation included in
the Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity
with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it is the intent
of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the legislation so changed have been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.
(1) Standardization of penalty provisions. Pursuant to 53 P.S. § 65741,2
as amended by Act. No. 1988-20, the penalty provisions in the
following sections of individual ordinances prescribing penalties
for violations are revised to provide for a maximum fine of either
$1,000 or $600, as appropriate in each case and as indicated below,
2. Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. 66601.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
plus costs of prosecution and in default of the payment thereof for
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
(a) Sections where maximum fine is increased to $1,000: §§ 57-8,
60-3A(8) and (9), 66-7, 87-7, 89-15, 98-4, 129-9, 140-6A,
140-16, 140-24, 140-30A, 147-17, 168-3 and 181-9B.
(b) Sections where maximum fine is increased to $600: §§ 75-4,
113-18, 122-3, 124-6, 153-6 and 160-28.
(2) Other sections added or amended.3
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code, or in supplements made to the Code, are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
3. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6B(2), the following sections were added or amended:
§§ 31-2, 31-3, 34-1, 57-5, 66-6, 75-2, 75-3, 84-3, 87-4, 87-5, 87-8, 89-3A(3), 89-4, 89-6F(4),
89-10, 89-11, 89-12, 113-1, 113-2A, 124-2A and C, 124-3B, 124-5A, 129-2, 129-3, 129-4,
129-8B and D, 155-4B and C, 155-6, 155-12B(6) and (8), 155-13E, 155-15C(2),
155-16D(11), 155-29H, 155-31A(1), 155-36A and B(3), 160-1, 170-9A, 181-5, 181-7, 186-6,
186-13, 186-29, 186-45C, 186-52C, 186-69B, 186-75B, 186-79C, 186-96D, 186-100A,
186-106C(6)(c) and D(1)(b), 186-107A, 186-109A, 186-111C, 186-112, 186-122A, 186-128,
186-131, 186-132A, 186-153, 186-154, 186-155, 186-156, 186-157, 186-164, 186-172 and
186-173. Additionally, original Sections 2201 and 2202 of Ord. No. 74 are deleted. A
complete description of each change is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 1-6 LIMERICK CODE § 1-9
1:6
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary, or someone authorized
and directed by him or her, to keep up-to-date the certified copies of
the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Township Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code
and all legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code, or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600 plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article or part
thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of
the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance and the Code would have
been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, article or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after March 21, 1989.
§ 1-14 LIMERICK CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 5
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 140.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)4
§ 5-1. through § 5-4. (Reserved)
4. Editor’s Note: Former Art. I, Sewer Authority, adopted 5-3-1966 by Ord. No. 32, as
amended, was repealed 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 374.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-1
1:11

ARTICLE II
Industrial Development Authority
[Adopted 9-14-2006 by Ord. No. 268]
§ 5-5. Intent.
It is the desire of the Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township,
Montgomery County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to organize an
Industrial Development Authority in Limerick Township, under the
Economic Development Financing Law.
§ 5-6. Adoption of Articles of Incorporation.
In pursuit of said desire and intention, and in conformity with the terms
and provisions of the Economic Development Financing Law, Articles of
Incorporation shall be submitted to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania on
a date certain not sooner than three days following publication of the notice
as required by 73 P.S. § 374. The Articles of Incorporation of said Authority
shall be executed by and on behalf of the Board of Supervisors of Limerick
Township by the Chairman of the Board. The seal of Limerick Township shall
be affixed thereto and attested to by the Secretary of said Board.
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:13

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)5
§ 5-7. through § 5-10. (Reserved)
5. Editor’s Note: Former Art. III, Assumption of Municipal Authority Obligations, adopted
3-13-2008 by Ord. No. 293, was repealed 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 374.
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:15
Chapter 12
DRUG TASK FORCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 34.
§ 12-1. Participation in task force.
The Township of Limerick has evidenced its intent to participate in the
Municipal Drug Task Force activities in cooperation with the
commonwealth's Office of Attorney General designed to interdict the illegal
use and trafficking of narcotics and other illegal drugs within its municipal
boundaries, as well as within the boundaries of nearby communities.
§ 12-2. Intergovernmental cooperation.
This agreement may include intergovernmental cooperative activities with
adjacent and nearby municipal governments as part of a regional effort to
interdict illegal drug activities.
§ 12-3. Utilization of police force.
The Township of Limerick shall utilize the services of its police force,
both full-time as well as part-time, under the conditions set forth in the
agreement and in compliance with the Municipal Police Jurisdiction Act, 42
Pa.C.S.A. § 8953.
§ 12-4. Establishment of procedures.
The Township of Limerick shall establish, pursuant to the terms of the
agreement which is attached hereto6 and incorporated as a part of this
chapter, appropriate procedures to comply with all relevant provisions of
the agreement and relevant regulations, direction and guidance from the
Office of the Attorney General.
§ 12-5. Term of agreement.
The term of the agreement shall commence on November 9, 1990, and may
be terminated at any time upon 30 days' written notice.
§ 12-6. Purpose and objective.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement include region-wide
coordination of municipal police activities in an effort to combat illegal
narcotics and drug trafficking.
6. Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the office of the Township Secretary, where it
may be examined during regular office hours.
§ 5-7 LIMERICK CODE § 12-7
12:16
§ 12-7. Financing of agreement.
The agreement shall be financed with the assistance of funds supplied by
the Office of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 12-8. Implementation.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the terms of this
agreement shall be covered by directives, procedures and guidance from
the Office of the Attorney General and other area police departments.
§ 12-9. Management and disposition of property acquired.
All property, real or personal, acquired, managed or disposed of pursuant to
this agreement shall be in accordance with both the terms of the agreement,
as well as the directives, procedures and guidance of the Office of the
Attorney General.
§ 12-10. Responsibility for employees.
The municipality shall retain responsibility for the management, control and
direction of its employees with assistance, financial or otherwise, from the
Office of the Attorney General.
Chapter 14
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 29.
Police Department — See Ch. 34.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 40.
§ 12-7 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 12-10
14:17

ARTICLE I
Extended Duties of Volunteer Fire Companies
[Adopted 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 192]
§ 14-1. Intent.
The purpose and intent of the Board of Supervisors by the enactment of this
article is to authorize the official dues-paying members of the Limerick and
Linfield Fire Companies to perform certain extended duties and to clarify
that such duties are intended for workers' compensation coverage.
§ 14-2. Authorized activities.
The Limerick and Linfield Volunteer Fire Companies (hereinafter "Fire
Company") and their memberships are authorized by the Township Board of
Supervisors to perform the following, in addition to the normal fire-fighting,
rescue and emergency medical duties and activities:
A. Participation in drills, practices, training sessions and pre-fire planning
activities authorized by the Fire Chiefs and supervised by a qualified
instructor or a Fire Department officer.
B. Participation in community celebrations, ceremonial observations and
funerals for deceased fire fighters or other public figures where such
attendance is deemed appropriate by the Fire Chiefs. The Township
Board of Supervisors must have prior notice for out-of-town
participation.
C. Performing duties necessary to prepare the fire station for use as a
distribution center due to a disaster or a polling place for the primary
and general elections. This shall also include like services performed on
behalf of the Township but held at other locations within the Township
such as school district buildings.
D. Preparation for and responsible participation in parades, provided that
attendance has the prior approval of the Fire Company. The Township
Board of Supervisors must have prior notice for out-of-town
participation.
E. Any public service functions performed for the welfare of the
community, including recovery of animals, as long as these activities
are responsibly supervised and are sanctioned by the Fire Company.
F. Any public safety activities undertaken by Fire Company members to
render care to the injured, prevent loss of life, provide comfort and
security to victims and limit or prevent damage to or loss of property as
circumstances may dictate.
G. Rendering assistance to police officers where such aid is specifically
requested or is done without request to protect the public welfare from
imminent danger, including fire/police duties.
§ 14-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 14-2
14:19
H. Participation in fire prevention activities, post-fire investigations, bomb
searches, evacuation drills and fire lane enforcement.
I. Participation in public programs to promote health and safety, to enlist
new members, solicit community support or conduct fund-raising
activities, as long as no compensation is being paid to the member while
engaged in the fund-raising activity and 100% of the activity's proceeds
go to the Fire Company and as long as each activity is sanctioned by the
Fire Company.
J. The safe and responsible performance of maintenance or remodeling
work on the Fire Company vehicles, buildings, grounds or equipment.
K. Such other activities and/or duties necessary for the efficient operation
of the Fire Company as may, from time to time, be assigned by the
Township Board of Supervisors and the officers of the Fire Company
and as may be defined within the Constitution and bylaws of the Fire
Company.
§ 14-2 LIMERICK CODE § 14-2
14:20
Chapter 16
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
§ 16-1. Filing of complaints alleging discrimination on the basis of
handicap.
Complaints should be addressed to the Secretary of the Township of
Limerick, 646 West Ridge Pike, Limerick, Pennsylvania 19468, who has
been designated to coordinate compliance with the nondiscrimination
requirements contained in Section 51.55 of the Revenue Sharing
Regulations.7
§ 16-2. Manner of filing complaint.
A complaint should be filed in writing or verbally, contain the name and
address of the person filing it and briefly describe the alleged violation of
the regulations.
§ 16-3. Timing.
A complaint should be filed within 30 days after the complainant becomes
aware of the alleged violation. Processing of allegations of discrimination
which occurred before this grievance procedure was in place will be
considered on a case-by-case basis.
§ 16-4. Investigation.
An investigation, as may be appropriate, shall follow a filing of a complaint.
The investigation shall be conducted by the Board of Supervisors or its
designated representative. These rules contemplate informal but thorough
investigations, affording all interested persons and their representatives, if
any, an opportunity to submit evidence relevant to a complaint. Under the
Office of Revenue Sharing Regulations, the Township of Limerick need not
process complaints from applicants for employment or from applicants for
admission to post-secondary educational institutions.
§ 16-5. Issuance of written determination.
A written determination as to the validity of the complaint and a description
of the resolution, if any, shall be issued by the Board of Supervisors and a
copy forwarded to the complainant no later than 10 days after its filing.
§ 16-6. Records of complaints.
The Secretary of the Township of Limerick shall maintain the files and
records of the Township of Limerick relating to the complaints filed.
7. Editor's Note: The Federal Revenue Sharing Regulations implement Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 U.S.C. § 794).
§ 14-2 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE § 16-7
16:21
§ 16-7. Request for reconsideration.
The complainant can request a reconsideration of the case in instances
where he or she is dissatisfied with the resolution. The request for
reconsideration should be made within 10 days to the Township Secretary.
§ 16-8. Other remedies.
The right of a person to a prompt and equitable resolution of the complaint
filed hereunder shall not be impaired by the person's pursuit of other
remedies, such as the filing of a complaint under Section 504 of the
rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, with the responsible federal
department or agency. Utilization of this grievance procedure is not a
prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies.
§ 16-9. Interpretation of rules.
These rules shall be construed to protect the substantive rights of
interested persons, to meet appropriate due process standards and to
assure that the Township of Limerick complies with Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended and as implemented by Section
51.55 of the Revenue Sharing Regulations.
Chapter 24
MANAGER, TOWNSHIP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 40.
§ 24-1. Position created.8
The position of Township Manager be and the same is hereby created,
subject to the right of the Township, by ordinance, at any time, to abolish
said position.
§ 24-2. Appointment and removal; vacancies; residency.
The Township Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a
majority vote of all the members of the Township Board of Supervisors. The
Township Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors,
and the Township Manager may be removed at any time by a majority
vote of all of its members. At least 30 days before such removal becomes
effective, the Board of Supervisors shall furnish the Township Manager with
a written statement setting forth its intentions to remove the Township
Manager from office. When a vacancy occurs in the position of Township
8. Editor's Note: See also 53 P.S. § 66301.
§ 16-7 LIMERICK CODE § 24-2
24:22
Manager by reason of death, resignation or removal by the Board of
Supervisors, the Board of Supervisors shall then appoint a suitable person
to hold the office in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
Township Manager need not be a resident of the Township or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of this appointment, but, during
the tenure of the Township Manager's office, the Township Manager may
reside outside the Township only with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 24-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of the office
herein outlined.
§ 24-4. Bond required.
Before entering upon the Township Manager's duties, the Township
Manager shall, at the expense of the Township, file with the Township a
bond to be approved by the Board of Supervisors, with a bonding company
as surety, in the sum of $25,000 in favor of the Board of Supervisors
of Limerick Township, conditioned for the faithful performance of the
Township Manager's duties as Township Manager.
§ 24-5. Compensation.
The compensation of the Township Manager shall be fixed from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township.9
§ 24-6. General authority.
The Township Manager shall carry on the business of the Township under
the direction of the Board of Supervisors, and the Township Manager's
powers and duties shall relate to the general management of all Township
business not expressly imposed or conferred by statute upon other
Township officers or hereinafter expressly reserved or restricted.
§ 24-7. Specific powers and duties.
The Township Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Township, and the Township Manager shall be responsible to the Board
of Supervisors as a whole for the proper and efficient administration of
the affairs of the Township. Subject to recall by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors and upon the Township Manager's selection and assumption of
office, the powers and duties of the Township Manager shall include the
following:
9. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 40, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 24-2 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 24-7
24:23
A. The Township Manager, on the direction of the Board of Supervisors,
shall execute and enforce the laws of the commonwealth and
ordinances, resolutions and bylaws of the Board of Supervisors.
B. The Township Manager shall attend all meetings of the Board of
Supervisors and recommend such measures as he or she shall deem
expedient.
C. The Township Manager shall make a monthly report to the Board of
Supervisors, and at such other times as the Board of Supervisors may
direct, upon the affairs of the Township and keep the Township Board of
Supervisors duly advised of the Township's financial condition and its
financial needs.
D. The Township Manager shall supervise and be responsible for the
activities of all municipal departments and all Township employees,
including the Township Police Department, as related solely to the
administration of all nonrelated law enforcement activities, including
but not limited to pensions, insurances, vacations, fringe benefits, etc.
E. The Township Manager shall prepare and submit to the Board of
Supervisors, pursuant to the terms of the Second Class Township
Code,10 a recommendation budget for the next fiscal year and an
explanatory budget when necessary. Such budget shall be submitted in
sufficient time to allow for its study and adoption within the time
directed by the Second Class Township Code. In preparing the
recommended budget, the Township Manager or any officer designated
by the Township Manager shall obtain from the head of each
department, agency, board or office estimates of revenues and
expenditures and such other support data as the Township Manager
may require. The Township Manager shall review such estimates and
may revise them before submitting the recommended budget to the
Board of Supervisors.
F. The Township Manager shall be responsible for the administration of
the budget after its adoption by the Board of Supervisors.
G. The Township Manager shall hold such other municipal offices or head
one or more of the municipal departments as the Board of Supervisors
may from time to time direct.
H. The Township Manager shall, in addition to attending all meetings of
the Board of Supervisors, attend meetings of each department,
committee, agency or board when directed to do so by the Board of
Supervisors, with the right to take part in the discussions, and the
Township Manager shall receive notice of all special meetings of the
Board of Supervisors or its departments, committees, agencies and
boards.
10.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 24-7 LIMERICK CODE § 24-7
24:24
I. The Township Manager shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of
the Board of Supervisors and supply facts pertinent thereto.
J. The Township Manager shall keep the Board of Supervisors informed as
to the conduct of the Township's affairs, submit periodic reports on the
condition of the Township's finances and such other reports as the
Board of Supervisors requests and make such recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors as the Township Manager deems necessary.
K. The Township Manager shall submit to the Board of Supervisors, as
soon as possible after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on
the financial and administrative activities of the Township for the
preceding year.
L. The Township Manager shall see that the provisions of all the
franchises, leases, permits and privileges granted by the Township
Board of Supervisors are observed.
M. The Township Manager may employ, by and with the approval of the
Board of Supervisors, experts or consultants to perform work and to
advise in connection with any of the functions of the Township.
N. The Township Manager shall, subject to the Board of Supervisors'
approval, attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and the
Township Manager shall supervise the performance and faithful
execution of the same, except insofar as such duties are expressly
imposed upon some other Township officer by statute.
O. The Township Manager shall see that all money owed the Township is
promptly paid and that proper proceedings are taken for the security
and collection of all the Township's claims, provided that the Township
Manager shall not be responsible for the payment or collection of any
taxes imposed by the Township.
P. The Township Manager shall be the purchasing agent of the Township,
and the Township Manager shall have the full power to purchase all
supplies and equipment for the use of the Township Manager's own and
various departments and offices of the Township; provided, however,
that no single article or purchase shall be in excess of $500. The
Township Manager shall keep an account of all purchases made by the
Township Manager and shall, from time to time and as directed by the
Board of Supervisors, make a full written report thereof. The Township
Manager shall also issue rules and regulations, subject to the approval
of the Board of Supervisors, governing the requisition and purchasing
of all municipal supplies and equipment. These duties may also be
delegated to any other officer of the Township upon the approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
Q. All complaints regarding service or personnel of the Township, except
for complaints regarding the service or personnel of the Police
Department of the Township, shall be referred to the office of the
Township Manager. The Township Manager or an official designated by
§ 24-7 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 24-7
24:25
§ 24-8. Designation of Acting Manager.
If the Township Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the
Township, the Township Manager shall designate one qualified member of
the Township staff, who shall perform the duties of the Township Manager
during the Township Manager's absence or disability. The person so
designated shall not perform these duties for a period longer than two
weeks without the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
the Manager shall investigate and coordinate the disposition of such
complaints with the head of each department, and the Township
Manager shall report thereon to the Board of Supervisors.
R. The Township Manager shall make research and investigation into the
administrative and governmental functions of the federal government
and state government and of various townships and make
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors of all available grants-inaid
and other assistance available to the Township affecting the health,
safety, welfare and administration of the Township.
S. A Township Manager who is also a qualified voter of the Township may
serve as Secretary of the Township and, when so appointed, shall have
all the powers and duties given to the office of Township Secretary by
statute and ordinance of this Township.
T. All applications for employment by the Township, except for the
appointed offices of the Township, which by law are required to be filled
by legislative action of the Board of Supervisors, such as the Township
Treasurer, the Township Solicitor and all members of the Police
Department, shall be made to the Township Manager. The Township
Manager shall present the application to the Board of Supervisors, with
the Township Manager's recommendations, for final decision by the
Board of Supervisors. The Township Manager shall have the authority
to recommend dismissal of any Township employee, except the
appointed officers of the Township, which by law are required to be
filled by the legislative action of the Board of Supervisors, such as the
Township Treasurer, the Township Solicitor and all members of the
Police Department. Such recommendations shall contain the reasons
asserted by the Township Manager in support of the recommendation.
Except for the purposes of inquiry, the Board of Supervisors shall deal
with the administrative service solely through the Township Manager,
and neither the Board of Supervisors nor any member thereof shall give
orders to any subordinates of the Township Manager, either publicly or
privately. The Township Manager shall have full power and authority to
direct the work, employment and service, including but not limited to
suspension of an employee up to a maximum of five days, of said regular
Township employees over whom the Township Manager is hereby given
the power of employment and dismissal. [Amended 5-5-1987 by Ord.
No. 91-1]
§ 24-7 LIMERICK CODE § 24-8
24:26
Chapter 27
MAP, OFFICIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 31.
Subdivision and Land Development — See Ch.
155.
Zoning — See Ch. 184.
§ 27-1. Legislative intent.
Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code ("MPC")11
authorizes the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors to adopt an Official
Map of Limerick Township designating and reserving areas for future
streets and other municipal facilities.
§ 27-2. Adoption.
The Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township hereby adopts the Official
Map prepared by Pennoni Associates, Inc., dated January 18, 2011, and last
revised August 13, 2013, and attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated
herein, adding Limerick Township open space reservations and adding
alignments pursuant to the 2013 Greenway Trail Master Plan within
Limerick Township, as the revised Official Map of Limerick Township.12
§ 27-3. Recording.
Limerick Township officials are authorized to take all steps necessary to
record the revised Official Map in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in
and for Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, as required by Section 402(c) of
the MPC.13 The proper officials of Limerick Township are further authorized
to transmit certified copies of the revised Official Map to those entities
required to be provided with such copies by the MPC.
§ 27-4. Amendments.
Any amendments to the Official Map shall be made in a manner consistent
with Article IV of the MPC, as amended.
§ 27-5. Incorporation of governing law.
The provisions of Article IV of the MPC, as amended, are hereby
incorporated by reference to govern the effect of the adoption of the Official
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10402 et seq.
12.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10402(c).
§ 24-8 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 27-5
24:27
Map, issuance of permits and approvals for land reserved on the Official
Map, and all other matters relating to the Official Map.
§ 27-6. Revisions.
The Limerick Township Board of Supervisors does hereby reserve the right,
from time to time, to adopt modifications of, supplements to, or
amendments of its ordinance including this provision.
§ 27-7. Failure to enforce not a waiver.
The failure of Limerick Township to enforce any provision of this chapter
shall not constitute a waiver by Limerick Township of its rights of future
enforcement hereunder.
Chapter 29
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 34. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 40.
§ 27-5 LIMERICK CODE § 27-7
24:28
ARTICLE I
Social Security
[Adopted 12-8-1952 by Ord. No. 3]
§ 29-1. Legislative intent.
It is the considered opinion of the Board of Supervisors that the extension
of the social security system to employees and officers of the Township of
Limerick will be of great benefit not only to the employees of Limerick by
providing that said employees and officers may participate in the provisions
of the Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System but will also be of great
benefit to the Township of Limerick by enabling it to attract and retain in
employment the best of personnel and thus increase the efficiency of its
government.
§ 29-2. Extension of coverage authorized.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute known as "Act No. 491,"
which is the enabling act provided for in Section 218 of Public Law 734,
81st Congress,14 which designated the Secretary of Labor and Industry of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the state agency to implement
the coverage of employees and officers under said Old Age and Survivors'
Insurance System. The Township of Limerick is hereby authorized to
execute and deliver to the state agency a plan or plans and an agreement,
required under Section 6 of said enabling act and the Social Security Act,
to extend coverage to employees and officers of the Township of Limerick
and do all other necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees and
officers under the Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System.
§ 29-3. Payroll deductions authorized.
The Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deductions to be matched by payments by the Township of Limerick to be
made into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act through the
office of the state agency and to make charges of this tax to the fund or
funds from which wage or salary payments are to be made in accordance
with the provisions of the law and regulations promulgated by the state
agency and the Federal Security Administrator. Such payments which are
delinquent shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such
time as payments are made.
§ 29-4. Appropriation; effective date of participation.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the
Township of Limerick in the necessary amount of pay into the Contribution
Fund as provided in Section 4 of the enabling act and in accordance with
14.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq. coverage of employees and officers under the Old
Age and Survivors' Insurance System.
§ 29-1 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-4
24:29
the plan or plans and agreement. Authority is given to the Chairman and
Secretary of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Limerick to enter
into an agreement with the state agency, which agreement shall be in
accordance with Act No. 491 and with Paragraph 218 of the Social Security
Act. Such plan and agreement shall provide that the participation of the
Township of Limerick shall commence as of January 1, 1953.
§ 29-4 LIMERICK CODE § 29-4
24:30
ARTICLE II
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 10-18-1994 by Ord. No. 16715; amended in its entirety
9-14-2006 by Ord. No. 266]
§ 29-5. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ACCRUED BENEFIT — The member's normal retirement benefit multiplied
by the ratio of (a) over (b), where:
(a) = The years and months of service completed by the member as of
the date of his termination of employment.
(b) = The years and months of service the member would have
completed if he had continued to participate until his normal
retirement date.
AGE — Age at nearest birthday.
AVERAGE MONTHLY COMPENSATION — The average of a member's
monthly compensation earned over the last 36 months of employment.
COMPENSATION — The total compensation paid to an employee for
services rendered as a police officer, excluding "buybacks" and severance
pay.
EMPLOYER — Limerick Township, Montgomery County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
FUND — Limerick Township Police Pension Plan Trust Fund.
MEMBER — All police employees who meet the requirements set forth in
§ 29-8 of this article. The masculine pronoun will include the feminine.
MUNICIPALITY — Limerick Township, Montgomery County, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
PLAN — Limerick Township Police Pension Plan. The plan's fiscal year is the
calendar year.
TOWNSHIP — Limerick Township, Montgomery County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
TRUSTEE — Limerick Township Board of Supervisors or its designee.
§ 29-6. Funding of pensions.
This plan is to be funded and maintained by any of the following methods,
or combination of each:
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Police Pension Plan, adopted
12-3-1974 by Ord. No. 59.
§ 29-5 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-6
24:31
§ 29-7. Administration.
A. General fund: contributions from the general fund of the Township
which may be required after appropriate approval of the Township
Supervisors.
B. Member contributions: All members shall make contributions, which
shall be 5% of their total compensation. The Board of Supervisors may,
on an annual basis, by ordinance or resolution, reduce or eliminate
contributions into the plan by members. The Township may, but need
not, have an actuarial study performed prior to reducing or eliminating
member contributions into the plan.
C. State aid received pursuant to the Municipal Pension Plan Funding
Standard and Recovery Act (Act 205).16
D. Gifts, grants, devises or bequests: Sums received by the Township may,
to the extent authorized by law, be contributed to such fund so long as
prior approval of the Township Supervisors is obtained.
A. Pension Committee.
(1) The general administration and management of the plan shall be
under the direction of a Pension Committee as appointed by the
Township Board of Supervisors. The Committee shall consist of two
duly appointed Township representatives and one pension plan
member.
(2) The Pension Committee shall have all powers necessary to enable it
properly to carry out its duties, including, but not limited to, the
power to construe the provisions of the fund, to direct the
investment advisor, to determine all questions relating to eligibility
of members and to authorize all disbursements for benefits to
members. The decisions of the Pension Committee on all matters
within the scope of its authority shall be final, subject to approval of
the Board of Supervisors.
B. Trustee.
(1) The Fund shall be under the direction of a Trustee designated by
resolution by the Township Board of Supervisors. The Trustee shall
have full responsibility for administration of the program
established hereunder and shall hold, invest, reinvest and
distribute all funds and other property received pursuant hereto in
trust for the purposes of this article. The Trustee may receive, at
any time, gifts, grants, devises, or bequests to the pension fund of
any money or property, real, personal or mixed, to be held by them
in trust for the benefit of this fund and in accordance with the
provisions hereof. The Trustee shall be subject to such rules and
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 29-6 LIMERICK CODE § 29-7
24:32
§ 29-8. Eligibility.
regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the governing
body of this Township by ordinance or by resolution.
(2) The Trustee shall have full power and authority by a majority
action, either directly or through their designated representatives,
to do all acts, execute, acknowledge and deliver all instruments,
and to exercise, for the sole benefit of the plan members, any and
all powers and discretions necessary to implement and effectuate
the purposes of this article, including, for purposes of illustration,
but not limited to, any of the following:
(a) To hold, invest and reinvest all funds received pursuant to this
article and such legal investments as may be authorized as
legal investments under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania;
(b) To retain any property which may at any time become an asset
of the fund, as long as said Trustee may deem it advisable; and
(c) To make distribution of the monies in the fund, in accordance
with the terms of this article.
C. The expense of administering this pension fund, including
compensation of any actuary, any custodian of the fund, and any other
charges or expenses related thereto, exclusive of the payment of
pensions, may be paid by the Township or by the pension fund as
determined by the Township Board of Supervisors.
A. Each full-time police employee (regularly working a minimum of 35
hours per week during the calendar year) employed by the employer is
eligible to participate and shall be a member in the Limerick Township
Police Pension Plan and Fund as of his or her date of hire.
B. For the purpose of this section, "service" shall mean the period of an
employee's continuous employment by the employer. The following
types of absence shall not break continuity, and the time elapsed shall
be included in computing the aggregate length of service:
(1) Temporary leave of absence or layoff which shall, if not otherwise
stated, expire in six months unless sooner renewed.
(2) Absence during which regular remuneration is paid.
(3) A regularly appointed member of the police force who has been
employed as such for at least six months, and who enters active
military service for the United States, must receive retirement
credit for the period of active military service. To be eligible, the
member must return to employment within six months of
separation from such military service and be ineligible to receive
military retirement pay as a result of that service.
§ 29-7 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-9
24:33
§ 29-9. Normal retirement.
The benefits from the fund shall be payable to members who have served in
the Township in a full-time capacity and who attain their normal retirement
date. "Normal retirement date" shall mean the first of the month coincident
with or next following the attainment of the 50th birthday and the
completion of 25 years of total service. Benefits commence on the first day
of the month coincident with or next following actual retirement.
§ 29-10. Normal retirement benefit.
§ 29-10.1. Years of service increments. [Added 2-4-2014 by Ord. No.
343]
Any officer employed as a police officer for 26 years or more shall receive an
additional payment per month after retirement, in addition to their normal
monthly pension retirement payments, as follows:
Years of Completed Service Additional Payment per Month
26 years $100
27 years $200
28 years and longer $300
§ 29-11. Early retirement.
An early retirement benefit shall be provided to a member of the police
force with 20 or more years of service who terminates employment prior to
the completion of superannuation retirement age and service requirements
and who files a written application for an early retirement benefit with the
Township. The early retirement benefit shall become effective as of the date
the application is filed with the governing body or the date designated on
the application, whichever is later, and shall be the actuarial equivalent of a
partial superannuation retirement benefit calculated as follows:
A. The monthly normal retirement benefit shall equal 50% of average
monthly compensation.
B. The normal form of payment is a life annuity.
A. A partial superannuation retirement benefit shall be determined by
applying the percentage that the member's years of service bear to the
years of service that the member would have rendered had the member
continued to be employed until his superannuation retirement date to
the gross pension amount calculated using the monthly average salary
during the appropriate period prior to his termination of employment.
B. The actuarial equivalent of the partial superannuation retirement
benefit shall be determined by actuarially reducing the partial
superannuation retirement benefit to reflect that it will commence on
the effective date of the early retirement rather than on the date on
§ 29-9 LIMERICK CODE § 29-11
24:34
§ 29-11.1. Service-related total and permanent disability.
§ 29-11.2. Termination benefits and vesting.
§ 29-11.3. Death benefit. [Amended 12-10-2009 by Ord. No. 310]
which the member would have completed superannuation age and
service requirements. The actuarial reduction shall be calculated using
the actuarial assumptions reported in the last actuarial valuation report
filed with the Public Employee Retirement Commission under the act
of December 18, 1984 (P.L. 1005, No. 205), known as the "Municipal
Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act."17
A. In the event of any member's service-related total and permanent
disability, the member shall become eligible for a monthly disability
pension as set forth below.
B. "Total and permanent disability" shall mean a service-related physical
or mental condition of a member incurred in the course and scope of
employment as a Township police officer, which precludes him from
engaging in any substantially gainful employment.
C. The monthly total and permanent disability pension benefit shall be in
conformity with a uniform scale and shall be equal to 50% of the
member's salary on the date the disability occurred, reduced by the
amount of Social Security disability benefits received for the same
injury. Disability pension benefits shall commence on the first of the
month coincident with or next following the date of disability, as
determined by a qualified physician selected by the employer. Such
determination shall be final and conclusive.
D. The employer shall have the right to require the disabled member to
undergo medical examination at monthly intervals. Disability benefit
payments shall cease upon recovery from disability as determined by
the employer's physician. Disability benefit payments shall also cease
upon death.
A. Any member who has completed 12 years of service in this plan shall
become one-hundred-percent vested in his accrued benefit. Upon
termination of employment with the employer, a vested member shall
be eligible to receive his accrued benefit starting as a monthly annuity
at his normal retirement date under this article.
B. However, any member who separates from service prior to his normal
retirement date for any reason other than death or total and permanent
disability shall receive a complete refund of the total amount of his
member contributions with interest, if such refund is greater in value
than the actuarial equivalent of the accrued benefit.
17.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 29-11 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-11.3
24:35
§ 29-11.4. (Reserved)18
§ 29-11.5. Compliance with Internal Revenue Code.
The Plan is intended to be tax-qualified under the applicable provisions
of Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, and shall
be construed and applied in a manner consistent with such intent. The
plan and its trust fund are for the exclusive benefit of plan members and
their beneficiaries. Refer to Attachment "A" for requirements of the Internal
Revenue Code.19
§ 29-11.6. Transfer or assignment.
The pension payments herein provided for shall not be subject to
attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal process and shall
A. Survivor benefits. In the event of the death of a member or the death of
a member who has retired or is honorably discharged on pension, the
surviving spouse or, if no spouse survives or if he or she survives and
subsequently dies, then the child(ren) under the age of 18 or, if then
attending college, under or reaching the age of 23, shall, during his or
her lifetime in the case of a surviving spouse or, in the case of a
child(ren), until reaching the age of 18 or, if then attending college,
under or reaching the age of 23, be entitled to receive a pension
calculated at 50% of the pension the member was receiving or would
have been receiving had he or she been retired or honorably discharged
on pension at the time of his or her death. For the purposes of this
section, the phrase "attending college" shall mean the eligible
child(ren) is registered at an accredited institution of higher learning
and is carrying the minimum course load of seven credit hours per
semester.
B. Pre-vesting benefits. The surviving spouse of any member who dies
before his or her pension has vested or, if no spouse survives or if he or
she survives and subsequently dies, the child(ren) under the age of 18
or, if attending college, under or reaching the age of 23 of the member
shall be entitled to receive repayment of all money which the member
invested in the pension fund plus interest or other increases in value of
the member's investment in the pension fund unless the member has
designated another beneficiary for this purpose. For the purposes of
this section, the phrase "attending college" shall mean the eligible
child(ren) is registered at an accredited institution of higher learning
and is carrying a minimum course load of seven credit hours per
semester.
18.Editor's Note: Former § 29-11.4, Killed in service death benefit, was repealed 12-10-2009
by Ord. No. 310, effective as of 10-9-2009. This ordinance also provided that if a police
officer who is a member of the plan is killed in service while performing police services for
the employer on or after 10-9-2009, no killed-in-service benefit shall be payable to the
participant’s surviving spouse or eligible dependents, if any, under this plan or by the
employer or Township.
19.Editor's Note: Said attachment is on file in the Township offices.
§ 29-11.3 LIMERICK CODE § 29-11.6
24:36
be payable only to the member or his designated beneficiary. No member
or his beneficiary shall have any right to alienate, encumber or assign any
assets of the fund held by the Trustees on his behalf or any of the benefits of
payments or proceeds of any contract or agreement purchased or acquired
by the Township hereunder.
§ 29-11.7. DROP provisions. [Added 12-10-2009 by Ord. No. 311]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACT 44 — Chapter 11 (only) of the bill signed by Governor Edward
G. Rendell on September 18, 2009, and designated as Act 44 of 2009
(formerly House Bill 1828 of 2009).
ACT 51 — The bill signed by Governor Edward G. Rendell on October
9, 2009, and designated as Act 51 of 2009 (formerly Senate Bill 369 of
2009).
ASSOCIATION — The Limerick Township Police Officers' Association,
the duly recognized collective bargaining unit representing all eligible
full-time police officers of the Limerick Township Police Department.
BENEFICIARY — The individual identified by a DROP participant to
receive the balance of such participant's DROP account in the event
of the death of the DROP participant during the DROP participation
period.
COMMENCEMENT DATE — The date of an officer's entry into the
DROP Program.
DROP NOTICE or DROP ELECTION — The form prescribed by the
employer and association upon which a member or officer informs
the employer of his or her irrevocable intent to participate in the
DROP Program. Once submitted to the employer and approved by the
employer, the DROP notice is irrevocable, except as otherwise provided
herein.
DROP PARTICIPANT or PARTICIPANT — A member or officer who is
eligible to receive a normal retirement benefit based on reaching the
requisite age and service for retirement as defined under the Limerick
Township Police Pension Plan ("Plan") and who has properly submitted
a DROP notice to participate in the DROP, which has been approved by
the employer's Board of Supervisors, and who has commenced his or
her DROP participation period.
DROP PARTICIPATION PERIOD — The period from the time of the
commencement of the officer's (i.e., participant's) participation in the
DROP as stated in the officer's DROP notice which has been approved
by the employer (i.e., the commencement date) until the officer's
separation from employment as a police officer of the employer (i.e.,
the resignation date), which shall not exceed 36 months. Participation
in the DROP does not guarantee the DROP participant's employment by
§ 29-11.6 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-11.7
24:37
the local government during the DROP participation period.[Amended
3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 385]
DROP PROGRAM — The program implemented by the employer and
association pursuant this document through which members of the
employer may establish DROP accounts while continuing to provide
police service for the employer as described herein. The DROP Program
is an integral component of the plan.
EMPLOYER — The Limerick Township and the Limerick Township
Police Department, Montgomery County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
FORMER DROP PARTICIPANT — An individual who elected to
participate in the DROP Program pursuant to the terms of this DROP
agreement and who completed his or her DROP participation period
and who is currently receiving his or her pension directly from the plan
following his or her resignation date.
MEMBER or OFFICER — A duly sworn police officer employed by the
employer.
PLAN — The Limerick Township Police Pension Plan.
PLAN ADMINISTRATOR — The individual(s) charged with supervising
the administration of the plan.
RESIGNATION DATE — The date specified in the participant's
irrevocable DROP notice which was approved by the employer on which
the member or participant shall resign from employment with the
employer at the end of the DROP participation period, which shall be
no more than 36 months from the commencement of the participant's
DROP participation period.[Amended 3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 385]
RETIREMENT DATE — The date specified in the participant's
irrevocable letter of resignation as the date on which the officer shall
retire and begin his/her DROP participation period.
SUBSIDIARY DROP ACCOUNT or DROP ACCOUNT — A separate
account created for the exclusive purpose of accepting monthly pension
benefits of a DROP participant while they are participating in the DROP
Program. The account balance shall be accounted for separately but
need not be physically segregate from other pension trust fund assets.
The DROP account will not have any interest compounded or credited,
except to the extent that the officer's account earns such interest up
to a maximum of 4.5%. If no interest is earned, no interest shall be
credited.
TOWNSHIP — Limerick Township.
B. Eligibility. Any officer who has reached his/her normal retirement date
based on age and service (the superannuation date as defined by the
pension plan) may elect to become a DROP participant on the first day
of the month coincident with or next following the attainment of the
requirements for receipt of normal retirement age and service (i.e.,
§ 29-11.7 LIMERICK CODE § 29-11.7
24:38
superannuation) pension benefits under the plan, which is a minimum
of 25 years of service and attaining at least the age of 50. In addition, in
order to be eligible to participate in the DROP, an officer must comply
with the following requirements:
(1) Letter of resignation. An officer electing to participate in the DROP
must provide to the employer a binding and irrevocable letter of
resignation from regular employment with the local government
that discloses the member's intent to retire and specifies the
member's retirement date. This letter of resignation must be
submitted to the employer at least 30 days prior to the date on
which the officer's DROP participation period is to commence.
(2) Written DROP election.
(a) An officer electing to participate in the DROP must complete
and execute a DROP election form provided by the employer.
The DROP election must be signed by the officer, notarized,
and submitted to the employer at least 30 days prior to the
date on which the officer's DROP participation period is to
commence, which shall be specified on the DROP election. The
DROP election shall include a notice to the employer by the
officer that the officer shall resign from employment with the
employer effective on his or her resignation date, which shall
be no more than 36 months from the commencement of the
participant's DROP participation period. Once approved by the
employer, an officer's resignation date shall be irrevocable. An
officer shall cease to work as a police officer on the officer's
resignation date, unless the employer terminates or honorably
discharges the officer prior to the resignation date. The DROP
election shall also: [Amended 3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 385]
[1] Detail or reference the DROP participant's rights and
obligations under the DROP (as stated in this document);
[2] Include an agreement and acknowledgement that the
DROP participant agrees to forgo:
[a] Active membership in the retirement system and plan;
[b] Any growth in the salary base used for calculating the
DROP participant's regular retirement benefit and any
additional growth in the DROP participant's monthly
retirement benefit;
[c] Any growth in the DROP participant's DROP
supplemental account, except any credited interest (in
accordance with the terms of the plan) between zero
and 4.5%;
§ 29-11.7 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-11.7
24:39
[d] Any additional benefit accrual for retirement
purposes, including but not limited to length of service
increments; and
(b) The written DROP election form shall also include an
acknowledgement by the DROP participant that he/she has
reviewed the DROP Plan and Program as well as this
agreement and that he/she is retiring and entering into the
DROP knowingly and voluntarily and that he/she agrees to
enter into a release of claims (provided separately and
attached hereto)20 that will be attached to the Written DROP
election. The form shall also include an acknowledgement by
the DROP that he/she shall be solely responsible for all tax
liability and any other fees or penalties that may be incurred as
a result of his/her participation in the DROP.
(3) Waiver and release. Each officer who seeks to become a DROP
participant must execute a waiver of claims and release (attached
hereto)21 before he or she may become a DROP participant. The
failure to execute this document will preclude the officer from
participating in the DROP Program.
C. Pension contributions. After an officer elects to participate in the DROP
Program by the execution of the DROP notice and his or her DROP
participation period commences, the officer shall not make any
required contributions to the plan during the DROP participation
period.
D. Accrual of non-pension benefits. After an officer elects to participate in
the DROP Program, all other terms and conditions of employment, as
set forth in the collective bargaining agreement between the employer
and the association, shall continue to apply during the DROP
participation period with the exception of those provisions relating to
the plan. The parties agree that a DROP participant shall be entitled to
the continued accrual during the DROP participation period of leave
time but shall not be entitled to the payout of any payments for unused
leave time during or at the end of the DROP participation period. At the
end of the DROP participation period, a DROP participant shall not be
entitled to any severance pay or other lump sum payment (except his or
her accrued DROP account).
E. Disability during DROP participation period.
(1) The employer, association, and all DROP participants recognize the
unique nature of the DROP Program and the benefits that it offers
to the DROP participant and the employer. Such benefits for the
employer, however, are based on the DROP participant being able
to work to provide the employer with the benefit of his or her
20.Editor's Note: Said form is available in the Township offices.
21.Editor's Note: Said form is available in the Township offices.
§ 29-11.7 LIMERICK CODE § 29-11.7
24:40
experience, as stated above. It is recognized that if the DROP
participant cannot work by providing police services for the
employer, the employer will suffer a significant burden and the
purpose and intent behind the DROP Program will not be fulfilled
to the detriment of the taxpayers of the employer and the employer.
(2) Accordingly, in light of those acknowledgements and concerns, if a
DROP participant becomes temporarily incapacitated during his or
her DROP participation period, the following shall apply:
(a) The DROP participant shall continue to participate in the
DROP Program as if fully employed. Such participant shall
receive disability benefits (including heart and lung benefits, if
eligible and such benefits are applicable) in the same amount
and under the same terms as disabled police officers that are
not participating in DROP except:
[1] If a DROP participant is still temporarily disabled and has
not returned to work as of his or her required resignation
date, such participant shall be required to resign on his or
her resignation date and after such date shall be a former
DROP participant who shall begin to receive directly the
same monthly pension benefit payment as calculated at
the beginning of the DROP participation period. Such
officer shall not be entitled to any other benefit, disability
payment or monthly disability pension benefit from the
plan or the Township, except that the normal retirement
benefit that was previously deposited into the DROP
account shall be paid directly to the former DROP
participant.
[2] If a participant becomes permanently disabled from
performing his or her full police duties during his or her
DROP participation period (whether due to a work-related
or non-work-related injury), the participant shall be
honorably discharged from employment after the injury
that prevents the DROP participant from performing full
police duties is deemed to be permanent.
[a] If the injury has been deemed to be work-related, the
DROP participant shall terminate employment and
resign from employment and begin to receive the
service-connected disability benefit under the plan to
the extent permitted by law. At such time, if a
disability benefit under the plan is legally payable, the
DROP participant's normal retirement benefit shall
cease in lieu of the disability benefit under the plan.
[b] Alternatively, if the injury is deemed to be non-workrelated,
the DROP participant shall terminate his or
her DROP Participation and resign from employment
§ 29-11.7 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-11.7
24:41
and begin to receive directly his or her normal
monthly pension benefit, as calculated at the
beginning of the DROP participation period, and
payment of his or her DROP account in accordance
with this agreement.
F. Death during DROP period. If a DROP participant dies during the DROP
participation period, his or her survivor(s) as defined by the plan or, in
lieu thereof, the participant's named beneficiary, shall be entitled to
receive benefits and the participant's DROP account, and shall be
handled according to the following provisions:
(1) If a DROP participant dies during his or her DROP participation
period and a killed-in-service death benefit is determined to be
payable in accordance with Act 51 of 2009 (which amended
Emergency and Law Enforcement Personnel Death Benefits Act by
creating a killed-in-service benefit applicable to municipal law
enforcement officers and repealed the killed-in-service benefit in
Act 600, as amended by Act 30 of 2002) to the DROP participant's
survivors, the participant's DROP election shall be revoked and the
DROP account shall be payable to survivor(s) as defined by the plan
or, in lieu thereof, the named beneficiary, of the deceased DROP
participant. At that time, the DROP participant's monthly
retirement benefit shall cease and there shall be no survivor's
benefit payable under the plan to the DROP participant's survivors.
(2) If death occurs during the DROP participation period but the killedin-
service death benefit under Act 51 of 2009 (as defined above) is
deemed to be not payable, the DROP participant's DROP election
shall be revoked, and the survivor(s) as defined by the plan or, in
lieu thereof, the participant's named beneficiary, shall be entitled to
a lump-sum payment of the DROP account balance and the
participant's survivor(s) as defined by the plan shall receive the
survivor's benefit, if any, in accordance with and as defined by the
plan.
G. Forfeiture of benefits. Notwithstanding an officer's participation in the
DROP Program, an officer or DROP participant who is convicted of or
pleads guilty to engaging in criminal misconduct which constitutes a
"crime related to public office or public employment," as that phrase is
defined in Pennsylvania's Pension Forfeiture Act, 43 P.S. §§ 1311 to
1314, shall forfeit his or her right to be a DROP participant and also
shall forfeit his or her right to receive a pension, including any amounts
currently deposited in the DROP account. In such a case, the member
shall only be entitled to receive the contributions, if any, made by the
member to the plan, without interest.
H. The monthly pension benefit calculation and limitation on pension
accrual. After the effective date of the DROP notice, the officer shall no
longer earn or accrue additional years of service for pension calculation
purposes under the plan. No benefit increases that may occur after a
§ 29-11.7 LIMERICK CODE § 29-11.7
24:42
DROP participant's commencement date, including bargained pension
enhancements, mandated pension enhancements through arbitration,
or pension enhancements mandated by law, will apply to the DROP
participant and shall not increase the DROP participant's frozen
pension under the plan, as calculated on the effective date of the
DROP participation period as stated in the DROP notice. Upon the
commencement date, the participant's monthly pension payment shall
be transferred into the participant's DROP account. The average
monthly compensation of the participant for pension calculation
purposes shall remain as it existed on the effective date of the DROP
participation period as stated in the DROP notice. Earnings or increases
in earnings thereafter shall not be recognized or used for the
calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the plan. The
pension benefit payable to the members shall increase only as a result
of cost-of-living adjustments, if applicable, that may be applicable and
in effect under the plan on the effective date of the member's
participation in the DROP Program or by applicable cost-of-living
adjustments specifically granted to DROP participants or retirees
thereafter.
I. Maximum participation. The maximum period of participation in the
DROP Program is 36 months. Once the maximum participation has been
achieved, the participant must terminate employment and separate
from service. [Amended 3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 385]
J. DROP participation termination.
(1) DROP participant's participation in a DROP shall end when the
DROP participant is separated from employment from or by the
employer during his or her DROP participation period for any
reason or when the DROP participant reaches his or her
resignation dates as stated in his or her DROP election form. A
DROP participant may change the DROP termination date to an
earlier date within the limitations of this agreement, which in no
event shall exceed 36 months. [Amended 3-6-2018 by Ord. No.
385]
(2) Upon termination of the DROP participation period, the balance of
the DROP account shall be paid to the terminating DROP
participant as stated in § 1114(d) of Act 44 and shall be subject to
any applicable taxes under applicable law and to any attachment
and assignment as stated in § 1114(e) of Act 44.
(3) A DROP participant shall be ineligible to re-enroll in the DROP
Program after his or her participation in the DROP is terminated
for any reason, even if the former DROP participant is re-employed
by the local government with renewed active membership in the
retirement system.
K. DROP pension payments. Upon entry into the DROP Program, a DROP
participant's service and average monthly compensation (as each is
§ 29-11.7 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-11.7
24:43
defined under the plan) will be frozen and his or her pension payment
will be calculated as if he or she retired and ceased employment with
the employer on the effective date of such officer's DROP participation
period as stated in the DROP notice. The monthly pension payment
shall be credited towards the participant's DROP account as stated
below.
L. Individual DROP account. The employer shall create a DROP account
which shall be a ledger account for each DROP participant. Such
account shall be accounted for separately but will not be physically
segregated from the other Plan assets. While employed and a DROP
participant, the DROP participant's monthly retirement benefit shall be
credited to the DROP account as stated above and the benefit
accumulation under the DROP shall be calculated and credited in
accordance with the policy set by the plan administrator. No interest
shall be credited to any DROP participant's account, except to the
extent that the officer's account earns such interest up to a maximum of
4.5%.
M. Distribution options.
(1) Commensurate with DROP Program participation, a participant
must make an election on forms designated by the employer of the
payout option(s) desired upon termination of the DROP period. This
election may be changed at any time before termination. The
distribution options are as follows:
(a) A lump-sum cash distribution.
(b) Rollover to another eligible retirement plan (as permitted by
law) or to an individual retirement account ("IRA").
(c) Any other method permitted by applicable law.
(2) The DROP participant shall be responsible and liable for all taxes
and other governmental fees, penalties and charges that may be
due as a result of the DROP participant's termination of the DROP
and receipt of the monies in his/her DROP account.
N. Beneficiary designation. Commensurate with DROP Program
participation, a participant must make an election, on forms designated
by the employer, of the beneficiary or beneficiaries he or she intends to
receive the balance of the participant's DROP account in the event of
the participant's death and there are no survivors as defined by the plan
before such balance has been distributed.
O. Amendment. Any amendments to the DROP Program shall be consistent
with the provisions covering deferred retirement option plans set forth
in any applicable collective bargaining agreement and shall be binding
upon all future DROP participants and upon all DROP participants who
have balances in their DROP accounts. The DROP Program may only be
amended by a written instrument, signed by an authorized
§ 29-11.7 LIMERICK CODE § 29-11.7
24:44
representative of the employer and the association, not by any oral
agreement or past practice.
P. Interpretation of provisions.
(1) This document shall be interpreted under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. An officer's election to participate
in the DROP Program shall in no way be construed as a limitation
on the employer's right to suspend or terminate an officer for just
cause under applicable law or to grant the officer an honorable
discharge based upon a physical or mental inability to perform his
or her duties. Nothing provided hereunder shall be construed as a
change to the parties' practice of calculating pensionable
compensation, and except for the ability to establish a DROP
account and participate in the DROP Program, nothing herein is
intended to create new pension benefits of any kind which did not
exist as of the date the DROP Program is adopted.
(2) Nothing provided hereunder shall guarantee any officer or DROP
participant a specific term of employment. All DROP participants
shall be subject to the same terms and conditions of employment
(except those relating to benefits under the plan and retiree
benefits), rules and regulations, and disciplinary procedures as
other officers and members who are not DROP participants.
Q. Cost to participants.
(1) The original costs for starting the DROP, as well as the costs of
administering the DROP Program as a whole will be paid by the
Township and/or the plan, as decided by the Township.
(2) Any costs incurred by an individual officer's DROP account will be
paid by the officer.
(3) Participants and all parties to this agreement agree that this DROP
Program must at all times be cost neutral. If it is determined at any
time that this DROP Program is not cost neutral, or that the DROP
Program increases the costs to the plan in any amount, the
association and the Township shall meet to discuss how the cost
will be funded. The two options to be discussed are limited to the
following:
(a) To the extent permitted under applicable law, the association
will make up the cost, through increased contributions; or
(b) If the association will not agree to the remedy stated above in
Subsection Q(3)(a), the DROP Program will be terminated and
removed from the plan and any future participation in the
DROP will cease. All then-current DROP participants shall
continue until their DROP participation period ends (i.e., the
resignation date).
§ 29-11.7 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-11.7
24:45
(4) No issue in this Subsection Q shall be subject to the grievance and
arbitration procedure contained in the collective bargaining
agreement between the Township and the association or as
outlined below in Subsection S.
R. Compliance with law.
(1) The employer and the association acknowledge and agree that the
provisions stated in this agreement are essential to their
agreement and to the continuation of this DROP Program. The
employer and the association further acknowledge and agree that
they believe that all of the provisions in this agreement are in
compliance with applicable law, including Act 44 and Act 51. If any
provision contained in this agreement and DROP Program is found
by a court of law or the Pennsylvania Department of the Auditor
General or any court of law to not be in compliance with applicable
law, including Act 44 or Act 51, the association and the employer
may meet to discuss ways to most efficiently implement any
changes necessary to bring this agreement and DROP Program into
compliance with applicable law and any agreement reached in
those discussions shall be binding on the employer, the association,
and any current and future DROP participants. However, if this
agreement or DROP Program, or any provision contained in this
agreement, is found by any court of law or the Pennsylvania
Department of the Auditor General or any other federal or
commonwealth governmental agency or department to not be in
compliance with applicable law, including Act 44 or Act 51, neither
the association nor the employer is under any obligation to bargain
over bringing the agreement and DROP Program into compliance
with such law and instead may terminate this agreement and the
DROP Program immediately.
(2) The parties acknowledge and agree that any DROP participant will
be bound by any changes to the DROP Program as a result of the
legislation referenced above, regardless of whether at the time
these changes are made such individual is a DROP participant or a
former DROP participant who is then currently receiving his/her
pension directly and has access to his/her DROP account. As a
result, the association, the employer, and all individuals who
become a DROP participant or former DROP participant recognize
that such who become a DROP participant or former DROP
participant do not have a vested or constitutional right in the
benefits provided under this DROP Program to the extent it is
subsequently changed by legislation or found to be unlawful as
stated above as referenced herein. No issue in this Subsection R
shall be subject to the grievance and arbitration procedure
contained in the collective bargaining agreement between the
Township and the association or as outlined below in Subsection S.
S. Arbitration applicable.
§ 29-11.7 LIMERICK CODE § 29-11.7
24:46
(1) The parties agree that, except as stated in Subsections Q and R
with respect to an issue relating to cost neutrality or legality of any
provision of this DROP or the DROP as a whole, an issue arising
under a provision of the DROP Program and/or this agreement shall
be subject to collective bargaining or Act 111 interest arbitration if,
after negotiation, the parties cannot come to an agreement on the
dispute.
(2) The course of action to resolve any association or association
member dispute arising from a provision of the DROP Program and/
or this agreement shall be the same as that contained within the
grievance procedures in the applicable collective bargaining
agreement.
§ 29-11.7 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-11.7
24:47

ARTICLE III
Nonuniformed Employees' Pension Plan
[Adopted 12-21-1976 by Ord. No. 73; amended in its entirety
3-12-2009 by Ord. No. 30722]
§ 29-12. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ACCRUED BENEFIT — Equals 2% of the member's average monthly
compensation multiplied by years of service as of the date of determination,
not to exceed 25 years.
AGE — Age at nearest birthday.
AVERAGE MONTHLY COMPENSATION — The average of a member's
monthly compensation over the last 60 months of employment or total
months of employment, if member has less than 60 months of service.
COMPENSATION —
EMPLOYER — Limerick Township, Montgomery County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
FUND — Limerick Township Non-Uniformed Employees Pension Plan Trust
Fund.
MEMBERS — All municipality employees who meet the requirements set
forth in § 29-15 of this article. The masculine pronoun will include the
feminine.
Any earnings reportable as W-2 wages for federal income tax purposes,
plus elective contributions, for the calendar year ending with or within
the plan year. However, compensation shall not include elective
contributions or amounts excludable from the employee's gross income
and contributed by the employer, at the employee's election to:
(1) Cafeteria Plan (Section 125).
(2) Deferred Compensation Plan (Section 457).
A.
Exclusions from compensation include:
Any earnings reportable as W-2 wages that are payable following
the termination of employment pursuant to a severance agreement.
(1)
(2) Bonuses and other nonrecurring compensation.
(3) Educational assistance payments.
Any amounts paid to an individual who waives his or her right to
participate in the Township's core health care, dental, vision and/or
prescription drug programs.
(4)
B.
22.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2009.
§ 29-12 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-12
24:49
MUNICIPALITY — Limerick Township of Montgomery County,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PLAN — Limerick Township Non-Uniformed Employees Pension Plan. The
plan's fiscal year is the calendar year.
TOWNSHIP — Limerick Township, Montgomery County, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
TRUSTEE — Limerick Township Board of Supervisors or its designee.
YEARS OF SERVICE — The total of an employee's service, expressed as
whole years and completed months (to three decimal places) on the basis
that 12 months equals one year.
§ 29-13. Funding of pensions.
This plan is to be funded and maintained by any of the following methods,
or combination of each:
§ 29-14. Administration.
A. General fund: contributions from the general fund of Limerick
Township which may be required after appropriate approval of the
Township Supervisors.
B. Member contributions.
C. State aid received pursuant to the Municipal Pension Plan Funding
Standard and Recovery Act (Act 205).23
D. Gifts, grants, devises or bequests. The sums which may be received by
the Township in the form of gifts, grants, devises or bequests may, to
the extent authorized by law, be contributed to such fund so long as
prior approval of the Township Supervisors is obtained.
A. Pension Committee.
(1) The general administration and management of the plan shall be
under the direction of a Pension Committee as appointed by the
Limerick Township Board of Supervisors. The Committee shall
consist of two duly appointed Township representatives and one
Non-Uniformed Pension Plan member.
(2) The Pension Committee shall have all powers necessary to enable it
properly to carry out its duties, including, but not limited to, the
power to construe the provisions of the fund, to direct the
investment advisor, to determine all questions relating to eligibility
of members and to authorize all disbursements for benefits to
members. The decisions of the Pension Committee on all matters
within the scope of its authority shall be final, subject to approval of
the Board of Supervisors.
23.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 29-12 LIMERICK CODE § 29-14
24:50
§ 29-15. Eligibility.
B. Trustee.
(1) The fund shall be under the direction of a Trustee designated by
resolution of the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors. The
Trustees shall have full responsibility for administration of the
program established hereunder and shall hold, invest, reinvest and
distribute all funds and other property received pursuant hereto in
trust for the purposes of this article. The Trustees may receive, at
any time, gifts, grants, devises, or bequests to the pension fund of
any money or property, real, personal or mixed, to be held by them
in trust for the benefit of this fund and in accordance with the
provisions hereof. The Trustees shall be subject to such rules and
regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the governing
body of this Township by ordinance or resolution.
(2) The Trustees shall have full power and authority by a majority
action of its members either directly or through their designated
representatives to do all acts, execute, acknowledge and deliver all
instruments, and to exercise for the sole benefit of the participants
hereunder any and all powers and discretions necessary to
implement and effectuate the purposes of this article, including for
purposes of illustration, but not limited to, any of the following:
(a) To hold, invest and reinvest all funds received pursuant to this
article and such legal investments as may be authorized as
legal investments under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(b) To retain any property which may at any time become an asset
of the fund, as long as said Trustees may deem it advisable;
and
(c) To make distribution of the monies in the fund, in accordance
with the terms of this article.
C. The expense of administering this pension fund, including
compensation of any actuary, any custodian of the fund, and any other
charges or expenses related thereto, exclusive of the payment of
pensions, may be paid by the Township or by the pension fund as
determined by the governing body of the Township.
A. Each full-time non-uniformed municipal employee (regularly working
not less than 35 hours per week during the calendar year) employed by
the employer is eligible to participate and shall be a member in the
Limerick Township Non-Uniformed Employees' Pension Plan and Fund
as of the date of hire. Notwithstanding the foregoing, former employees
of the Limerick Township Municipal Authority that were hired by the
employer on September 2, 2008, and full-time nonuniformed municipal
employees hired or rehired by the employer on or after January 1, 2009,
§ 29-14 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-15
24:51
§ 29-16. Normal retirement.
§ 29-17. Normal retirement benefit.
are not eligible to participate in or be a member of the Limerick
Township Non-Uniformed Employees' Pension Plan and Fund and
instead may be eligible to participate in the Limerick Township
Retirement Savings Plan.24
B. A Member shall retain membership status until he or she separates
from service. Any Member who separates from service shall cease to be
a Member.
C. For the purpose of this section, "service" shall mean the period of an
employee's total employment by the employer. The following types of
absence shall not break continuity and the time elapsed shall be
included in computing length of service:
(1) Temporary leaves of absence or layoff, which shall, if not otherwise
stated, expire in six months unless sooner renewed;
(2) Absence during which regular remuneration is paid;
(3) Absence for military service under leave granted by the employer
or when required by law, provided the absent employee returns to
service with the employer within 90 days of his or her release from
active military duty or any longer period during which his or her
right to reemployment is protected by law. For the purpose of this
section, employees in similar circumstances shall be similarly
treated.
A. The benefits from the fund shall be payable to members who have
served in the Township in a full-time capacity and who meet the
following requirements, after which the Member may retire from
service with the employer. Benefits commence on the first day of the
month coincident with or next following actual retirement.
B. "Normal retirement date" shall mean the first day of the month
coincident with or next following the attainment of the 65th birthday.
A. The basis for determining the amount of monthly pension to members
retiring under § 29-16 shall be 2% of average monthly compensation
multiplied by the number of years of service up to a maximum of 25
such years multiplied by the vested percentage.
B. The normal form of annuity under this plan is a ten-year certain and
continuous annuity. However, a Member may elect to receive benefits in
a form different from the normally prescribed annuity form. Any such
alternative form must be the actuarial equivalent of the normal form of
annuity. Alternative options available include:
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 29, Art. IV, Retirement Savings Plan.
§ 29-15 LIMERICK CODE § 29-17
24:52
§ 29-18. Early retirement.
A Member who has attained his or her 55th birthday may retire at his or her
own election. The benefit payable at early retirement shall be the normal
retirement benefit reduced by 6 2/3% for each year (or portion thereof) up
to five years and 3 1/3% for years (or portion thereof) between five and
10 years for benefit payments commencing prior to the member's 65th
birthday.
§ 29-19. Termination benefits and vesting.
§ 29-20. Death benefits.
(1) A lifetime annuity.
(2) A joint and fifty-percent survivor annuity, whereby the annuity is
continued to the Member's spouse after the death of the retired
Member as 50% of the annuity being paid while the Member
survived.
(3) Any other alternative form requested by the Member, which is
approved by the employer.
C. Any time a Member selects to receive monthly benefits which do not
include joint and fifty-percent survivor benefits for a spouse, the spouse
must sign a waiver approving the option.
A. A Member shall become vested in accordance with the following
schedule:
Completed Years of Service Vested %
Less than 2 0%
2 but less than 3 20%
3 but less than 4 40%
4 but less than 5 60%
5 but less than 6 80%
6 or more 100%
B. Upon termination of employment, a vested member shall be eligible to
receive his or her monthly vested accrued benefit payable on his or her
normal retirement date. However, if the actuarially equivalent lumpsum
value of the benefit is $5,000 or less, the benefit may be paid as a
lump sum.
C. However, any Member who separates from service prior to his or her
normal retirement date for any reason other than death or early
retirement shall receive a complete refund of the total amount of his or
her member contributions, if any, without interest, if such refund is
greater in value than the actuarial equivalent of the accrued benefit.
§ 29-17 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-20
24:53
§ 29-21. Compliance with Internal Revenue Code.
The plan is intended to be tax-qualified under the applicable provisions
of Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the
"Code"), and shall be construed and applied in a manner consistent with
such intent. The plan and its trust fund are for the exclusive benefit of plan
members and their beneficiaries. Refer to Attachment "A" for requirements
of the Code.25
§ 29-22. Transfer or assignment.
The pension payments herein provided for shall not be subject to
attachment, execution, levy, garnishment or other legal process, and shall
be payable only to the Member or his or her designated beneficiary. No
member or his or her beneficiary shall have any right to alienate, encumber
or assign any assets of the fund held by the Trustees on his or her behalf, or
any of the benefits of payments or proceeds of any contract or agreement
purchased or acquired by the Township hereunder.
§ 29-23. When effective, repealer.
This article shall become effective five days from the date of adoption by the
Board of Supervisors. All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, inconsistent
with the provision of this article are hereby repealed insofar as they are
inconsistent with the article, except for any ordinance provisions mandated
by the Internal Revenue Service.
A. The preretirement death benefit is payable to spouse upon death of a
member while fully or partially vested. Benefits begin at the later of the
date of death or the date the participant would have reached age 55.
The amount of the benefit is equal to the amount that would have been
paid had the participant terminated employment on his or her date of
death and had retired with a joint and fifty-percent survivor annuity,
which is actuarially equivalent to the accrued benefit.
B. The postretirement death benefit is determined by the form of annuity
in effect.
25.Editor's Note: Said attachment is on file in the Township offices.
§ 29-20 LIMERICK CODE § 29-23
24:54
ARTICLE IV
Retirement Savings Plan
[Adopted 3-12-2009 by Ord. No. 306]
§ 29-24. Ratification of plan.
A defined contribution retirement plan, entitled the Limerick Township
Retirement Savings Plan (the "plan"), for the former employees of the
Limerick Township Municipal Authority hired by Limerick Township (the
"Township") on September 2, 2008, and the full-time non-uniformed
employees of the Township hired on or after January 1, 2009, is hereby
ratified and approved and the same is incorporated herein by reference to
the same. A copy of the plan is attached to this article in substantially final
form and shall remain on file in the Township office.
§ 29-25. Effective date.
This article shall become effective retroactively to January 1, 2009.
§ 29-26. Funding.
§ 29-27. Administration.
A. This plan is to be funded and maintained by any of the following
methods, or a combination of each:
(1) Contributions from the general fund of the Township which may be
required after appropriate approval of the Board of Supervisors;
(2) State aid received pursuant to the Municipal Pension Plan Funding
Standard and Recovery Act (Act 205 of 1984);26
(3) The sums which may be received by the Township in the form of
gifts, grants, devises or bequests may, to the extent authorized by
law, be contributed to such plan so long as prior approval of the
Board of Supervisors is obtained; and
(4) Any other sums received or contributed to the Board of Supervisors
to the extent authorized by law and with prior approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
B. The percentage of compensation eligible for a discretionary
contribution made by the Township shall be designated by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors annually.
A. Plan administrator. The Township shall be the administrator of the plan.
B. Pension Committee.
26.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 29-24 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-27
24:55
(1) The general administration and management of the plan shall be
under the direction of a Pension Committee as appointed by the
Board of Supervisors. The Committee shall consist of at least two
duly appointed Township representatives and one Non-Uniformed
Plan member.
(2) The Pension Committee shall have all powers necessary to enable it
to properly carry out its duties, including, but not limited to, the
power to construe the provisions of the plan, to direct the
investment advisor, to determine all questions relating to eligibility
of participants, to authorize benefit disbursements to participants
and to delegate its authority as it deems appropriate. The decisions
of the Pension Committee on all matters within the scope of its
authority shall be final, subject to approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
C. Trustee.
(1) The plan shall be under the direction of a Trustee(s) designated by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The Trustee(s) shall have
full responsibility for administration of the plan established
hereunder and shall hold, invest, reinvest and distribute all funds
and other property received pursuant hereto in trust for the
purposes of this article. The Trustee(s) may receive, at any time,
gifts, grants, devises, or bequests of any money or property, real,
personal or mixed, to be held by them in trust for the benefit of this
plan and in accordance with the provisions hereof. The Trustee(s)
shall be subject to such rules and regulations as may from time to
time be adopted by the governing body of this Township by
ordinance or resolution.
(2) The Trustee(s) shall have full power and authority by a majority
action of its members, either directly or through their designated
representatives, to do all acts, execute, acknowledge and deliver all
instruments, and to exercise for the sole benefit of the participants
hereunder any and all powers and discretions necessary to
implement and effectuate the purposes of this article, including for
purposes of illustration, but not limited to any of the following:
(a) To hold, invest and reinvest all funds received pursuant to this
article and such legal investments as may be authorized as
legal investments under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania;
(b) To retain any property which may at any time become an asset
of the plan, as long as said Trustees may deem it advisable; and
(c) To make distribution of the monies in the plan, in accordance
with the terms of this article.
D. The expense of administering this plan, including compensation of any
actuary, any custodian of the plan, and any other charges or expenses
§ 29-27 LIMERICK CODE § 29-27
24:56
related thereto, exclusive of the payment of benefits, may be paid by
the Township or by the plan as determined by the governing body of the
Township.
§ 29-27 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 29-27
24:57
Chapter 31
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
155.
Zoning — See Ch. 184.
§ 31-1. Creation and composition. [Amended 4-22-2014 by Ord. No.
350]
There is hereby created and established a Township Planning Commission,
to consist of seven members to be appointed by the Board of Supervisors of
Limerick Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 31-2. Terms. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
The terms of said members of the Commission shall be for terms of four
years.
§ 31-3. Powers and duties. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
Said Commission members shall exercise the powers and authorities
granted under and by virtue of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805), 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
Chapter 34
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Plan — See Ch. 29, Art. II.
§ 29-27 LIMERICK CODE § 31-3
24:58
ARTICLE I
Code of Conduct
[Adopted 7-3-1973 by Ord. No. 50]
§ 34-1. Adoption and filing. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
There is hereby adopted by the Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township
a code of conduct and disciplinary standards for police officers, setting forth
rules and regulations for the administration of conduct and disciplinary
procedures of police officers, creating disciplinary standards and a standard
table of punishment and establishing departmental disciplinary procedures,
hereinafter known as the "Limerick Township Police Code of Conduct," of
which not less than three copies have been and now are filed in the office of
the Township Secretary, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out at length herein, and, from the date on which this article
shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the conduct
and disciplinary procedures of all police officers of Limerick Township.
§ 34-2. Contents.
There is hereby established a code of conduct for police officers, which
shall consist of a manual of rules and regulations containing definitions,
command and supervisory responsibilities and authority, rules and
regulations for the conduct of all members, departmental discipline
procedures and a standards table of punishment.
§ 34-3. Interpretation.
Nothing in this article or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court or any rights
acquired or liability incurred nor any cause or causes of action accrued or
existing under any act or ordinance repealed hereby, nor shall any right or
remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
§ 34-1 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 34-3
24:59

ARTICLE II
Mutual Assistance Agreement With Lower Pottsgrove and New
Hanover Townships
[Adopted 9-6-1977 by Ord. No. 75]
§ 34-4. Agreement authorized; implementation.
The Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township, Montgomery County, by
and through the Chairman and Secretary, is hereby authorized and
empowered, pursuant to the terms and provisions of the General Municipal
Law and the Second Class Township Code as established in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to enter into a written agreement with
Lower Pottsgrove Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, and New
Hanover Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, for the purpose of
providing additional police protection for the citizens of Limerick Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, in accordance with the proposed
agreement form attached hereto and marked "Exhibit A,"27 the terms and
provisions of which are incorporated herein by reference and are intended
to comply with the requirements of Section 7 of Act No. 180 of 1972, 53 P.S.
§ 487.28 Any amendments to said agreement and/or ordinance relative to the
same, whenever agreed upon between the respective municipalities, shall
be consistent with the requirements of the General Municipal Law and are
hereby authorized and shall be binding upon the respective municipalities
to the same extent and with the same effect as if such amendments had
been a part of the original agreement attached hereto as Exhibit A. The
governmental police action of the foregoing municipalities prior to the
effective date of this article is hereby ratified and confirmed by this article
as if the same was authorized by ordinance.
§ 34-5. Contents.
The condition of this agreement, the duration of the term of this agreement,
the purpose and objectives of the agreement, the manner and extent of
financing the agreement, the organizational structure necessary to
implement the agreement and the manner in which property, real or
personal, shall be acquired, managed or disposed of shall be the same
as those set forth in the proposed written agreement attached hereto as
Exhibit A and shall be incorporated herein by reference to the same extent
as if specifically set forth herein.
27.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is attached to the original copy of Ord. No. 75 and on file in the
office of the Township Secretary.
28.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 487 was repealed December 19, 1996, by P.L. 1158, No. 177. See
now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 34-4 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 34-5
24:61

ARTICLE III
Mutual Assistance Agreement With East Coventry Township
[Adopted 2-21-1978 by Ord. No. 77]
§ 34-6. Agreement authorized; implementation.
The Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township, Montgomery County, by
and through the Chairman and Secretary, is hereby authorized and
empowered, pursuant to the terms and provisions of the General Municipal
Law and the Second Class Township Code as established in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to enter into a written agreement with
East Coventry Township, Chester County, Pennsylvania, for the purpose of
providing additional police protection for the citizens of Limerick Township,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, in accordance with the proposed
agreement form attached hereto and marked "Exhibit A,"29 the terms and
provisions of which are incorporated herein by reference and are intended
to comply with the requirements of Section 7 of Act No. 180 of 1972, 53 P.S.
§ 487.30 Any amendments to said agreement and/or ordinance relative to the
same, whenever agreed upon between the respective municipalities, shall
be consistent with the requirements of the General Municipal Law and are
hereby authorized and shall be binding upon the respective municipalities
to the same extent and with the same effect as if such amendments had
been a part of the original agreement attached hereto as Exhibit A. The
governmental police action of the foregoing municipalities prior to the
effective date of this article is hereby ratified and confirmed by this article
as if the same was authorized by ordinance.
§ 34-7. Contents.
The condition of this agreement, the duration of the term of this agreement,
the purpose and objective of the agreement, the manner and extent of
financing the agreement, the organizational structure necessary to
implement the agreement and the manner in which property, real or
personal, shall be acquired, managed or disposed of shall be the same
as those set forth in the proposed written agreement attached hereto as
Exhibit A and shall be incorporated herein by reference to the same extent
as if specifically set forth herein.
29.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is attached to the original copy of Ord. No. 77 and on file in the
office of the Township Secretary.
30.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 487 was repealed December 19, 1996, by P.L. 1158, No. 177. See
now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 34-6 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 34-7
24:63

ARTICLE IV
Auxiliary Police Officers
[Added 10-25-2007 by Ord. No. 285]
§ 34-8. Authority and duties of auxiliary police officer; policies and
procedures.
A. The auxiliary police officer is authorized to supplement the staffing of
the Police Department at those times when traffic control is required to
enhance public safety. Auxiliary police are subject to the policies and
procedures of the Township and Police Department.
B. Auxiliary police employees are herein committed to the delivery of
service to the general public and the citizens located within the
Township, in the most effective and harmonious manner possible, and
each is to be governed by Department's core values of honor, integrity
and professionalism.
C. The policies and procedures of the auxiliary police officer shall be done
in accordance with the attached general order and as amended by the
Chief of Police when he deems necessary in the future.31
31.Editor's Note: Said general order is on file in the Township offices.
§ 34-8 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 34-8
24:65

ARTICLE V
Warrantless Arrests
[Adopted 2-21-2012 by Ord. No. 329]
§ 34-9. Promulgation of warrantless arrest guidelines required.
Pursuant to § 8902, Chapter 89, Title 42, of the Pennsylvania Consolidated
Statutes,32 and any subsequent amendments thereto, the Limerick
Township Police Department shall be required to draft and adopt guidelines
to be followed by police officers which prescribe policies and procedures for
effecting a warrantless arrest pursuant to § 34-10 herein.
§ 34-10. Authorization to effect warrantless arrest for offenses.
The Limerick Township Police shall be authorized to effect a warrantless
arrest for any individual committing any of the following offenses under
Title 18 (relating to crimes and offenses), and any subsequent amendments
thereto, when such conduct constitutes a summary offense and such
ongoing conduct imperils the personal security of another person or
endangers public or private property:
§ 34-11. Arrest procedures.
Any arrest made pursuant to the authority granted under this Article V
entitled "Warrantless Arrests" shall proceed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, and any subsequent
amendments thereto, §§ 440 and 441, Chapter 4, Part D(2), "Procedures in
Summary Cases: Arrests Without a Warrant."33
A. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503 (relating to disorderly conduct);
B. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5505 (relating to public drunkenness);
C. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5507 (relating to obstructing highways and other public
passages);
D. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308 (relating to the purchase, consumption, possession,
or transportation of liquor or malt or brewed beverages).
32.Editor's Note: See 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 8902.
33.Editor's Note: See 234 Pa. Code §§ 440 and 441.
§ 34-9 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 34-11
24:67

ARTICLE VI
Emergency Response Team
[Adopted 1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 375]
§ 34-12. Authorization of intergovernmental cooperation
agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township, Montgomery County, by
and through the Chairman and Secretary, is hereby authorized and
empowered, pursuant to the terms and provisions of the General Municipal
Law and the Second Class Township Code as established in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to enter into an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement establishing a police emergency response team
to be known as "Montgomery County S.W.A.T. - Western Region" for the
purpose of providing additional police protection for the citizens of Limerick
Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, in accordance with the
proposed agreement form attached hereto and marked "Exhibit A,"34 the
terms and provisions of which are incorporated herein by reference and
are intended to comply with the requirements of 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et
seq. Any amendments to said agreement and/or ordinance relative to the
same, whenever agreed upon between the respective municipalities, shall
be consistent with the requirements of the General Municipal Law and are
hereby authorized and shall be binding upon the respective municipalities
to the same extent and with the same effect as if such amendments had
been a part of the original agreement attached hereto as Exhibit A. The
governmental police action of the foregoing municipalities prior to the
effective date of this article is hereby ratified and confirmed by this article
as if the same was authorized by ordinance.
§ 34-13. Contents.
The condition of this agreement, the duration of the term of this agreement,
the purpose and objectives of the agreement, the manner and extent of
financing the agreement, the organizational structure necessary to
implement the agreement and the manner in which property, real or
personal, shall be acquired, managed or disposed of shall be the same
as those set forth in the proposed written agreement attached hereto as
Exhibit A35 and shall be incorporated herein by reference to the same extent
as if specifically set forth herein.
34.Editor’s Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
35.Editor’s Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 34-12 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 34-13
24:69
Chapter 40
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 29.
§ 40-1. Annual salary of Supervisors. [Amended 8-16-2007 by Ord.
No. 283]
§ 40-2. Manner of payment.
Such compensation shall be paid in monthly installments.
§ 40-3. Township-paid insurance plans of Supervisors. [Added
8-16-2007 by Ord. No. 283]
Supervisors, while in office, may be eligible for inclusion in Township-paid
insurance plans as follows:
A. Pursuant to Article VI, Section 606, of the Second Class Township
Code,36 Supervisors may receive as compensation, in an amount
established by ordinance, not in excess of $3,250 in their next elected
term since the current population, according to the 2000 Census, is
13,534:
Township Population
Annual Maximum
Compensation
10,000 to 14,999 $3,250
B. Any change in salary, compensation or emoluments of the elected office
becomes effective at the beginning of the next elected term of the
supervisor.37
A. Supervisors, whether or not they are employed by the Township, and
their dependents are eligible for inclusion in group life, health,
hospitalization, medical service and accident insurance plans paid in
whole or in part by the Township. The insurance shall be uniformly
applicable to those covered and shall not give eligibility preference to
or improperly discriminate in favor of Supervisors. No policy of group
life insurance shall contain any provision for a cash surrender value,
loan value or any other benefit beyond the face amount of insurance.
36.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65606.
37.Editor's Note: The salaries and compensation of other Township officers and employees
are set by the Board of Supervisors. Such information is available in the office of the
Township Secretary.
§ 34-13 LIMERICK CODE § 40-3
24:70
Chapter 44
TAX COLLECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 160.
§ 44-1. Maintenance of account.
The Tax Collector shall maintain a separate checking account into which all
Township tax receipts shall be deposited and from which all Township tax
payments shall be made. No other funds shall be deposited to this separate
account, which shall be clearly labeled "Limerick Township Tax Escrow
Account."
§ 44-2. Utilization of separate accounts.
A separate Township tax escrow account shall be utilized for each tax year,
and the tax receipts for any given tax year shall be deposited only to the
appropriate tax escrow account.
§ 44-3. Deposit of taxes.
The Tax Collector shall deposit all taxes collected to a municipal savings
account, which shall be established for this purpose by the Township
Manager, within 24 hours of the close of each day's business and provide
the Treasurer of the Township with a written statement of said deposit.
§ 44-4. Statement required.
The Tax Collector shall, on or before the 10th day of each month, make a
true, verified statement in writing to the Secretary of the Township for all
taxes collected during the previous month, giving the names of the taxable,
the amount collected from each, along with discounts granted or penalties
applied, if any, and the total amount of taxes received, discounts granted
and penalties applied.
§ 44-5. Annual settlement.
The Tax Collector shall make annual settlement of his tax duplicate at the
first regularly scheduled meeting of the Township Board of Supervisors in
B. Inclusion of Supervisors in Township-paid insurance plans, as
authorized under the Second Class Township Code, Article VI, Section
606(c),38 shall not be implemented with regard to any Supervisor until
the beginning of the next elected term of that Supervisor.
38.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65606(c).
§ 40-3 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 44-5
24:71
the month of June in the year following the one for which the taxes were
levied.
§ 44-6. Certifications. [Added 1-18-1994 by Ord. No. 161; amended
4-22-2014 by Ord. No. 346]
The Limerick Township Tax Collector is hereby authorized to charge a fee
per tax parcel for each and every tax certification requested, plus costs
of expedited service, including but not limited to faxing costs and express
and overnight mailing costs. The Township shall impose and amend the tax
certification fee by a resolution duly authorized and enacted by the Limerick
Township Board of Supervisors as may be amended from time to time. A
copy of such resolution setting the tax certification fee shall be available to
the public at the Limerick Township Municipal Administrative Building.
§ 44-7. Duplicate tax bills. [Added 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 384]
The Limerick Township Tax Collector is hereby authorized to charge a fee
per tax parcel for each and every duplicate tax bill requested, plus costs
of expedited service, including but not limited to faxing costs and express
and overnight mailing costs. The Township shall impose and amend the
duplicate tax bill fee by a resolution duly authorized and enacted by the
Limerick Township Board of Supervisors as may be amended from time to
time. A copy of such resolution setting the duplicate tax bill fee shall be
available to the public at the Limerick Township Municipal Administrative
Building.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 52
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 34. Outdoor burning — See Ch. 66.
§ 52-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall
have the following meanings given herein, unless the context
specifically and clearly indicates otherwise:
ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER — Any person, firm or corporation
who sells or leases and/or installs automatic protection devices.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A service whereby trained employees in
attendance at all times receive prerecorded voice messages from
automatic protection devices reporting an emergency at a stated
§ 44-5 LIMERICK CODE § 52-1
24:72
location and who have the duty to relay immediately by live voice only
such emergency message over a designated or direct trunk line to the
Police and/or Fire Department.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to
the interior or exterior of a building and which emits a warning signal
audible outside the building, designed to attract attention activated by
a criminal act or other emergency requiring police and/or fire personnel
to respond.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE — An electrically operated
instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which
automatically transmits a prerecorded voice alarm over a regular
telephone line by direct or indirect connection to the Police and/or Fire
Department, upon receipt of a stimulus from a sensory apparatus that
has detected a physical force or condition inherently characteristic of a
fire or intrusion.
CENTRAL STATION PROTECTIVE SYSTEM — A protective system, or
group of such systems, operated privately for customers by a person,
firm or corporation which maintains supervisors and accepts recorded
messages from automatic protection devices at a central station which
has trained operators and guards in attendance at all times that have
the duty to take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message,
including the relaying of messages by designated or primary trunk line
to the Police or Fire Department.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of Limerick Township.
DESIGNATED TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the Police
and/or Fire Department that is for the primary purpose of handling
emergency messages which originate from automatic protection
devices and are transmitted directly or indirectly through an
intermediary.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal activated by an automatic protection
device, any audible alarm or any other kind of direct or indirect signal
given the Police and/or Fire Department to which police and/or firemen
respond, which is not the result of a fire, burglary, robbery or similar
emergency.
FIRE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The Montgomery County
Communications Center servicing the Limerick Fire Company and/or
the Linfield Fire Company.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Limerick Fire Company and/or the Linfield
Fire Company.
INTERMEDIARY — A central station protective system or an answering
service as herein defined.
KEY — To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a
message, either directly or indirectly, by an automatic protection
device.
§ 52-1 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 52-1
24:73
§ 52-2. Permit required.
§ 52-3. Application for permit.
PERSON — Any person or persons, male or female, corporation,
partnership, association, company, individual, owner, occupant, lessee
or any agency, organization or other entity recognized by law as the
subject of rights and duties.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Township of
Limerick.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the Police and/
or Fire Department that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls
on a person-to-person basis, which line is identified by a specific listing
among the white pages in the telephone directory issued by Bell of
Pennsylvania Telephone Company.
SECONDARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the Police
and/or Fire Department that is for the purpose of handling
administration calls on a person-to-person basis, which line is identified
by a specific listing among the white pages in the telephone directory
issued by Bell of Pennsylvania Telephone Company.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Township of Limerick.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Limerick.
B. Word usage.
(1) Words used in the singular include the plural; words in the plural
include the singular; and words used in the present tense include
the future.
(2) The word "shall" is always mandatory.
A. Henceforth, any person who desires to install an answering service,
audible alarm, automatic protection device and/or central station
protective system within the Township shall, prior thereto, be required
to file with the Township an application for a permit, which shall be
accompanied by a filing fee of $10, and thereafter shall receive a permit
therefor.
B. In the case of those persons who have previously installed an answering
service, audible alarm, automatic protection device and/or central
station protective system within the Township, said persons shall,
within 120 days of the effective date of this chapter, be required to file
with the Township an application for permit.
A. The application for permit referred to shall require the applicant to set
forth the following:
§ 52-1 LIMERICK CODE § 52-3
24:74
§ 52-4. Consent to inspection. [Amended 9-14-2006 by Ord. No.
267]
As a condition of installing and maintaining an answering service, audible
alarm, automatic protection device and/or central station protective system,
the person or persons owning and using same shall execute a consent which
will authorize the appropriate Township Building Official, Chief of Police
and Fire Inspector to enter upon the subject premises, at such reasonable
times and upon reasonable notice, to inspect the installation and operation
of such equipment.
§ 52-5. Timing mechanisms required for audible alarms.
Henceforth, persons must equip audible alarms with a timing mechanism
that will disengage the audible alarm after a maximum period of 15 minutes.
Audible alarms without such a timing mechanism shall be unlawful in the
Township and must be disconnected by the persons within 120 days from
the effective date of this chapter.
§ 52-6. Direct keying.
(1) The designation of the type of equipment which is desired to be
installed, i.e., answering service, audible alarm, automatic
protection device, central station protective system, etc.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting
installation of such equipment.
(3) The address where the equipment is to be installed and the
telephone number of that address.
(4) The name, address and telephone number of a central station
protective system or any other person or firm who is authorized to
respond to an emergency and gain access to the address where the
device is installed.
(5) The name and telephone number of the person who is responsible
for maintenance and repair of the automatic protection device.
B. Application for permit to be filed in triplicate. The application for permit
required above is to be filed in triplicate. one copy shall be retained by
the Township, one copy shall be on file with the Police Department, and
one copy shall be on file with each of the fire companies.
C. All information furnished in the application for permit shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the use only of the designated personnel of
the Township Police Department and Fire Department.
A. No automatic protection device installed after the effective date of this
chapter shall be keyed to a primary and/or secondary trunk line.
§ 52-3 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 52-6
24:75
§ 52-7. Indirect keying.
§ 52-8. Current list of installations required.
B. After the effective date of this chapter, installations of all automatic
protection devices that transmit recorded messages directly to the
Police and/or Fire Department shall be keyed to a designated trunk line.
C. Within 120 days from the effective date of this chapter, existing
automatic protection devices in the Township shall be disconnected
from primary and/or secondary trunk lines.
D. Automatic protection devices disconnected as provided in Subsection C
above may be keyed to a designated trunk line.
A. Any person who has an automatic protection device in the Township
may arrange to have such device keyed to an intermediary authorized
to relay emergency messages to the Police and/or Fire Department.
B. The relay of messages by authorized intermediaries shall be over a
designated trunk line.
C. Automatic protection devices keyed to an authorized intermediary may
also be keyed to another telephone which the owner or lessee of the
automatic protection device has available to himself, or his
representative, at some other location.
A. Within 120 days from the effective date of this chapter, every alarm
equipment supplier who has keyed an automatic protection device in
the Township to the designated trunk line shall furnish to the Chief of
Police and to the Fire Inspector a current list of such installations,
which shall include: [Amended 9-14-2006 by Ord. No. 267]
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person supplied
with such equipment.
(2) The address where the device is installed and the telephone
number of that address.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of a central station
protective system or any other person or firm who is authorized to
respond to an emergency and gain access to the address where the
device is installed.
(4) The name and telephone number of any person, if any, other than
the alarm equipment supplier who is responsible for maintenance
and repair of the automatic protection device.
B. By the fifth working day of each month following the submission of the
initial list, every alarm equipment supplier shall furnish the Police and
Fire Departments with a supplemental list of any additional
installations he has keyed to the designated trunk lines, along with any
corrections to or deletions from lists previously furnished. An alarm
§ 52-6 LIMERICK CODE § 52-8
24:76
§ 52-9. Operational requirements.
Automatic protection devices installed in the Township that are keyed to
designated trunk lines shall meet the following requirements:
§ 52-10. Technical information.
equipment supplier who enters into the business after the effective date
of this chapter shall furnish a list containing the information specified
in Subsection C by the fifth working day of the month following a first
installation and shall, thereafter, furnish supplemental lists as required
by this subsection.
C. All information furnished pursuant to these subsections shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the use of the designated personnel of the
Township Police Department and Fire Department only.
A. The type and intent of recorded messages must be intelligible and in a
format approved prior to installation by the Chief of Police or the Fire
Chief, as appropriate for the type of emergency. A sample of the content
format is available from the office of the Chief of Police or the Fire
Chief, upon request.
B. No more than one call shall be made over a designated trunk line to the
Police and/or Fire Department as a result of a single activation of the
automatic protection device.
C. The time for transmitting each recorded message shall not exceed 15
seconds.
D. Recorded messages may be repeated during one call, but the interval
between each recorded message shall be no less than four seconds and
not more than eight seconds.
E. The sensory mechanism used in connection with an automatic
protection device must be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire
or intrusion so that the device will not be activated by impulses due to
fleeting pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, the
rattling or vibration of doors and windows, vibrations to the premises
caused by the passing of vehicles or any other force not related to
genuine alarms.
F. All components comprising such a device must be maintained by the
person, in good repair, to assure maximum reliability of operation.
A. Each alarm equipment supplier who sells or leases an automatic
protection device in the Township after the effective date of this chapter
which is keyed to a designated trunk line shall furnish operating
instructions, a circuit diagram and maintenance manual to the person
owning and/or using said device.
§ 52-8 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 52-10
24:77
§ 52-11. Disconnection.
When messages evidencing failure to comply with the operational
requirements set forth in § 52-9 are received by the Police or Fire
Department and the Township Board of Supervisors concludes that the
automatic protection device sending such messages should be disconnected
in order to relieve the particular Department of the burden of responding
to false alarms, the Board is authorized to demand that the person owning
or using said device, or his representative, disconnect said device until
it is made to comply with the operational requirements. (If disconnection
of the defective device is not accomplished promptly and said Board of
Supervisors determines that the malfunctioning device is repeatedly
sending false alarms without any intermittent valid alarms, the Board may
then take any steps necessary to disconnect the defective automatic
protection device.)
§ 52-12. Testing.
No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of an automatic
protection device without first obtaining permission from the Police and/or
Fire Department. Where the equipment is keyed through an intermediary,
no such permission is necessary unless the alarm or signal is to be relayed
to the Police and/or Fire Department.
§ 52-13. Repair service.
B. Each alarm equipment supplier referred to above shall furnish
operating instructions, circuit diagram and maintenance manual for
each type of automatic protection device he deals in and installs in the
Township to the Chief of Police and to the Fire Chief.
C. If the instructions are not clear, the alarm equipment supplier may be
required to revise the instructions to the Chief of Police and the Fire
Chief and all persons owning and/or using the particular automatic
protection device.
A. Each alarm equipment supplier who sells or leases an automatic
protection device in the Township which is keyed to a designated trunk
line shall make service available, directly or through an agent, on a
twenty-four-hour-per-day basis, seven days a week, to repair such
device or to correct any malfunction that may occur. Such service shall
be made available for any person using an automatic protection device
supplied.
B. At the time of installation, an alarm equipment supplier shall furnish to
any person owning and/or using said device who uses a repair service
written information as to how service may be obtained at any time,
including the telephone number of the alarm equipment supplier or
agent responsible for service. The person owning and/or using said
device and the alarm equipment supplier or agent supplying a service
shall responsible for having the device disconnected or repaired as
§ 52-10 LIMERICK CODE § 52-13
24:78
§ 52-14. Copies of chapter to be furnished.
Alarm equipment suppliers, installers of audible alarms and intermediaries
shall furnish, at or prior to the time of contracting and at their expense, a
copy of this chapter to the persons owning and/or using the equipment or
services to be supplied.
§ 52-15. Responsibilities for costs of false alarms.
§ 52-16. Violations and penalties.
quickly as possible after notice that the automatic protection device is
not functioning properly.
A. For the purpose of defraying the costs to the Township of responding to
a false alarm, the person owning and/or using an automatic protection
device, persons using the services of intermediaries, users of audible
alarms and users of any other kind of direct or indirect connection with
the Police and/or Fire Department, except persons using the two-way
live-voice communication by telephone, shall, as a condition to
installation and continued operation of such equipment or service,
execute a consent in such form as may be prescribed by the Secretary
that such owner, lessee or user shall pay the Township $35 for each
false alarm resulting in a police or fire response originating from the
owner's premises. This sum shall be a civil claim by the Township and
does not affect the penalty provisions prescribed by § 52-16 hereof.
B. Any such person who fails to execute the consent described within this
section within 120 days from the effective date of this chapter shall,
within the one-hundred-twenty-day period, disconnect the alarm,
automatic protection device or any other kind of direct or indirect
connection with the Police and/or Fire Department and shall
discontinue using the services of any intermediaries.
A. Violations.
(1) Any person who intentionally sends or conspires to send or assists
or participates in the sending or transmitting, by whatever means,
of a false alarm for the purpose of activating the Township Police
Department, or any member or employee thereof, or the Limerick
Fire Company and/or the Linfield Fire Company, or any member or
employee thereof, shall be in violation of this chapter.
(2) Any person who installs, or permits to be installed, in any building
used or occupied for any purpose any answering service, audible
alarm, automatic protection device and/or central station
protective system, which equipment is so poorly designed,
constructed, regulated, installed or maintained that, as a result
thereof, false alarms are transmitted to the Township Police
Department and/or the Limerick Fire Company and/or the Linfield
Fire Company, shall be in violation of this chapter.
§ 52-13 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 52-16
24:79
Chapter 57
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 66.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 95.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 132.
Solid waste — See Ch. 149.
§ 57-1. Declaration of nuisance.
Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon any premises in the
Township in violation of any of the provisions of §§ 57-2 and 57-3 of this
chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health,
safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the Township.
(3) Any person who owns, leases or occupies a building which has an
answering service, audible alarm, automatic protection device and/
or central station protective system installed where such
equipment results in continual accidental activation, then, in such
case, said person shall be in violation of this chapter. For the
purposes of this subsection, "accidental activation" shall be defined
to mean activation of the emergency alarm system which is not the
result of a fire, burglary or similar emergency and which is
unintentional and/or a result of mechanical failure which is other
than that defined in Subsection A(2) above; and "continual
accidental activation" shall be defined to mean three accidental
activations within a six-month period.
B. Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter
shall forfeit and pay a fine or penalty of not more than $1,000 to the
Township, the same to be collected by a summary proceeding before a
Magisterial District Judge or to be recovered as debts of like amount
are now, by law, recoverable and, in default of the payment of such fine,
shall be liable for imprisonment for not more than 30 days in the
Montgomery County Prison.
C. Whenever a violator of this chapter has been notified by any of the duly
authorized and constituted representatives of the Township or by
service of summons or prosecution or in any other way that such
violator has committed a violation, each day that the violator shall
continue in such violation shall constitute a separate offense punishable
by a like fine or penalty.
§ 52-16 LIMERICK CODE § 57-2
24:80
§ 57-2. Height and type of vegetation; cutting requirements.
[Amended 9-21-1993 by Ord. No. 155; 1-18-2011 by ]
Every person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within
the Township of Limerick shall cut or remove or cause to be cut or removed
grass or weeds or any vegetation whatsoever not edible or planted for some
useful or ornamental purpose in excess of six inches in height; provided,
however, that this requirement shall not apply to land used for agricultural
purposes, environmentally sensitive lands which are protected under
Zoning Code § 184-81 (including steep slopes; woodlands; floodplains,
shorelines, watercourses and other riparian corridors) or land not located
within 50 feet of a road or other property line of premises used for
residential, commercial or industrial purposes.
§ 57-3. Visibility at intersections. [Amended 1-18-2011 by Ord. No.
320]
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within
the Township of Limerick shall permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation
whatsoever to grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height
of six inches within a triangle measuring 75 feet in either direction from the
point of intersection of the street center lines.
§ 57-4. Submission of complaints.
Complaints of violations of §§ 57-2 and 57-3 of this chapter shall be
submitted, in writing, to the Township Manager and must include an
accurate location of the property in violation.
§ 57-5. Notice of violation.
The Board of Supervisors or the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township
is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal service or by the United
States Mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case may be, of the premises
whereon brush, grass, weeds and other vegetation is growing or remaining
in violation of the provisions of §§ 57-2 and 57-3 of this chapter, directing
and requiring the owner or such occupant, as the case may be, to remove,
trim or cut such brush, grass, weeds or vegetation, so as to conform to the
requirements of this chapter, within seven days of issuance of such notice.
In case any person, firm or corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply
with such notice, within the period of time stated therein, the Township
authorities may remove, trim or cut such brush, grass, weeds or vegetation,
and the cost thereof, together with any additional penalty authorized by law,
may be collected by the Township from such person, firm or corporation in
the manner provided by law.
§ 57-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail, neglect
or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
§ 57-2 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 57-6
24:81
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day's violation
shall constitute a separate offense, and notice to the offender shall not be
necessary in order to constitute an offense.
Chapter 60
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 60, Building Construction, adopted 9-7-1999 by Ord. No
204, as amended, was repealed 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 391.]
Chapter 66
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 57.
§ 66-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BONFIRES — An outdoor fire for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
or other similar purposes. The location shall not be less than 50 feet from
any structure, property line, or combustible materials. A property owner
shall make all necessary provisions to prevent the fire from spreading to
within 50 feet of any structure, property line, or combustible materials. A
property owner must first obtain a permit from the Limerick Township Fire
Marshal's office before any bonfires shall be allowed to commence on their
property. Bonfires shall not burn yard, household, or leaf waste.[Added
3-22-2007 by Ord. No. 272; amended 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 396]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind or nature.
RECREATIONAL FIRE — An outdoor fire not contained in an incinerator,
outside fireplace, approved certified outdoor appliance, barbeque grill, or
barbeque pit which has a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter
and two feet or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking,
warmth, or similar purposes. Recreational fires shall not be conducted
within 50 feet from any structure, property line, or from any combustible
materials. Recreational fire shall not burn yard, household, or leaf
waste.[Added 3-22-2007 by Ord. No. 272; amended 4-23-2019 by Ord.
No. 396]
§ 66-2. Outdoor burning restricted. [Amended 3-22-2007 by Ord.
No. 272]
§ 57-6 LIMERICK CODE § 66-2
24:82
§ 66-3. Burning at night. [Amended 3-22-2007 by Ord. No. 272]
With the exception of recreational fires and bonfires, there shall be no
burning at nighttime.
§ 66-4. Authorization for fires. [Amended 3-22-2007 by Ord. No.
272]
All other burning not prohibited under this chapter shall be authorized by
proper notification of intent to burn having been given to the Fire Code
Official. Said notification shall set forth the proposed time of burning,
material to be burnt, and a plot plan showing they meet the exception in
§ 66-2.
§ 66-5. Health and safety considerations.
All burning authorized under the terms of this chapter will be accomplished
without affecting adversely in any manner or to any degree the health or
safety of any person in Limerick Township or the safety of any property, real
or personal, within Limerick Township.
§ 66-6. Enforcement. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109;
9-14-2006 by Ord. No. 267; 3-22-2007 by Ord. No. 272]
It shall be the duty of the Limerick Township Fire Code Official to enforce
the provisions of this chapter, provided that no action shall be instituted on
private complaint without the delivery of a signed written complaint to the
Limerick Township Fire Code Official by the complaining person or persons
prior to the institution of any enforcement proceeding.
§ 66-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No.
109]
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine
A. No person shall burn, cause or allow the burning of any household,
business or industrial waste within the limits of Limerick Township.
B. Exceptions: [Amended 9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 316]
(1) Burning to prevent or abate a fire hazard and control of disease or
pests which has been approved by the Limerick Township Fire
Marshal's Office. [Amended 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 396]
(2) Burning for the purpose of instructing personnel in firefighting.
(3) Burning in conjunction with the production of agricultural
commodities in their unmanufactured state on the premises of the
farm operation.
§ 66-2 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 66-7
24:83
and costs, shall be committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding
30 days.
Chapter 70
CODE ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 60.
Driveways — See Ch. 75.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 132.
§ 70-1. Applicability.
The term "applicable codes and ordinances" and the enforcement thereof
as referred to in this as well as other sections of this chapter shall apply to
those codes and/or ordinances which are listed as follows:
§ 70-2. Creation of Office of Code Enforcement.
There is hereby created by the Board of Supervisors of the municipality an
office to be known as the "Office of Code Enforcement." Said office shall
have the responsibility for administering and enforcing the provisions of
this chapter and of those other codes and/or ordinances of the municipality
referred to as "applicable codes and ordinances" in § 70-1 of this chapter,
which designates said Office of Code Enforcement as their official
administration and enforcement agency.
§ 70-3. Appointment of Code Enforcement Officer.
There shall be appointed, by the Board of Supervisors of the municipality,
a Code Enforcement Officer, who shall be in charge of the Office of Code
Enforcement of the municipality. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
supervise such other employees or assistants as shall be necessary for
the administration and execution of the responsibilities of said office, as
appointed and approved by the Board of Supervisors. Said Code
Enforcement Officer and other personnel may consist of employees directly
hired and compensated by the municipality.
A. BOCA National Building Code, 1990 Edition, as published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.39
B. BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, 1990 Edition, as published
by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc.40
39.Editor's Note: The BOCA National Building Code, 1990 Edition, was adopted by Ord. No.
123, with certain modifications. See Ch. 60, Building Construction.
40.Editor's Note: The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, 1990 Edition, was adopted
by Ord. No. 124, with certain modifications. See Ch. 132, Property Maintenance.
§ 66-7 LIMERICK CODE § 70-4
24:84
§ 70-4. Relief from personal liability.
The Code Enforcement Officer or other official or employee shall not, while
acting for the municipality, render himself liable personally because of any
act or omission as required or permitted in the discharge of his official
duties. Any suit instituted against such Code Enforcement Officer, official or
employee of his duties shall be defended by the Solicitor of the municipality,
and in no case will said officer, official or employee be liable for costs in any
action, suit or proceeding.
§ 70-5. Official record.
An official record shall be kept of all business and activities of the Office
of Code Enforcement, and all such records shall be open to the public
for inspection at all appropriate times, except that no individual, owner,
operator, occupant or other person shall be subject to unwarranted invasion
of privacy, and except that all evidence or information obtained in the
course of any inspection shall be kept confidential. Such evidence or
information shall not be disclosed, except as may be necessary in the
judgment of the Code Enforcement Officer for the proper and effective
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and shall
not otherwise be made public without the consent of the owner, occupant,
operator or other person in charge of the unit, structure or premises
inspected.
§ 70-6. Administration and enforcement of provisions.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce and administer all of the
provisions of this chapter and of those other applicable codes and
ordinances which establish the Office of Code Enforcement as their official
administration and enforcement agency.
§ 70-7. Duties of code enforcement officer.
The duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall include the receipt of
applications, the issuance of permits, notices, certificates and orders, the
making of inspections to determine conformance with applicable codes
and ordinances, the undertaking of systematic inspection programs, the
undertaking of searches and investigations, the recommendation of
appropriate administrative rules for review and adoption by the Code
Hearing Board, the keeping of records, the issuance of written annual
reports and such other activities as may be required.
§ 70-8. Right of entry.
A. In the discharge of his duties and upon reasonable cause of a code
violation, the Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized
representative, upon showing proper identification where requested, is
hereby authorized to enter and inspect, between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m., any structure or premises in the municipality to enforce
the provisions of this chapter and of those other applicable codes and
§ 70-4 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 70-8
24:85
§ 70-9. Permit application.
An application for a permit shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of those applicable codes and ordinances which the Office of
Code Enforcement has the responsibility to administer. Said application
shall be submitted in such form as may be prescribed by the Code
Enforcement Officer and shall be accompanied by any required fee.
§ 70-10. Approval or rejection of application.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall examine said application to determine
compliance with those other applicable codes and ordinances of the
municipality and shall, within 90 days after filing, either approve or reject
said application. If said application is rejected, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall inform the applicant, in writing, stating the reasons for such
rejection.
§ 70-11. Fees.
Applicants for permits required by any of the applicable codes and
ordinances shall pay, at the time of application, to the Code Enforcement
Officer, for use by the municipality, fees as established by resolution of the
Board.
§ 70-12. Abandonment of application; permit expiration.
ordinances. The assistance and cooperation of all other municipality
officials, including Police and Fire Departments, shall be available to
the Code Enforcement Officer to assist in the performance of his duties
and in securing right of entry.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer and the owner, operator or occupant or
other person in charge of any structure or premises subject to the
provisions of this chapter may agree to an inspection by appointment at
a mutually convenient time.
C. The owner, operator or occupant or other person in charge of any
structure or premises shall give the Code Enforcement Officer entry
and free access thereto and to every part of the structure or to the
premises surrounding the structure.
D. If any owner, operator or occupant or other person in charge fails or
refuses to permit entry and free access to the structure or premises
under his control or to any part thereof with respect to any authorized
inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer may, upon a showing that
probable cause exists for the inspection, file a complaint and may
petition for and obtain an order directing compliance with the
inspection requirements of this chapter from a court of competent
jurisdiction. Any person who refuses to comply with such an order
issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to such penalties as may
be authorized by law for violation of a court order.
§ 70-8 LIMERICK CODE § 70-12
24:86
§ 70-13. Certificates.
The following certificates shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of those other applicable codes and ordinances which the Office
of Code Enforcement has the responsibility to administer. Said certificates
may be issued separately or combined in the form of a single certificate.
§ 70-14. Notice of violations.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter or of the other applicable codes and ordinances or
of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, he shall proceed as
follows:
A. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to
have been abandoned six months after date of filing, unless such
application has been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been
issued, except that, for reasonable cause, the Building Official may
grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not
exceeding 90 days each.
B. All permits granted under any of the above applicable codes and
ordinances shall be good for a period of one year, provided that
extensions may be granted by the Code Enforcement Officer for good
reason, except that any permit granted for demolition activities shall be
valid for three months only, and if such demolition work is not
completed within that time, any bond posted by the applicant shall be
forfeited.
A. Certificate of use and occupancy. In accordance with Section 119.0 of
the BOCA National Building Code, a certificate of use and occupancy
shall be required, and no new building or portion of an existing building
which is enlarged or altered shall be used or occupied, in whole or in
part, until such a certificate of use and occupancy shall have been
issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Certificate of approval. A certificate of approval shall be required for
any electrical or plumbing work completed under the provisions of the
applicable codes and ordinances. All applicants shall apply to the Office
of Code Enforcement for such a certificate of approval within 30 days of
the completion of the building structure, work or premises.
C. Other certificates. Any other permits, certificates or licenses, as
required by the applicable codes and ordinances, shall be obtained by
the applicant in accordance with the provisions of said applicable codes
and ordinances. Application for such permits, certificates or licenses
shall be made to the Code Enforcement Officer.
A. He shall serve notice, in writing, of the alleged violation, which shall be
signed by the Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized
§ 70-12 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 70-14
24:87
§ 70-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-21-2010 by Ord. No.
317]
Any person who fails to correct a violation or institute a remedial action
as ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer or who violates a provision or
fails to comply with any requirements of this chapter or of any of the other
applicable codes or ordinances of Limerick Township shall be subject, for
each violation, to fines and penalties unless otherwise specified in another
statute, designate the method of its enforcement in accordance with the
following:
representative. Said notice shall be served personally to the responsible
owner, occupant, operator or other person in charge; or served by
registered mail with a return receipt requested; or, where such
responsible person in charge cannot be found, service may be made by
posting a notice in or about the structure or premises or by publishing
such notice in a newspaper of general circulation for a period of three
consecutive days; or served by any other method authorized under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Said notice shall include a statement of the reasons why the notice is
being issued, the sections of the code and/or ordinances which have
been violated and the remedial actions required.
C. Said notice shall allow a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days, for the
initiation and correction of the violation alleged or of the remedial
actions required, except where emergency conditions exist which
require immediate corrective action.
D. Said notice shall contain a statement indicating that the notice will
become an order if no request and approval for an extension of time is
made to the Code Enforcement Officer or if no petition for an appeal or
hearing is requested before the Code Hearing Board within 15 days
from the receipt of said notice.
E. The Code Enforcement Officer may grant a request for a reasonable
extension of time where he has evidence to believe that the responsible
person is attempting to remove the alleged violation. However, no such
extension of time may exceed a period of 90 days, unless authorized by
the Code Hearing Board upon appeal of the responsible owner,
operator, occupant or other person in charge.
A. Civil enforcement. Except as provided in § 70-15B, when the penalty
imposed for the violation of a Limerick Township ordinance is not
voluntarily paid to the Township, the Township shall initiate a civil
enforcement proceeding before the Limerick Township District Justice.
The civil enforcement proceeding shall be initiated by complaint or by
such other means as may be provided by the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil
Procedure. An ordinance which is to be enforced through a civil
enforcement proceeding may prescribe civil penalties not to exceed
$600 per violation. In addition to or in lieu of civil actions before the
§ 70-14 LIMERICK CODE § 70-15
24:88
§ 70-16. Abatement of dangerous and unfit conditions and
structures.
Structures which contain dwellings which are unfit for human habitation
or structures which are dangerous or unsafe and structures which contain
dangerous conditions or materials, as defined by the applicable codes and
ordinances of the municipality, are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
Limerick Township District Justice, Townships may enforce ordinances
in equity. In any case where a penalty for a violation of a Township
ordinance has not been timely paid and the person upon whom the
penalty was imposed is found to have been liable therefor in civil
proceedings, the violator shall be liable for the penalty imposed,
including additional daily penalties for continuing violations, plus court
costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township in the
enforcement proceedings.
B. Enforcement as summary offenses. For an ordinance regulating
building, housing, property maintenance, health, fire, public safety,
parking, solicitation, curfew, water, air or noise pollution, the Limerick
Township Board of Supervisors shall provide that its enforcement shall
be by action brought before Limerick Township's District Justice in the
same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under
the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Limerick Township
Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the consent of
the District Attorney as required under Pa.R.Crim.P. No. 83(c) (relating
to trial in summary cases). The Board of Supervisors may prescribe
criminal fines not to exceed $1,000 per violation and may prescribe
imprisonment to the extent allowed by law for the punishment of
summary offenses.
C. The imposition of the penalties. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Solicitor representing the
Municipality from initiating, and he is hereby ordered to initiate,
appropriate actions or proceedings in law or in equity to effect the
purposes of this chapter.
D. Separate offenses. Separate offenses shall arise for each day or portion
thereof in which a violation is found to exist or for each section of the
ordinance which is found to have been violated.
E. Payment to Finance Director. All fines and penalties collected for the
violation of any Township Ordinance shall be paid to the Township
Finance Director.
F. Enforcement officers or agents. The Board of Supervisors may delegate
the initial determination of ordinance violation and the service of notice
of violation to such officers or agents as the Township shall deem
qualified for that purpose.
§ 70-15 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 70-16
24:89
§ 70-17. Establishment of Code Hearing Board.
There is hereby established a Code Hearing Board appointed by the Board
of Supervisors of the municipality, consisting of no fewer than three
members nor more than five members, who shall serve without
compensation but may be reimbursed for necessary reasonable expenses.
Their terms of office shall be for three years, except for those first
appointed, so fixed that the term of office of at least one member shall
expire each year. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term.
§ 70-18. Powers of Code Hearing Board.
The Code Hearing Board shall have the following powers and duties:
A. General procedure. The Code Enforcement Officer shall order the
responsible owner, operator, occupant or person in charge of the
structure or premises which are dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human
habitation to vacate, repair and/or demolish said structure and to
remove the public nuisance as provided for in this chapter and in the
applicable codes and ordinances of the municipality, in accordance with
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Failure to comply. Whenever an order to vacate, repair and/or demolish
a structure which is a public nuisance because it is unsafe, dangerous
or unfit for human habitation has not been complied with, the Code
Enforcement Officer may, in accordance with the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, proceed to cause the structure to be
vacated, repaired and/or demolished, or take such other action as is
necessary to abate the nuisance. Abatement under this section shall not
commence until at least 10 days after the service of the order, except
that the Code Enforcement Officer may determine that more immediate
action is required because of the special emergency or dangerous
conditions which exist.
C. Recovery of expenses.
(1) The expenses incurred pursuant to Subsection B of this section and
of the other applicable codes and ordinances shall be paid by the
responsible owner, operator or occupant or by the persons who
caused or maintained such public a nuisance.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall file, on his records, an affidavit
stating with fairness and accuracy the items and date of the
expenses incurred. The Board of Supervisors of the municipality
may institute a suit to recover such expenses to be charged against
the property as a lien.
A. Interpretation. On appeal from a determination of the Code
Enforcement Officer or on request of any municipal official, the Code
Hearing Board shall decide any questions involving the interpretation
§ 70-16 LIMERICK CODE § 70-18
24:90
§ 70-19. Appeals and variances.
of any provision of this chapter or of those other applicable codes and
ordinances.
B. Variances. The Code Hearing Board may grant a variance from the
strict application of this chapter or of those other applicable codes and
ordinances. Such variances may be granted only in those cases which
would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and where
the public health and safety shall not be jeopardized.
C. Decide appeals. The Code Hearing Board shall hear all appeals made to
it and, depending on its findings, shall decide whether such appeals
shall be granted.
A. Requests for appeals or variances. Any person requesting a variance or
aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or by another
employee or official charged with the administration and enforcement
of this chapter and of those other applicable codes or ordinances may
take an appeal to the Code Hearing Board. All appeals must be made in
writing, stating the grounds upon which the appeal is based, and shall
be transmitted to the Office of Code Enforcement. An appeal must be
taken within 15 days of the action or of the receipt of written notice of
any decision or ruling which is being appealed.
B. Appeals and variance procedure.
(1) Public hearing. The Code Hearing Board shall meet and conduct a
hearing within 45 days of the receipt of an appeal or a request for a
variance. All hearings shall be public, and all persons whose
interests may be affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
A record shall be kept of all evidence and testimony presented at
the hearing.
(2) Decision of the Board. All decisions of the Board shall be in writing,
and a copy of each decision shall be sent to the applicant and to the
Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Hearing Board shall also
retain, in its files, a copy of each decision, which files shall be
available for inspection by the public. Each decision shall set forth
fully the reasons for the decision of the Code Hearing Board and
the findings of fact on which the decision was based. The Code
Hearing Board shall make an order on its decision, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall take immediate action to carry out said
order.
C. Appeals from the decision of the Code Hearing Board. Any person or
persons aggrieved by any final order or decision of the Code Hearing
Board may appeal such order or decision within 30 days to the Court of
Common Pleas in accordance with, as far as practicable, the rules of
civil procedure of the Supreme Court regarding appeals from
administrative agencies.
§ 70-18 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 70-19
24:91
§ 70-20. Effect on existing provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to effect any suit or proceeding
now pending in any court or any actions required or liability incurred or any
cause or causes of action accrued or existing under any act or ordinance
repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired
or affected by this chapter.
§ 70-21. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Code Enforcement
Ordinance of the Municipality."
Chapter 72
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 60. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 73.
§ 72-1. Applicability.
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to make, cause, or permit construction,
reconstruction, additions, alterations, demolitions, site improvements or
road work for developments within prohibited hours of operation.
§ 72-2. Hours of operation. [Amended 4-18-2017 by Ord. No. 377]
Operating or permitting the operation of any equipment or tools in new
construction, reconstruction, additions, alterations, demolition, drilling,
excavation, earth moving and paving will be permitted Monday through
Friday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., and Saturday and
Sunday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Any work, as
referenced above, performed outside of these hours will be considered a
violation of this chapter.
§ 72-3. Exceptions.
D. Reports by the Code Hearing Board. The Code Hearing Board shall
report to the Board of Supervisors periodically, at intervals of not later
than 12 months. The report shall summarize all applications and
appeals made to it since the last report and shall contain a summary of
the Board's decision on each case. A copy of the report shall be filed
with the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Hearing Board may also
submit to the Board of Supervisors advisory reports recommending
changes and modifications in this chapter or in those other applicable
codes or ordinances.
§ 70-19 LIMERICK CODE § 72-3
24:92
§ 72-4. Compliance monitoring.
The compliance monitoring of this chapter shall be upon receipt of a written
complaint.
§ 72-5. Submission of complaint.
All complaints of violations of the terms of this chapter shall be submitted
in writing to the Limerick Township Police Department and must include a
narrative description of the location of the property and the nature of the
violation, to include the date and time of the violation.
§ 72-6. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Limerick Township Police Department to enforce
this chapter.
§ 72-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, upon conviction
thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in a manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs or such other penalty as may be authorized and
imposed by law. Further, in default of payment thereof, the person shall be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. Notwithstanding
the same, the Township may seek enforcement by means of a request for
injunctive relief or other equitable remedies as may be provided by law in a
court of competent jurisdiction.
A. The operation of domestic power tools, to include but not be limited to a
gas powered saw, lawn or garden tools or similar devices used for the
purpose of personal property maintenance, shall be exempt from this
chapter.
B. The operation of tools or equipment for emergency work, as determined
by the Township's Code Enforcement Officer, shall be exempt from this
chapter.
C. The construction, reconstruction and maintenance of the roadways
within Limerick Township shall be exempt from this chapter.
D. The operation of tools, to include but not be limited to gas-powered
lawn or garden tools or similar devices used for the purpose of mowing
a golf course within Limerick Township, shall be exempt from this
chapter. [Added 4-18-2017 by Ord. No. 377]
§ 72-3 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 72-7
24:93
Chapter 73
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 60.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 70.
Construction activities — See Ch. 72.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 80.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 111.
Plumbing — See Ch. 129.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 132.
Soil erosion, sedimentation and grading
control — See Ch. 147.
§ 72-7 LIMERICK CODE § 72-7
24:94
ARTICLE I
Building Code
[Adopted 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-242]
§ 73-1. Election to administer and enforce. [Amended 11-13-2018
by Ord. No. 394]
Limerick Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
through 7210.1103, as amended through Act 35 of 2017 and Act 36 of 2017.
The codes applicable to work for which a construction permit is sought on
or after October 1, 2018, are the 2015 International Codes issued by the
International Code Council (ICC), and the provisions amended by the UCC
Review and Advisory Council (RAC).
§ 73-2. Adoption of Building Code.
The Uniform Construction Code, referred to above, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the Building Code of Limerick Township
(the "Code").
§ 73-3. Administration and enforcement.
The administration and enforcement of the Building Code of Limerick
Township shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors:
§ 73-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors of Limerick Township in conformity with the requirements of
the Code, as amended from time to time, and for the purpose set forth
therein. If at any time, enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly
A. By the designation of an employee of Limerick Township to serve as the
Limerick Township Code Official to act on behalf of the Township.
B. By the retention of one or more Construction Code Officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Township.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Building Code through an
intermunicipal agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the Code on behalf of the Township.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 73-1 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 73-4
24:95
with one or more other municipalities, the Board of Appeals shall be
established by joint action of the participating municipalities.
§ 73-5. Effect of prior codes.
All Building Code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were adopted
by Limerick Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed
the requirements of the Code shall continue in full force and effect until
such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum
requirements of the Code, as amended from time to time.
§ 73-6. Amendment of codes.
All prior Building Code ordinances, or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the Code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the Code.
§ 73-7. Effect on other codes.
All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Limerick Township not
governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 73-8. Fee schedule.
All fees assessable by Limerick Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the Code shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 73-4 LIMERICK CODE § 73-8
24:96
ARTICLE II
Permits for Accessory Utility and Miscellaneous Use Structures
[Adopted 4-26-2007 by Ord. No. 273]
§ 73-9. Permits and inspections required.
Limerick Township hereby elects to include utility and miscellaneous use
structures, as defined in Act 92 of 2004, 41 and thereby requires applicable
permits and inspections for the construction and modification of such
structures from 1,000 square feet to 120 square feet under the Uniform
Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 to 405, as
amended from time to time, and as was previously adopted as the Building
Code of Limerick Township.
§ 73-10. When effective.
This article shall be effective 35 days after the date of passage of this
article.
41.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.104.
§ 73-9 MANAGER, TOWNSHIP § 73-10
24:97
Chapter 75
DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
147.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 153.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 155.
§ 75-1. Compliance required.
No driveway having an outlet to any Township street or road shall hereafter
be laid out or opened unless it shall be in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and any other ordinances or regulations of the Township of
Limerick not inconsistent herewith.
§ 75-2. Submission of sketch and profile plan required. [Amended
4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
§ 75-3. Permit required; fee. [Amended 3-16-1976 by Ord. No. 69;
4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
All residential, commercial and industrial driveways opening onto a
Township street or road shall require the issuance of a driveway permit
before construction. The fees for such permits shall be an amount set by
resolution by the Board of Supervisors.44
§ 75-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-16-1976 by Ord. No.
69; amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the terms of this chapter,
shall, upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge, be
A. Prior to the construction of any residential driveway that opens onto a
Township street or road, a driveway sketch and driveway profile plan,
prepared in accordance with the sample attached hereto and made a
part hereof as Exhibit A,42 shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Township of Limerick.
B. Prior to the construction of any commercial and industrial driveway
that opens onto a Township street or road, a driveway sketch and
driveway profile plan, prepared in accordance with the sample attached
hereto and made a part hereof as Exhibit B,43 shall be submitted to the
Code Enforcement Officer.
42.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
43.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
44.Editor's Note: The current permit fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township
Secretary.
§ 73-10 LIMERICK CODE § 75-4
75:98
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 80
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 80, Electrical Standards, adopted 10-16-1990 by Ord.
No. 121, was repealed 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 391.]
Chapter 81
EMERGENCY SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Police Department — See Ch. 34.
Hazardous accidents — See Ch. 101.
Use of tax funds — See Ch. 160, § 160-34.2.
Assessment for fire hydrants — See Ch. 160,
Art. VI.
§ 75-4 DRIVEWAYS § 75-4
75:99

ARTICLE I
Cost Reimbursement
[Adopted 4-3-2001 by Ord. No. 223]
§ 81-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the Limerick Township "Emergency Service
Cost Reimbursement Ordinance."
§ 81-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
EMERGENCY SERVICES — All services rendered by Limerick Township
Fire Departments to include, but not be limited to, motor vehicle accidents,
hazardous material spills, or any other act or omission by a party or parties
that necessitates the services of the aforementioned departments.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any substance or materials in a quantity or
form which poses an unreasonable and eminent risk to the life, health
or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum products or gases, poisons, flammables, corrosives or materials
listed in the hazardous substances list of the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry.
TOWNSHIP — Limerick Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 81-3. Liability for costs of Fire Department.
Reimbursement for costs: Subject to the exceptions provided herein, any
person who intentionally, negligently, accidentally, or otherwise causes a
motor vehicle accident, hazardous material spill, or any other act or
omission necessitating the emergency services of the Fire Department
within the established service area of the Fire Department shall be liable
for all costs incurred by the Fire Department as a result of providing said
emergency services.
§ 81-4. Establishment of costs.
For purposes of this article, the costs for use of the Fire Department
emergency service equipment, materials, and personnel shall be
established by resolution of the Limerick Township.
§ 81-1 DRIVEWAYS § 81-4
75:101
Chapter 82
FEES
§ 81-4 LIMERICK CODE § 81-4
75:102
ARTICLE I
Transportation Impact Fee
[Adopted 5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 227; amended in its entirety
6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 322]
§ 82-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Limerick Township Transportation
Impact Fee Ordinance."
§ 82-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a transportation impact fee to
ensure that the transportation system is available and adequate to support
new growth and development. To advance this objective, there is hereby
created a transportation impact fee payable to the Township at the time of
building permit issuance.
§ 82-3. General findings and conditions.
The Board of Supervisors hereby finds and declares that:
A. The conditions and standards for the determination and imposition of
the transportation impact fee set forth herein are those set forth in Act
209 of 1990, Article V-A, Municipal Capital Improvement, of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10501-A et seq.,
and any and all amendments thereto (hereinafter the "Act"), and
consists of:
(1) The recitals set forth above;
(2) The analysis, advice, and recommendations of the Transportation
Impact Fee Advisory Commission;
(3) The Land Use Assumptions report as adopted by the Board of
Supervisors;
(4) The Roadway Sufficiency Analysis as adopted by the Board of
Supervisors;
(5) The Transportation Capital Improvements Plan, as adopted by the
Board of Supervisors; and
(6) Such other conditions and standards as the Board of Supervisors
may by resolution identify from time to time as being relevant and
material to the imposition of a transportation impact fee and
consistent with the provisions of the Act and any amendments
thereto.
B. The collection, disbursement, and accounting of transportation impact
fees shall be administered by the office of the Township Manager,
subject to review, oversight, and control by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 82-1 DRIVEWAYS § 82-3
75:103
§ 82-4. Definitions.
The terms and definitions set forth in Section 502-A of the Act, 53 P.S.
§ 10502-A, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference in full in this
article, as if they were attached hereto.
§ 82-5. Enactment and imposition.
There are hereby enacted transportation impact fees to be imposed upon
new development, as defined in the Act, for the purpose of off-site public
transportation capital improvements authorized by the Act and as described
by the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan adopted by the Board
of Supervisors. Said transportation impact fees shall apply to all new
subdivisions and land developments within the Transportation Service Area
established pursuant hereto, and the imposition and payment shall be a
condition precedent to final approval of a subdivision or land development
plan and issuance of a building permit.
§ 82-6. Uses.
Transportation impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall be
expended for costs incurred for improvements attributable to new
development and designated in the Transportation Capital Improvements
Plan for improvements within the Transportation Service Area in which the
new development will be located. Additionally, such fees may be used for the
acquisition of land and rights-of-way, engineering, legal and planning costs,
and all other costs, including debt service related to road improvements
within the Transportation Service Area, and including such proportionate
amount of the Roadway Sufficiency Analysis as is allowed under the
provisions of the Act.
§ 82-7. Documents adopted by Board of Supervisors.
The following documents, previously adopted by the Board of Supervisors,
are hereby incorporated by reference in full in this article, as if attached
hereto:
C. The amount of the per-peak-hour-trip transportation impact fees shall
be as set forth in § 82-13 of this article.
D. The time, method, and procedure for payment of transportation impact
fees shall be as set forth in § 82-18 of this article.
E. The procedures for credits against transportation impact fees shall be
as set forth in § 82-19 of this article.
F. The procedures for refunds of transportation impact fees shall be as set
forth in § 82-20 of this article.
G. Such exemptions as the Board of Supervisors shall choose to enact shall
be set forth in § 82-21 of this article.
§ 82-3 LIMERICK CODE § 82-7
75:104
§ 82-8. Special traffic studies.
Where intended to assist in determining the appropriate amount of traffic
transportation impact fees, the Township may require the preparation of
a special transportation study to determine the traffic generation of
circulation patterns in new nonresidential developments only; provided,
nevertheless, that no studies may be required where the proposed
development will not require a deviation from the land use assumptions
used to create the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan. Any such
studies required by the Township shall be submitted prior to the imposition
of the transportation impact fee and shall be considered in the
determination of the fee.
§ 82-9. Uniform applicability.
This article shall be uniformly applicable to all developments that occur
within a defined Transportation Service Area.
§ 82-10. Imposition and payment required for building permit.
No building permit shall be issued for a development in the Transportation
Service Area hereto unless the applicant therefor has paid the
transportation impact fees imposed by and calculated pursuant to this
article.
§ 82-11. Method of calculation.
A. Recommendations of the Transportation Impact Fee Advisory
Committee, including those set forth in the documents identified below.
B. Land Use Assumptions Report as adopted by Resolution No. 2011-08.
C. Roadway Sufficiency Analysis as adopted by Resolution No. 2011-14.
D. Transportation Capital Improvements Plan as adopted by Resolution
No. 2011-15.
E. Transportation Service Area Map as prepared by Traffic Planning and
Design, Inc., attached as Exhibit A to the Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan, and incorporated by reference in full herein, as if
attached hereto.
A. The transportation impact fees for transportation capital improvements
shall be based upon the total costs of the road improvements included
in the adopted Transportation Capital Improvements Plan within the
transportation service area, which are attributable to and necessitated
by the new development within the Transportation Service Area as
calculated in accordance with the Act and herewith, divided by the
number of anticipated peak hour trips generated by all new
development consistent with the adopted Land Use Assumptions Report
and calculated in accordance with the Trip Generation Manual
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, 8th or
§ 82-7 DRIVEWAYS § 82-11
75:105
§ 82-12. Establishment of Transportation Service Area.
§ 82-13. Calculation of per-peak-hour-trip fee for Transportation
Service Area.
The amount of peak-hour trip fee for the Transportation Service Area 1 and
2 shall be $1,102 and $1,403, respectively, unless revised or amended in
subsequent editions, as amended, which is hereby adopted by the
Township to equal a per-trip cost for transportation improvements
within the Transportation Service Area.
B. The specific transportation impact fee for a specific new subdivision or
land development within the Transportation Service Area for road
improvements shall be determined as of the date of preliminary
subdivision or land development approval by multiplying the per-trip
cost established for the Transportation Service Area by the estimated
number of PM peak-hour trips to be generated by the new subdivision
or land development using the Trip Generation Manual published by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers, 8th or subsequent editions, as
amended.
C. The Board of Supervisors may authorize or require the preparation of a
special transportation study in order to determine the traffic generation
or circulation for a new nonresidential development to assist in the
determination of the amount of the transportation fee for such
subdivision or land development.
A. Transportation Service Areas 1 and 2 are established as shown on the
Transportation Service Area Map prepared by Traffic Planning and
Design, Inc., attached as Exhibit 1 to the Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan, and incorporated by reference in full herein.
Additional transportation service areas or subareas or combinations of
transportation service areas or subareas may be designated by the
Board of Supervisors from time to time, consistent with the procedure
set forth in this article and in consideration of the following factors:
(1) The Comprehensive Plan;
(2) Any standards for adequate public facilities incorporated in the
Transportation Capital Improvements Plan;
(3) The projected build-out and timing of development areas;
(4) The need for and cost of unprogrammed transportation
improvements necessary to support projected development; and
(5) Such other factors as the Board of Supervisors may deem relevant.
B. Fees collected from development in each transportation service area or
subarea will be used exclusively to fund transportation improvement
projects scheduled for that area or subarea.
§ 82-11 LIMERICK CODE § 82-13
75:106
accordance with the provisions hereof and the Act, calculated in accordance
with Sections 504-A and 505-A(a)(1) of the Act45 and § 82-11 hereof, as
follows:
§ 82-14. Large subdivision and land developments.
There is hereby imposed an additional transportation impact fee upon new
developments which generate 1,000 or more new peak hour trips, net
of pass-by trips as defined by the Trip Generation Manual published by
the Institute of Transportation Engineers, 7th subsequent editions, during
the peak-hour period designated in this article. The applicant for such a
development shall perform traffic analysis of development traffic impact
on highways, roads, or streets outside the Transportation Service Area in
which the development site is located but within the boundaries of the
Township. Any such highways, roads or streets or parts thereof outside
the Transportation Service Area which will accommodate 10% or more of
development traffic and 100 or more new peak-hour trips shall be studied,
and the applicant shall mitigate the traffic impacts of the development
on such highways, roads and streets to maintain the predevelopment
conditions after completion of the development.
§ 82-15. Use of funds outside plan.
Any other provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding, in
accordance with the provisions of the Act, the Township may expend
A. Transportation Service Area 1. Total costs of road improvements in
Service Area 1 included in the adopted Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan attributable to and necessitated by new
development within the Transportation Service Area including 50% of
the estimated costs of improvements to highways, roads, and streets
qualifying as a state highway or portion of the rural highway system as
provided in Section 102 of the State Highway Law.46
Total Costs Attributable to Service
Area 1
$6,438,000
B. Transportation Service Area 2. Total costs of road improvements in
Service Area 2 included in the adopted Transportation Capital
Improvements Plan attributable to and necessitated by new
development within the Transportation Service Area including 50% of
the estimated costs of improvements to highways, roads, and streets
qualifying as a state highway or portion of the rural highway system as
provided in Section 102 of the State Highway Law.47
Total Costs Attributable to Service
Area 2
$2,152,750
45.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10504-A and 10505-A(a)(1), respectively.
46.Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-102.
47.Editor's Note: See 36 P.S. § 670-102.
§ 82-13 DRIVEWAYS § 82-15
75:107
Transportation Impact Fees paid by an applicant on projects not contained
in the Transportation Capital Improvement Plan or may provide credit
against the transportation impact fees for the value of any construction
projects not contained in the Transportation Capital Improvement Plan
or may provide credit against transportation impact fees for the value
of any construction projects not contained in the Transportation Capital
Improvement Plan, which are performed at the applicant's expense if all of
the following criteria are met:
§ 82-16. Request for nonbinding estimate.
Prior to making an application for a building permit, an applicant may
request a nonbinding transportation impact fee estimate from the Township,
which shall be based upon the maximum development potential of the site
pursuant to existing zoning regulations, unless the applicant specifies use
of the development.
§ 82-17. Administration; collection; recordkeeping.
A. The applicant has provided written consent to use of its transportation
impact fees or the provision of such credit against the applicant's
transportation impact fees for the specific transportation projects,
which are not included in the Transportation Capital Improvement Plan.
B. The alternative transportation projects, whether highway or multimodal,
have as their purpose the reduction of traffic congestion or the
removal of vehicle trips from the roadway work.
C. The Township amends its Transportation Capital Improvement Plan
components required by Section 504-A(e)(1)(vi) of the Act48 to provide
replacement of the collected transportation impact fees transferred to
transportation projects outside the Transportation Capital
Improvement Plan from sources other than transportation impact fees
or developer contributions within three years of completion of the
alternative projects to which the transferred fees were applied or for
which credit was provided. All interest earned on such funds shall
become funds of that account. The Township shall make an accounting
annually for any fund account containing transportation impact fee
proceeds and earned interest. Such accounting shall include, but not be
limited to, the total funds collected, the source of the funds collected,
the total amount of interest accruing on such funds and the amount of
funds expended on specific transportation improvements. Notice of the
availability of the results of the accounting shall be included and
published as part of the annual audit required by the Township. A copy
of the report shall also be provided to the Transportation Impact Fee
Advisory Board.
48.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10504-A(e)(1)(vi).
§ 82-15 LIMERICK CODE § 82-17
75:108
§ 82-18. Time, method, and procedure for payment.
The transportation impact fee for a specific subdivision or land development
shall be paid prior to the issuance of the building permit for the
development. The transportation impact fee shall be paid to the Township
in cash, bank cashier's check, certified check, or electronic fund transfer
approved by the Township Manager and shall be administered by the
Township in accordance with the provisions of § 82-17.
§ 82-19. Credit.
Any applicant who shall perform, at its own expense and with the consent
and agreement of the Board of Supervisors, off-site improvements, as herein
defined, shall be eligible for a credit from a transportation impact fee
otherwise due. Such credit shall not exceed the amount of the
transportation impact fee that would have been charged if a credit was not
due.
A. Collection of transportation impact fees due pursuant to this article
shall be by the Township in the manner or manners prescribed herein
prior to the issuance of a building permit.
B. Establishment of the fund. Upon receipt of transportation impact fees,
the Township Manager shall be responsible for the separate and proper
accounting of such fees. All such fees shall be deposited in interestbearing
accounts in a bank authorized to receive deposits of the
Township funds. Interest earned by each account shall be credited to
that account and shall be used solely for the purpose specified for funds
of such account.
C. Establishment and maintenance of accounts. The Township Manager
shall establish appropriate trust fund accounts and shall maintain
records whereby transportation impact fees collected can be
segregated for each Transportation Service Area.
D. Maintenance of records. The Township Manager shall maintain and
keep adequate financial records for each such account which shall show
the source and disbursement of all revenues, which shall account for all
monies received, and which shall ensure that the disbursement of funds
from each account shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision
of projects specified in the Transportation Capital Improvements Plan
for the particular Transportation Service Area.
A. If the applicant makes such improvements, he shall enter into an
agreement with the Board of Supervisors prior to the issuance of any
building permit. The agreement shall establish the estimated cost of the
improvement, the schedule for initiation and completion of the
improvement, a requirement that the improvement be completed to
Township and Pennsylvania Department of Transportation standards
and design criteria, as applicable, and such other terms and conditions
as deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors. The Board of
§ 82-17 DRIVEWAYS § 82-19
75:109
§ 82-20. Refunds.
Transportation impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall be
refunded, together with interest earned thereon, to the payor of the
transportation impact fees under the following circumstances:
Supervisors shall review the improvement plan, verify costs and time
schedules, determine if the improvement is an eligible improvement,
and determine the amount of the applicable credit for such
improvement to be applied to the otherwise applicable transportation
impact fee prior to issuance of any building permit. The amount of such
credit for any capital improvement constructed shall be the amount
allocated in the Transportation Capital Improvement Plan, including
contingency factors, for such improvement. In no event shall the Board
of Supervisors provide a credit, which is greater than the applicable
transportation impact fee. If, however, the amount of the credit is
calculated to be greater than the amount of the transportation impact
fee due, the applicant may use such excess credit toward the
transportation impact fees imposed on other building permits for
development on the same site and in the same ownership. Any such
applicant shall be required to supply financial security sufficient, in
the judgment of the Township, to cover the cost of any improvement
installed by the applicant for which credit is sought.
B. An applicant shall be entitled as a credit against transportation impact
fees an amount equal to the fair market value of land dedicated by the
applicant to the Township and accepted by the Township for future
right-of-way, realignment or widening of existing roadways. The fair
market value of any land dedicated to and accepted by the Township
shall be determined as of the date of the submission of the subdivision
or land development application to the Township.
A. In the event the Township terminates or completes the Transportation
Capital Improvements Plan and there remains at the time of
termination or completion undisbursed funds, the respective payors
shall be entitled to a share of the fund balance in the same proportion
as the payor's transportation impact fee payment plus interest earned
bears to the total transportation impact fees collected plus interest. The
Township shall provide written notice by certified mail to each person
who previously paid the fees and remain undisbursed, that such
person's proportionate share of the fund balance is available for refund
to such person. Such notice shall be provided to the last-known address
provided by the payor of the transportation impact fees to the
Township. In the event that any of the funds remain unclaimed
following one year after the notice, the Township shall be authorized to
transfer any funds so remaining to any other fund in the Township
without any further obligation to refund said funds. It shall be the
responsibility of the payor to provide the Township at all times with a
current address for such notice.
§ 82-19 LIMERICK CODE § 82-20
75:110
§ 82-21. Exemptions.
(Reserved)
§ 82-22. Effect on other provisions.
This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property,
density or development previously adopted design and improvement
standards and requirements or any other aspect of the subdivision or land
development or provision of public improvements which remain subject
to applicable zoning, subdivision and land development, and planned
residential development regulations of the Township, which shall be
operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect
to such development.
§ 82-23. Fee as additional and supplemental requirement.
The transportation impact fee is additional and supplemental to, and not
in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the Township on the
development of land or the issuance of building permits. Nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to alter or affect the Township's existing
ordinances and regulations regarding on-site improvements. In no event
shall a property owner be obligated to pay for transportation capital
B. In the event the Township fails to commence construction within three
years of the scheduled construction dates of the project as set forth in
the Transportation Capital Improvement Plan, the Township shall
refund the portion of the transportation impact fee paid by any payor
making written request therefor, which is attributable to said project,
with accumulated interest; provided, nevertheless, that no refund shall
be payable or paid with respect to any project actually commenced
prior to the receipt of such refund request, and the failure of a payor to
make such written request prior to the commencement of such project
shall be deemed a waiver of any right to such refund.
C. In the event that, upon completion of any road improvements project,
the actual expenditures for the project are less than 95% of the
budgeted costs for such project, the Township shall refund the pro rata
difference between the budgeted costs and the actual expenditures,
including interest accumulated thereon from the date of payment, to
the person or persons who paid the impact fees for such improvements.
D. In the event the development for which transportation impact fees were
paid has not commenced prior to the expiration of the building permit
issued therefor, the transportation impact fees paid with accumulated
interest shall be refunded to the payor. Further, if a building permit
after issuance is altered in such a way as to reduce the amount of the
transportation impact fee due, the difference between such amount and
the amount actually paid shall be refunded. The payor, at its option, may
roll over the transportation impact fees attributable to an expired
building permit to cover fees incurred by a required permit.
§ 82-20 DRIVEWAYS § 82-23
75:111
improvements in an amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to
this article; provided, nevertheless, that a property owner may be required
to pay, pursuant to Township ordinances, regulations or policies, for other
public facilities in addition to the transportation impact fee as provided
herein.
§ 82-24. Construal of provisions.
It is hereby found and declared to be the intention of the Township that
the public health, safety, and welfare be protected and furthered by the
provisions of this article, and it shall be interpreted and construed liberally
to effectively carry out its purposes and in such manner as to favor such
public interest as opposed to any private interest.
§ 82-25. Retroactive applicability.
Notwithstanding § 82-26 herein, transportation impact fees shall be
imposed on those projects involving subdivisions, land developments, and
planned residential developments for which an application has been filed
on or after the first publication of notice of the intent of the Township to
adopt this article; provided, nevertheless, that such retroactivity does not
exceed 18 months after the adoption of the resolution that created the
Transportation Impact Fee Advisory Committee.
§ 82-26. When effective.
This article shall take effect five days after adoption by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 82-23 LIMERICK CODE § 82-26
75:112
ARTICLE II
Attorneys' Fees
[Adopted 10-9-2008 by Ord. No. 300]
§ 82-27. Recitals.
The recitals are incorporated herein as if set forth in extenso.49
§ 82-28. Delinquent accounts, fees and charges.
A. Subject to the procedures set forth in this article, attorneys' fees
incurred in collecting delinquent accounts, fees and/or charges shall be
assessed against a delinquent customer, resident or developer in the
amount charged to the Township by its solicitor in collecting the
delinquent account, fee and/or charge.
B. The attorneys' fees to be assessed against delinquent customers,
residents or developers shall be based upon the solicitor's then-current
hourly rate charged to the Township prior to litigation, and the
litigation rate charged to the Township once a lien is filed as a result of
a delinquency or failure of payment. Such rates are available at the
Township building.
C. At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorneys' fees, the
Township will notify, by certified mail, the delinquent customer, resident
or developer of its intention to impose attorneys' fees and specify the
manner in which the imposition of attorneys' fees may be avoided by
payment of the account. In the event certified mail is refused, the
Township will send a similar notice, by regular mail, 10 days prior to
imposing attorneys' fees. The notice provided shall be sent to the
delinquent customer's, resident's or developer's last known post office
address, as it is maintained in the office of the Tax Collector or county
assessment office.
49.Editor's Note: A complete copy of this ordinance, including recitals, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 82-27 DRIVEWAYS § 82-28
75:113
Chapter 84
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Fireworks — See Ch. 87.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 66.
§ 84-1. Adoption of standards.
It is hereby adopted in its entirety, subject to modifications and amendments
hereinafter provided by the Township, copies of which are on file in the
Limerick Township Administration Building, that certain International Fire
Code, known as the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council, Inc., and incorporated as fully as if set forth
at length herein and the standards and terms of said Code are incorporated
herein as if fully set forth at length. Three copies are on file in the Limerick
Township Administration Building located at 646 West Ridge Pike, Limerick,
Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code,
2015 Edition, as published by the International Code Council, which is
hereby adopted as the Fire Code of Limerick Township, Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the safeguarding of
life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from storage,
handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and
premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees as set forth under the Limerick Township Fee Schedule;
and each and all of regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms
of said Fire Code on file in the Limerick Township Administration Building
are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 84-2 of this chapter.
§ 84-2. Modifications to standards.
The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, as published by the International
Code Council, is hereby revised as follows:
A. The International Fire Code § 101.1 is supplemented to read: "The
Township of Limerick."
B. The notice of violation and the penalties, fines, and appeals as
referenced in the Fire Code § 108 (Board of Appeals), § 109 (Violations),
and § 111.4 (related to Stop Work Orders) shall be in accordance with
the applicable provisions of the Second Class Township Code and the
Limerick Township Code, Chapter 70, Code Enforcement, that are in
effect at the time of the violation.
§ 82-28 LIMERICK CODE § 84-2
75:114
Chapter 87
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 84.
§ 87-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
C. The Fire Code § 5704.2.9.6.1 is supplemented to read: "The Storage of
Class I and II liquids in the aboveground tanks outside of buildings is
prohibited in all residential districts."
D. The Fire Code § 5706.2.4.4 is supplemented to read: "The Storage of
Class I and II liquids in the aboveground tanks outside of buildings is
prohibited in all residential districts."
E. The Fire Code § 5806.2 is supplemented to read: "The storage of
flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings
is prohibited in all residential districts."
F. The Fire Code § 6104.2 is supplemented to read: "The storage of
liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or
congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall
not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7,570 liters) in all
residential districts."
G. The following Appendixes of the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition
(or applicable iteration), are specifically adopted:
(1) Appendix "C": Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution;
(2) Appendix "D": Fire Apparatus Access Roads;
(3) Appendix "E": Hazard Catagories;
(4) Appendix "H": Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP)
and Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS)
Instructions.
H. The Fire Code § 106 (Inspections) is supplemented to add Subsection 5
to read: "106.5 Fire Safety Inspection Program. Inspections are
required annually for all tenant spaces in a commercial occupancy." If
entry to the premises or common area is denied to the code
enforcement officer, the code enforcement officer may apply to the
appropriate authority for an administrative search warrant.
§ 84-2 FIREWORKS § 87-1
87:115
FIREWORKS — Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance
or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion,
deflagration or detonation.
§ 87-2. Permit required; nontransferability; term.
It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons, fair association,
amusement park, municipality or other organization to publicly display
or cause to be displayed fireworks without first obtaining a permit for
the supervised public display of fireworks from the Township Board of
Supervisors, who shall grant or deny such permit in accordance with the
regulations hereinafter provided. No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable. Every such permit issued will be valid for the period of seven
days following the date of issue, whereafter such permit shall be null and
void.
§ 87-3. Application for permit.
Applications for permits shall be made to the Board of Supervisors in
writing at least 15 days in advance of the date of the display. Applications
shall be made available through the Secretary of the Township.
§ 87-4. Permit fee. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
For every such permit for the supervised public display of fireworks granted
under this chapter, there shall be paid to the Township Treasurer, for the
use of the Township, a fee in the amount set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.50
§ 87-5. Bond or insurance. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
Any permittee under this chapter shall be required to post a bond or
submit proof of insurance deemed adequate by the Board of Supervisors,
conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be caused either
to a person or persons or to property, real or personal, by reason of the
permitted display and arising from any acts of the permittee or his agent,
employee or subcontractor.
§ 87-6. Standards and conditions.
No permit for the supervised public display of fireworks shall be granted
by the Board of Supervisors unless the following regulations have been
complied with such that, in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors after
inspection, the proposed display will not be hazardous to any property
within the Township or endanger any person or persons therein:
50.Editor's Note: The current permit fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township
Secretary.
§ 87-1 LIMERICK CODE § 87-6
87:116
§ 87-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No.
109]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be committed to the
county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
§ 87-8. Statutory authority. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
This chapter is enacted under the authority of the Act of the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of May 1, 1933, P.L. 1161,
as amended by the Act of July 10, 1947, P.L. 1481, and of the Act of the
General Assembly of May 15, 1939, as amended by the Act of June 24, 1959,
P.L. 486.51
A. Every such display shall be supervised by a person competent and
experienced in the supervision of such public displays of fireworks.
B. The actual point at which the fireworks are to be discharged shall be at
least 200 feet from the nearest permanent building, public street or
railroad or other means of travel and at least 100 feet from the nearest
aboveground telephone or telegraph line, tree or overhead obstruction.
C. No fireworks shall be discharged at any point in the Township within
600 feet of any hospital, asylum or infirmary.
D. The audience at any supervised public display of fireworks shall be
restrained behind lines at least 100 feet from the point at which the
fireworks are to be discharged, and only the person in charge of the
display and his assistants are to be allowed within the lines.
E. All fireworks that fire projectiles shall be erected in such a manner that
the projectiles will go into the air as nearly as possible at an angle of not
more than 15° from the vertical and shall be directed away from the
position of the spectators.
F. Fireworks unfired shall, immediately following the display, be disposed
of in any manner safe for those particular types of fireworks.
51.Editor's Note: See now 53 P.S. § 66534.
§ 87-6 FIREWORKS § 87-8
87:117
Chapter 89
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 60.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 73.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 113.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
147.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 151.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 155.
Zoning — See Ch. 184.
§ 87-8 LIMERICK CODE § 87-8
87:118
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization; Intent; Applicability
§ 89-1. Legislative authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,52 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township does
hereby order as follows:
§ 89-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 89-3. Applicability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. No person, partnership, business, or corporation shall undertake, or
cause to be undertaken, any construction, development, or conduct any
activity anywhere within the identified floodplain area unless a permit
has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
52.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 89-1 FIREWORKS § 89-3
87:119

ARTICLE II
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 89-4. Identification.
The identified floodplain area shall be:
§ 89-5. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. Any areas of the Township, classified as special flood hazard areas
(SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 2, 2016, and issued
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most
recent official version thereof adopted by FEMA, including all digital
data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study and the abovereferenced
FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments are hereby adopted by the Township and declared to be a
part of this chapter. For purposes of coordination with the UCC, the
identified floodplain area shall be considered the Flood Hazard Map
referenced in IBC 2009 Sec. 1612.
A. The Floodway Area/District (FW) is identified as floodway in the FIS
which represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS.
(1) Within any Floodway Area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
B. The AE Area/District without floodway shall be those areas identified as
an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for
which base flood elevations have been provided in the FIS but no
floodway has been delineated.
(1) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use,
or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway unless it is
§ 89-4 FIREWORKS § 89-5
87:121
§ 89-6. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Limerick
Township Board of Supervisors where studies or information provided by a
qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision. However,
prior to any such change to the Special Flood Hazard Area, approval must
be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later
than six months after the date such information becomes available, a
community shall notify FEMA of the changes to the Special Flood Hazard
Area by submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 89-7. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain area boundary arise,
an initial determination shall be made by the Limerick Township Engineer
and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the
Limerick Township Board of Supervisors. The burden of proof shall be on
the appellant.
§ 89-8. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development would not, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point.
(2) No new construction or development shall be located within the
area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection Regional Office.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no onepercent-
annual chance flood elevations have been provided. For these
areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where other
acceptable information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. In lieu
of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine
the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by Limerick Township.
§ 89-5 LIMERICK CODE § 89-8
87:122
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 89-8 FIREWORKS § 89-8
87:123

ARTICLE III
Technical Provisions
§ 89-9. General.
Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or development
shall be located within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the Department
of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
§ 89-10. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the applicant to FEMA
for a letter of map revision (LOMR) as soon as practicable but within six
months of any new construction, development, or other activity
resulting in changes in the BFE. The situations when a LOMR, or
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) are required:
(1) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(2) Any development occurring in Zone AE without a designated
floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base
flood elevation; or
(3) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges).
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Residential structures.
§ 89-9 FIREWORKS § 89-10
87:125
§ 89-11. Development which may endanger human life.
(1) In the AE Area/District, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In an A Area/District, where no base flood elevations are specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or
above the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 89-5C of this chapter.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In the AE Area/District, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In an A Area/District, where no base flood elevations are specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with § 89-5C of this chapter.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Floodproofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
C. Space below the lowest floor. Fully enclosed space below the lowest
floor (excluding basements) which will be used solely for the parking of
a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
§ 89-10 LIMERICK CODE § 89-11
87:126
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act53 and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development, as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which will be used for the production
or storage of any of the following dangerous materials or substances or
which will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a
supply (more than 550 gallons or other comparable volume, or any
amount of radioactive substances) of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises shall be subject to the
provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable provisions.
The following list of materials and substances are considered
dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(13) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel, oil, etc.).
(14) Phosphorus.
(15) Potassium.
(16)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(17) Sodium.
(18) Sulfur and sulfur products.
B. Within any Floodway Area District, any structure of the kind described
in Subsection A above shall be prohibited.
53.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 89-11 FIREWORKS § 89-11
87:127
§ 89-12. Activities and obstructions prohibited. [Amended
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 369]
Within any identified floodplain area, the following obstructions and
activities shall be prohibited, and no variance shall be granted:
§ 89-13. Design and construction standards.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any structure of
the kind described in Subsection A above shall be:
(1) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation; and
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
D. Any such structure or part thereof that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Floodproofing Regulations" (United States
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with
some other equivalent watertight standard.
E. Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirements
involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements
of this section.
A. The construction, placement, enlargement or expansion of any
structure used or intended to be used for any of the following:
(1) Hospitals (public or private).
(2) Nursing homes (public or private).
(3) Jails or prisons.
(4) Single manufactured homes.
B. The commencement of or any construction of a manufactured home
park or manufactured home subdivision or substantial improvement to
an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision.
A. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure drainage at all points along streets and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
B. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
§ 89-11 LIMERICK CODE § 89-13
87:128
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages."
C. Streets. The finished elevation of proposed new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
D. Utilities. All utilities, such as gas lines and electrical and telephone
systems, being placed in flood-prone areas should be located, elevated
(where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment
during a flood.
E. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes is submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 89-11, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions, shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
§ 89-13 FIREWORKS § 89-13
87:129
§ 89-14. Existing structures in designated floodplain districts.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the following provisions shall apply.
§ 89-15. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevans and floodway infortiomation. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map Revision or letter of map revision. Submittal
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
adopted by the UCC: Secs. 801, 1203.3.2, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612,
3403, 3404, 3405, and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition adopted by the UCC: Secs. R104, R105, R106, R109, R112,
R322, Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. Existing structures located in a designated Floodway District or Area
shall not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed
expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying improvements.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within the AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with
all other existing and anticipated development, increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Within any Floodway Area/District, no new construction or
development shall be allowed, unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection regional office.
E. Within any AE Area/District without floodway, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection regional
office.
§ 89-13 LIMERICK CODE § 89-15
87:130
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 89-16. Special requirements for recreational vehicles. [Amended
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 369]
Recreational vehicles in Zones A and AE must be on the site for fewer than
180 consecutive days and must be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
§ 89-15 FIREWORKS § 89-16
87:131

ARTICLE IV
Administrative Requirements
§ 89-17. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Limerick Township Manager is appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator." The
Floodplain Administrator may: fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth
in these regulations; delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these
regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors,
and other employees; or enter into a written agreement or written contract
with another agency or private sector entity to administer specific
provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these
regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations
at 44 CFR 59.22. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator,
the Floodplain Administrator's duties are to be fulfilled by the Limerick
Township Engineer. The Floodplain Administer shall consider the
requirements of the 34 Pa. Code and the latest adopted Pennsylvania
version of the IBC and IRC.
§ 89-18. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any identified floodplain area of Limerick Township.
§ 89-19. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);54 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);55 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);56 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
54.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
55.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
56.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 89-17 FIREWORKS § 89-19
87:133
§ 89-20. Information required as part of permit application.
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour, to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
E. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of Supervisors for
whatever action it considers necessary.
F. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
maintaining records of lowest floor and floodproofing elevations for
new construction and substantial improvements, permitting, inspection
and enforcement. A complete record of all appeals for relief requests
and related actions shall be maintained by the Floodplain
Administrator. In addition, a report of all relief granted during the year
shall be included in the annual report to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
G. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to the FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
H. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the Floodplain Administrator.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Township. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
§ 89-19 LIMERICK CODE § 89-20
87:134
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
§ 89-20 FIREWORKS § 89-20
87:135
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways;
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood; and
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a Floodway Area/District (See § 89-5A.)
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation at any
point.
(d) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway (See
§ 89-5B.) when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(e) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(f) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 89-13G, Storage, and § 89-11, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
§ 89-20 LIMERICK CODE § 89-20
87:136
§ 89-21. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for construction or development in
any designated floodplain district to be considered for approval shall be
submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County Conservation
District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by the
Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
§ 89-22. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 89-23. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 89-13G and 89-11 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 89-11
during a base flood.
(g) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(h) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 89-20 FIREWORKS § 89-24
87:137
§ 89-24. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 89-25. Determination of start of construction.
Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within 180
days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire unless a
time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The
actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part
of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause
for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
§ 89-26. Enforcement.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
§ 89-24 LIMERICK CODE § 89-26
87:138
§ 89-27. Appeals.
§ 89-28. Criteria for appeals to Floodplain Appeal Board.
Upon receipt of an appeal, the Floodplain Appeal Board may grant relief
from the strict application of the requirements in accordance with the
following criteria:
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall pay a fine to the Township, of not less than $25 nor more than
$600, plus costs of prosecution. Every day the violation exists shall
constitute a separate violation and fine. In addition to the above
penalties all other actions are hereby reserved including an action in
equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a
fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter
shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue.
All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations
and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development
initiated or any structure or building constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, altered, or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may
be declared by the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors to be a
public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person, partnership, business, or corporation aggrieved by any
action or decision of the Floodplain Administrator concerning the
administration of the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the
Limerick Township Board of Supervisors ("Floodplain Appeal Board").
Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Floodplain Appeal Board shall set a
time and place, within 60 days, for the purpose of considering the
appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the appeal will be
considered shall be given to all parties.
C. Any person, partnership, business, or corporation aggrieved by the
decision of the Floodplain Appeal Board may seek relief therefrom by
appeal to the Montgomery County Court of Common Pleas within 30
days from the date of the decision by the Floodplain Appeal Board.
A. No relief shall be granted for any construction, development, use or
activities within the designated Floodway Area/District (FW) that would
cause any increase in the base flood elevation.
§ 89-26 FIREWORKS § 89-28
87:139
B. No relief shall be granted for any construction, development, use or
activities is within the AE Area/District without floodway that would,
together with all existing and anticipated development, increase the
base flood elevation more than one foot at any point.
C. Except for the possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement, no relief shall be granted for any of the requirements
pertaining to the development regulated by § 89-11, Development
which may endanger human life or § 89-12, Activities and obstructions
prohibited.
D. In reviewing any request for relief, the Floodplain Appeal Board shall
consider but not be limited to the following criteria:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause, including:
(a) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shaper, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is not possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
authorization of relief is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the relief, is granted, will not alter the essential character
of the neighborhood where the property is located, nor
substantial or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(e) Consideration shall be given to the availability of alternate
location not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
(f) Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the
proposed use with respect to the Comprehensive Plan and
floodplain management program.
(2) That the granting of the variance will not result in any
unacceptable or prohibited increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety or extraordinary public expense, nor create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict
with any other applicable local or state ordinances and regulations,
including, but not limited to:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
§ 89-28 LIMERICK CODE § 89-28
87:140
(b) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions.
(c) The safety of access to the property in times of flood of
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(d) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwater expected at the site.
(3) Consideration for the structure shall include but is not limited to:
(a) All structures shall be designed and constructed so as to have
the capability of resisting the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and pressures and effects of buoyancy of the base flood.
(b) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owners.
(c) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(d) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
(4) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(5) No relief shall be granted for any construction, development, use or
activities unless its represents the least modification necessary to
provide relief.
E. In granting any relief, the Floodplain Appeal Board may attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary
in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to achieve
the objectives of this chapter.
F. Whenever relief is granted, the Floodplain Appeal Board shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that:
(1) The granting of the relief may result in increased premium rates for
flood insurance.
(2) Such relief may increase the risks to life and property.
§ 89-28 FIREWORKS § 89-28
87:141

ARTICLE V
Definitions; General Provisions
§ 89-29. Terms defined.
The following are special definitions which shall be used in making
reasonable interpretations of the provisions contained in Articles I through
IV:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of water on normally dry land areas.
§ 89-29 FIREWORKS § 89-29
87:143
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 89-29 LIMERICK CODE § 89-29
87:144
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exit way requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after March 2, 2016, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after March 3,
1981, and before March 2, 2016, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the
time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within
180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated March 16,
1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
§ 89-29 FIREWORKS § 89-29
87:145
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated March 16,
1981, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A or AE.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 89-29 LIMERICK CODE § 89-29
87:146
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage" (or "repetitive loss" when a repetitive
loss provision is used), regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation
that would constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this chapter,
must comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation
that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure
from the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of
historic places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or
the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by The Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
§ 89-29 FIREWORKS § 89-29
87:147
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 89-30. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 89-31. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the Ordinance, which shall remain
in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 89-32. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted
engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights
may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and
bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that areas
outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within
such areas, will be free from flooding or flood damages. Chapter 89 of the
Limerick Township Code shall not create liability on the part of Limerick
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 89-29 LIMERICK CODE § 89-32
87:148
Chapter 95
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 57.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 66.
Garbage disposal in mobile home parks — See
Ch. 113.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 168.
§ 95-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all territory embraced within the corporate limits
of the Township of Limerick and the area of police jurisdiction thereof, as
now established or as may hereafter be established.
§ 95-2. Intent.
The maintenance of health and sanitation require, and it is the intention
hereof, to make the collection, removal and disposal of garbage, refuse and
dead animals within the Township of Limerick compulsory and universal.
§ 95-3. Definitions; word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — Includes the solid waste products of coal, wood and other
fuels used for heating and cooking.
GARBAGE — Includes all putrescible wastes, except sewage and body
wastes, including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of dead
animals, but not including recognized industrial by-products.
PERSON — Every person, firm, copartnership, association, corporation,
estate or trust.
REFUSE — Includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, swill and all other
putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except sewage.
RUBBISH — Includes all nonputrescible wastes, except ashes.
SWILL — Includes every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or
vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use,
cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit and vegetables.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The official Township Manager of the
Township of Limerick.
B. Words herein used in the plural shall include the singular, and in the
singular shall include the plural; words herein used in the present tense
§ 89-32 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 95-3
95:149
§ 95-4. Administration and enforcement.
§ 95-5. Proper accumulation and storage.
shall include the future tense; and in the masculine shall include the
feminine and neuter genders.
A. The Township Manager shall be authorized to prepare any rules and
regulations for the efficient administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. Such rules and regulations, when approved
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and published, shall become
and are hereby made a part of this chapter and any person violating any
one of such rules shall be punished as for a violation of this chapter.
B. The Township Manager may designate the Code Enforcement Officer to
specifically enforce the provisions of this chapter.
A. It shall be the duty of every person occupying, in possession, charge or
control of any dwelling, flat, rooming house, apartment house, hospital,
school, hotel, club, restaurant, boardinghouse or eating place or
occupying, in possession, charge or control of any shop, place of
business or manufacturing establishment where garbage, refuse or
swill is created or accumulated, at all times, to keep or cause to be kept
portable appurtenances, metal or other approved cans or containers, of
approved size and/or capacity, for the deposit therein of garbage and
refuse and to deposit or cause to be deposited the same therein.
B. It shall be the duty of the producer (user) to furnish or to arrange for
the procurement of a container or containers, as herein designated.
Such containers shall be constructed in such a manner as to be strong,
watertight, not easily corrodible, rodentproof, insectproof, of not more
than 20 gallons' capacity and have tight-fitting lids, except as otherwise
authorized by the provisions of this section. Such lids shall not be
removed, except when necessary to place garbage and refuse in such
containers or to take the same therefrom. Such containers shall be kept
in a sanitary condition with the outside thereof clean and free from
accumulative grease and decomposing material, and this responsibility
shall be that of the producer, except where otherwise provided by
regulations adopted by the Township Manager. Each container shall be
kept in a place accessible to the collector at ground level or as
otherwise approved by the Township Manager.
C. Each garbage container shall be kept clean inside and out so that no
odor nuisance shall exist. The collector shall place tags on garbage
containers found to be in violation of this section and notify the
Township Manager. Two or more violations of this provision by persons
shall subject the persons to penalties as hereinafter set forth.
D. Large suitable containers for both collection of garbage and refuse may,
with the approval of the Township Manager, be used by hotels,
§ 95-3 LIMERICK CODE § 95-5
95:150
§ 95-6. Unlawful means of disposal.
§ 95-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation, except a licensed collector, who shall
violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to a fine of not more than $500 and/or imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days.
§ 95-8. Reimbursement of costs.
In the event that a person has violated any provision of this chapter and
the Township has expended sums of money in order to correct or remedy
the violation, the Township shall be permitted to recover from the violator,
through any enforcement proceeding, the sums expended for remedying the
violation.
§ 95-9. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter is, for any reason,
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter. It is hereby
restaurants, boardinghouses, eating places, apartment houses, schools
and hospitals.
E. Specially manufactured wet-strength paper bags, designed to be used
as refuse containers with a capacity of not more than 30 gallons, may be
used for refuse containers, provided that said paper bags are secured
by a holder equipped with a tight-fitting lid. If stored outside a building,
said paper bags and holders must be enclosed or protected by wire
mesh to prevent animals from tearing the paper bags.
F. It shall be the duty of the person in possession, charge or control of any
dead animal or upon whose premises the same may be located
forthwith to cause the same to be removed and disposed of by the Code
Enforcement Officer or by procuring proper authorization from the
Township Manager.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, burn, dump, collect, remove
or in any other manner dispose of garbage or swill upon any street,
alley, public place or private property within the Township of Limerick,
otherwise than as herein provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, burn or dump wastepaper,
boxes, rubbish and debris, grass, leaves, weeds and cuttings from trees,
lawns, shrubs and gardens, upon any street, alley or public place, or to
collect or remove the same over any public right-of-way of the Township
of Limerick, except as to wastepaper and box collectors, who shall be
duly authorized and licensed by the Township.
§ 95-5 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 95-9
95:151
declared as the intent of the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors that
this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
Chapter 98
GASOLINE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 84. Zoning — See Ch. 184.
§ 98-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTOMER — Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall receive
flammable products, whether by retail sale or any other method, from any
retail filling station or service station.
RETAIL FILLING STATION or SERVICE STATION — Any place in the
Township of Limerick where pumps or other dispensing devices are
available for the dispensing of gasoline or other flammable liquids for sale
to the public.
§ 98-2. Dispensing of gasoline by customers restricted.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, operator or employee of any
retail filling station or service station located in the Township of
Limerick, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, to permit any purchaser,
customer or other person to use or manipulate any pump, hose, pipe or
other device for pumping or dispensing gasoline or other flammable
liquid for any purpose, unless such dispensing of gasoline or other
flammable liquid shall be conducted under the supervision of a person
trained in the dispensing of such gasoline or flammable liquids,
hereinafter referred to as an "attendant," under such conditions that
the person supervising shall be within 15 feet of emergency controls,
including the main power shutoff switch or switches, and not more than
100 feet from the point of dispensing of such gasoline or flammable
liquids at all times during the dispensing of such gasoline or flammable
liquid.
B. It shall be unlawful for any purchaser or customer of a gasoline filling or
service station in the Township of Limerick, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, to use or manipulate any pump, hose, pipe or other
device for the pumping or dispensing of gasoline or other flammable
liquid for any purpose, unless such dispensing of gasoline or other
flammable liquid shall be conducted under the supervision of a person
trained in the dispensing of such gasoline or flammable liquid and
§ 95-9 LIMERICK CODE § 98-2
98:152
§ 98-3. Posting of notice on premises.
Every retail filling station or service station located in the Township of
Limerick, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, shall at all times, have posted
at conspicuous locations on the premises at least three signs of minimum
size of 12 inches by 15 inches with lettering no less than a uniform size of
1/2 inch, having affixed thereon the following statement:
IT IS UNLAWFUL UNDER ORDINANCE NO. 83 OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
LIMERICK FOR CUSTOMERS TO HANDLE PUMPS OR HOSES FOR
DISPENSING FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS UNLESS AN ATTENDANT IS
WITHIN 15 FEET OF EMERGENCY SHUTOFF CONTROLS AND WITHIN
100 FEET OF THE POINT OF DISPENSING.
§ 98-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No.
109]
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who or which shall violate the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 together with the costs
of prosecution, or, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned for not
more than 30 days.
Chapter 101
HAZARDOUS ACCIDENTS
§ 101-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS — Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity engaged
in the buying, selling, storing, transferring, transporting or manufacturing
or processing of properties, merchandise, chemicals, fuels, waste products
or any other goods or services for compensation.
under such conditions that the person supervising shall be within 15
feet of emergency controls, including the main power shutoff switch or
switches, and not more than 100 feet from the point of dispensing of
such gasoline or flammable liquids.
The intervention of the Township of Limerick Police Department or any
of the emergency agencies or services which may assist the Township of
Limerick, including but not limited to fire companies or rescue squads
operating in the Township of Limerick; or
A.
The need for cleanup or abatement measures to be performed by
Township employees or the need for any responsive action resulting in
expense to the Township.
B.
§ 98-2 HAZARDOUS ACCIDENTS § 101-1
101:153
DANGEROUS INCIDENT — Any incident which creates a dangerous
condition requiring immediate and emergency action in order to prevent
injury to persons or damage to property and which necessitates either or
both of the following responses:
HAZARDOUS ACCIDENT — Any incident that occurs from the storage,
transportation, use or manufacturing, processing or discharging of any
substance potentially dangerous to the public health and welfare at large,
which necessitates either or both of the following responses:
PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE — Bridges, state highways, county roads,
Township roads, any navigable waterways or other roadways or
watercourses owned by a governmental unit; or a privately owned street,
parking lot or accessway to which the public has access.
§ 101-2. Cost of abatement.
The intervention of the Township of Limerick Police Department or any
of the emergency agencies or services which may service the Township
of Limerick, including but not limited to fire companies or rescue
squads operating in the Township of Limerick; or
A.
The need for cleanup or abatement measures to be performed by the
Township employees or the need for any responsive action resulting in
expense to the Township.
B.
A. The business which owns or leases the premises on which a hazardous
accident occurs shall be responsible for all costs that occur as a direct
or consequential result of a hazardous accident. In the event that a
hazardous accident occurs during transportation on a public
thoroughfare or in delivery to an entity other than a business as defined
in § 101-1 hereinabove, the entity who owns or has custody or control of
the vehicle or substance involved in the hazardous accident shall be
responsible for all costs that occur as a direct or consequential result of
such accident. Nothing contained herein shall prevent such business or
entity from recovering any costs from a third party whose negligence
may have caused such hazardous accident.
B. In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon
order of an official of the Township of Limerick, to clean up or abate the
effects of any hazardous accident, the Township may take such action
as deemed necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the cleanup
or abatement. The business or entity described in Subsection A
hereinabove shall be liable to the Township for all costs incurred as a
result of such supervision or verification.
C. For the purpose of this chapter, the costs of a hazardous accident shall
include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Expenses incurred by police, fire or emergency medical benefits
and administrative overhead.
§ 101-1 LIMERICK CODE § 101-2
101:154
§ 101-3. Cost of emergency response to dangerous incidents.
(2) The costs of consultants or others preparing reports concerning the
hazardous accident.
(3) The costs of equipment operations.
(4) The costs of materials obtained directly by the Township.
(5) The cost of any contractual labor and materials for cleanup or
abatement.
(6) The costs of the Township Solicitor and the Township Engineer
connected with the hazardous accident.
(7) The costs to replace or repair any damage caused to equipment
utilized by the Township or any other service agency which
responded to the accident.
D. The costs resulting from the hazardous accident shall be paid directly to
the Township within 30 days from the date on which the Township
issues and invoice or other appropriate demand for such costs. Interest
shall accrue on any unpaid invoice at the rate of 1% to 1 1/2% per
month, commencing after the expiration of the thirty-day grace period.
A. Any entity which owns or has custody or has control of any motor
vehicle or other instrumentality that creates a dangerous incident as
defined by this chapter or any entity which owns or leases any real
property upon which a dangerous incident takes place shall be
responsible for all costs of any emergency response that arises as a
direct or consequential result of such incident. Nothing contained
herein shall prevent such entity from recovering any costs from a third
party whose negligence may have caused such dangerous incident.
B. In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon
order of any official of the Township of Limerick, to clean up or abate
the effects of any dangerous incident, the Township may take such
action as deemed necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the
cleanup or abatement. The entity described in Subsection A
hereinabove shall be liable to the Township for all costs incurred as a
result of such supervision or verification.
C. For the purpose of this chapter, the costs of a dangerous incident shall
include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Expenses incurred by police, fire or emergency medical services.
(2) The actual labor costs of Township personnel, including benefits
and administrative overhead.
(3) The costs of consultants or others preparing reports concerning the
dangerous incidents.
§ 101-2 HAZARDOUS ACCIDENTS § 101-3
101:155
Chapter 104
HUNTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 122.
§ 104-1. Hunting restricted.
The practice of hunting for, shooting at or pursuing any living creature
within the Township of Limerick between October 1 and January 15 of the
year following, such dates being inclusive, is hereby declared unlawful and
prohibited.
§ 104-2. Exemptions.
The provisions of § 104-1 hereof shall not apply to:
(4) The costs of equipment operations.
(5) The costs of materials obtained directly by the Township.
(6) The cost of any contractual labor and materials for cleanup or
abatement.
(7) The costs of the Township Solicitor and the Township Engineer
connected with the dangerous incident.
(8) The costs to replace or repair any damage caused to equipment
utilized by the Township or any other service agency which
responded to the incident.
D. The costs resulting from the dangerous incident shall be paid directly to
the Township within 30 days from the date on which the Township
issues an invoice or other appropriate demand for such costs. Interest
shall accrue on any unpaid invoice at the rate of 1% to 1 1/2% per
month, commencing after the expiration of the thirty-day grace period.
A. A property owner or lessee engaged in such activity upon his own
property.
B. A person having in his possession the current written consent of the
owner or lessee of the property upon which he is so engaged. Such
written consent shall be on the form provided by the Township Board of
Supervisors and made available by them for general distribution
throughout the Township. Such written consent shall in no case be valid
for a period greater than one year from the date of issuance.
C. A person engaged in such activity upon lands owned by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any agency thereof.
§ 101-3 LIMERICK CODE § 104-2
104:156
§ 104-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge, be fined a
sum of not less than $25 and no more than $50 plus costs of prosecution
for each offense, or, in default of the payment of such fine and costs, such
person or persons shall be committed to the Montgomery County Jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 106
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 95.
Solid waste — See Ch. 149.
Zoning — See Ch. 184.
§ 106-1. Definitions and word usage.
D. The trapping of predators and fur-bearing animals.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
FARM MACHINERY — All types of machinery and equipment which
were originally manufactured for farm use, which are retained on farm
properties either as operable equipment or for the purpose of salvaging
repair parts.
JUNK — Any discarded or salvageable article or material, including but
not limited to scrap metal, paper, rags, glass containers, scrap wood,
motor vehicles, trailer machinery and equipment, with the exceptions
of farm machinery and mobile homes or house trailers, which are
occupied or are properly placed and planned for occupancy.
JUNK DEALER — Any person who buys, sells, salvages, stores or in any
way deals in junk or owns, leases, operates or maintains a junkyard
within the municipality.
JUNKYARD — Any place where junk, as herein defined, is stored or
accumulated. Any premises, as herein defined, having two or more
unlicensed motor vehicles and/or unlicensed trailers thereon shall be
deemed to be a "junkyard," except that the foregoing shall not apply
to duly licensed automobile dealers having operable vehicles on their
premises for resale or the individual resident having a maximum of two
inoperable vehicles being stored for restoration purposes.
§ 104-2 JUNKYARDS § 106-1
106:157
§ 106-2. License required; application; fees; renewal;
nontransferability.
No person may be a junk dealer, as herein defined, within the municipality
without first obtaining a license to operate as herein described.
MOTOR VEHICLE — All types of automobiles, trucks and tractors,
including self-propelled machinery of all kinds, with the exception of
farm machinery.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, company,
corporation or other legal entity.
PREMISES — Any parcel of land situated in the Township of Limerick,
having a separate Tax Map parcel number for county assessment
purposes.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal,
residual or hazardous waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material.
TRAILER — Any wheeled vehicles not self-propelled, drawn by a motor
vehicle.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. Any person desiring to be a licensed junk dealer in the Township of
Limerick shall first make written application to the Board of
Supervisors. Such application shall be in the form established by the
Board of Supervisors and shall set forth the applicant's name and
address, include an accurate description of the premises on which the
junkyard is to be located, including the Montgomery County Tax Map
parcel number(s), and a statement that the applicant will comply with
this chapter and any regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, and
such other information as the Board of Supervisors may require.
B. An application for license under this chapter shall be examined by the
Board of Supervisors or duly authorized agent thereof, and a license
shall be issued or refused within 60 days of submission to the Board of
Supervisors. Examination of the application shall include consideration
of the suitability of the property proposed to be used for the purpose of
license, the character of nearby properties and the effect of the
proposed use upon the Township of Limerick. When the application is
found in compliance with the provisions herein given, the Board of
Supervisors or its agent shall issue a license to the junk dealer
applicant for operation of the junkyard as described in the application.
C. The license fee shall consist of two parts: the application fee shall be
$50, and is not returnable in case of refusal of license; the annual
license fee shall be $200 per year. All fees are due, payable to and for
the use of the Township of Limerick at time of application. The Board of
§ 106-1 LIMERICK CODE § 106-2
106:158
§ 106-3. Posting of licenses; operating procedures.
The license under which the junkyard is operated shall, at all times, be
conspicuously posted on the licensed premises, and the operating
requirements as herein provided shall be complied with.
§ 106-4. Manner of storage of junk.
All junk in junkyards licensed under this chapter shall be stored as herein
provided:
Supervisors or its agent may waive the application fee when issuing
renewed licenses. The period of any license issued under this chapter
shall be one calendar year or portion thereof and shall terminate on
December 31 of the year in which issued.
D. Licenses issued under this chapter are required to be renewed on or
before January 1 of the year in which it is desired to continue
operations. Such application for renewal must be in writing, in such
form as may be required by the Board of Supervisors and accompanied
by the license fee. Renewal applications are subject to complete
reexamination and consideration by the Board of Supervisors or its
agents for continued compliance with the terms of this chapter.
E. No person licensed under this chapter shall, by virtue of one license,
operate more than one business or junkyard within the municipality. No
person shall engage in business or operate a junkyard at any place
other than the place designated by his license. Licenses are
nontransferable, both as to junk dealer and junkyard premises. The
permitted size of the junkyard shall be fixed at the time of license
issuance, with due regard for the existing and proposed uses of the
surrounding area and properties, and shall not be in excess of 25 acres,
excluding setback areas.
A. Permanent records of all junk received in or removed from any junkyard
shall be kept by the junk dealer on the premises, containing the name
and address from whom received or to whom delivered, the date
thereof and a description of the junk. Such records shall be open to
inspection at all reasonable times to the Township Code Enforcement
Officer and to any law enforcement officer.
A. All junk shall be set back at least 40 feet from any adjoining premises
and at least 60 feet from the nearest right-of-way of any public street,
road or highway.
B. All junk shall be stored and arranged so as to permit access by firefighting
equipment. Junked motor vehicles shall be spaced in rows with
at least 20 feet between double rows; other junk shall be stored in piles
or tiers which shall be separated by aisles or cleared areas of no less
than 10 feet.
§ 106-2 JUNKYARDS § 106-4
106:159
§ 106-5. Time limit for allowing certain materials to remain on
premises.
Paper, rags, plastic and similar materials for salvage shall not be
accumulated or remain on the junkyard premises for more than 30 days.
Materials separated as solid waste shall not be accumulated for more than
30 days.
§ 106-6. Burning restricted.
Not more than one motor vehicle or its equivalent may be burned at any
one time. Gasoline, grease, oil, tires or similar materials which could be
dangerous or tend to produce obnoxious smoke or odors shall not be burned
at any time. Any and all burning or melting on junkyard premises shall be
properly attended and controlled at all times.
§ 106-7. Certain materials not to be received or stored.
Garbage, organic waste or plain solid waste shall not be received or stored
in any junkyard. Materials designated as solid waste may be received only
as mixed with salvageable materials, and shall be promptly disposed of as
herein provided.
§ 106-8. Fencing and screening; maintenance.
Every junk dealer licensed under this chapter shall enclose and maintain his
junkyard as herein provided:
C. Junk shall be arranged so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water and shall be stacked to a height of not more than 15 feet from the
ground.
D. Paper, rags, plastics and similar materials for salvage shall be stored
indoors.
A. Every junkyard premises shall be completely enclosed by a fence. Such
fence shall be set back in accordance with the provisions of § 106-4A of
this chapter, shall be six to eight feet in height and shall be of wood or
wire with maximum linear openings of three inches. Entrance gates
shall be of similar material, well constructed and shall be kept securely
locked, except during business hours. Fencing shall be maintained in
good condition throughout its length at all times.
B. Junkyard premises which have open-wire fence enclosures visible from
an abutting public thoroughfare or from an abutting residential
property within 500 feet of the fence shall have a landscaped screen of
trees and/or shrubs, of varieties capable of attaining a continuous
height of six feet within two years, planted along such fence or section
of fence. All required open areas between fence and lot lines of the
premises shall be maintained continuously in good order, free of weeds
and scrub growth.
§ 106-4 LIMERICK CODE § 106-8
106:160
§ 106-9. Right of entry for inspection; additional regulations
authorized.
Every junk dealer and junkyard licensed under this chapter is subject to
inspection and regulation as herein provided:
§ 106-10. Time limit for existing establishments to comply and
obtain license.
Junk dealers and junkyards operating and existing in the Township of
Limerick on the effective date of this chapter shall be required to comply
with the provisions of and obtain a license under this chapter within three
months from the effective date. However, an extension of the time allotted
in complying with the terms of this chapter may be granted at the direction
of the Board of Supervisors. Such extension shall be for good reason.
§ 106-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 106-12. Enforcement remedies.
The Board of Supervisors may take any appropriate action, at law or equity,
civil or criminal, to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and this chapter
shall in no way restrict any remedies otherwise provided by law.
C. The area inside the fence and lot lines of any junkyard premises shall
have weeds mowed regularly and not permitted to go to seed.
D. All junkyard premises shall be maintained in such manner so as not to
cause a public or private nuisance; nor shall they cause any menace to
the health or safety of persons off the premises; nor shall they cause any
excessive or offensive or noxious odors or sounds; nor shall they cause
the breeding, harboring or infesting of rats, rodents or vermin; nor shall
they be in violation of any health or sanitation law or ordinance or
regulation of any governmental body.
A. The Township Code Enforcement Officer may, at any reasonable time,
enter upon the premises currently licensed or for which a license
application is pending.
B. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, pursuant to
resolution, adopt regulations to carry out the provisions of this chapter,
upon giving notice to licensees affected by such regulations.
§ 106-8 JUNKYARDS § 106-13
106:161
§ 106-13. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
§ 106-14. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter is, for any reason,
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this chapter would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence,
clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
§ 106-15. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon enactment.
Chapter 110
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 110, Lewis Road Corridor, adopted 2-7-1989 by Ord. No.
107, was repealed 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 393.]
Chapter 111
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 111, Mechanical Standards, adopted 11-20-1990 by Ord.
No. 122, was repealed 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 391.]
Chapter 113
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 66.
Driveways — See Ch. 75.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 89.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 146.
Zoning — See Ch. 184.
§ 113-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME — A mobile home which does not have a flush
toilet and a bath or shower.
§ 106-13 LIMERICK CODE § 113-1
113:162
HEALTH OFFICER — The legally designated Code Enforcement Officer of
Limerick Township or his authorized representative.[Amended 4-4-1989
by Ord. No. 109]
INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME — A mobile home which has a flush toilet
and a bath or shower.
MOBILE HOME — Any vehicle or similar portable structure designed for
use as a conveyance upon highways, having no foundation other than
wheels or removable jacks and so designed or constructed as to permit
occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any lot under single and separate ownership
upon which two or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping
purposes, are located.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park,
designated for the accommodation of one mobile home.
PERMIT — A written permit issued by the health officer permitting the
mobile home park to operate under this chapter and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company or
association.
SERVICE BUILDING — A building housing toilet and bathing facilities for
men and women, with laundry facilities and such other facilities as may be
required by this chapter.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one or
more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is separate
and distinct from that of any adjoining lot.
§ 113-2. Permit required; application; issuance and suspension.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or operate any
mobile home park within the limits of Limerick Township unless he
holds a valid permit issued annually pursuant to this chapter by the
health officer in the name of such person for the specific mobile home
park. The application fee which must accompany the application shall
be in an amount set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.57 All
applications for permits shall be made to the health officer, who shall
issue a permit upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this
chapter and of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto and of any
other applicable legal requirements. No permit shall be transferable.
Every person holding such a permit shall give notice in writing to the
health officer within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away
or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any mobile home park.
Such notice shall include the name and address of the person
57.Editor's Note: The current permit fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township
Secretary.
§ 113-1 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 113-2
113:163
succeeding to the ownership or control of such mobile home park.
[Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
B. Applications.
(1) Applications for original permits under this chapter shall be in
writing, signed by the applicant and accompanied by an affidavit of
the applicant as to the truth of the applicant and shall contain the
following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The interest of the applicant in and the location and legal
description of the mobile home park.
(c) A complete plan of the mobile home park, showing compliance
with all applicable provisions of this chapter and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
(d) Such further information as may be requested by the health
officer to enable him to determine that the proposed mobile
home park will comply with legal requirements.
(e) A certification of the State Department of Health or other
appropriate state agency that the sewage disposal system
presently being utilized is satisfactory or, when deemed
necessary by the health officer, a similar certification from an
engineer employed by the Township.
(2) Applications for renewals of permits shall be made in writing by the
holder of the permit and shall contain the following:
(a) Any change in the information submitted since the time the
original permit was issued or the latest renewal granted.
(b) Such other information as the health officer may require,
including, if deemed necessary by the health officer, such
certifications as are required in Subsection B(1)(e) herein.
C. A complete plan for the purpose of obtaining a permit to be issued by
the health officer shall show:
(1) The area and dimensions of the tract of land.
(2) The number, location and size of all mobile home spaces.
(3) The location and width of roadways and walkways.
(4) The location of service buildings and any other proposed
structures.
(5) The location of water and sewer lines.
(6) Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park.
§ 113-2 LIMERICK CODE § 113-2
113:164
§ 113-3. Inspection of mobile home parks.
D. Any person whose application for a permit under this chapter has been
denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before
the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors under the procedure
provided by § 113-4 of this chapter.
E. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, the health officer
finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any
provision of this chapter or of any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, the health officer shall give notice, in writing, in accordance
with § 113-4A, to the person to whom the permit was issued that, unless
such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of
time specified in the notice by the health officer, the permit will be
suspended. At the end of such period, the health officer shall reinspect
such mobile home park and, if such conditions or practices have not
been corrected, he shall suspend the permit and give notice, in writing,
of such suspension to the person to whom the permit was issued. Upon
receipt of notice of suspension, such person shall cease operation of
such mobile home park except as provided in § 113-4B.
F. Any person whose permit has been suspended or who has received
notice from the health officer that his permit will be suspended unless
certain conditions or practices at the mobile home park are corrected
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
Limerick Township Board of Supervisors under the procedure provided
by § 113-4 of this chapter, provided that, when no petition for such
hearing shall have been filed within 10 days following the day on which
notice of suspension was served, such permit shall be deemed to have
been automatically revoked at the expiration of such ten-day period.
G. Nothing herein shall be construed to invalidate any trailer camp permit
issued for the year in which this chapter is enacted. This chapter shall
require, however, full compliance with this chapter in the event that any
presently existing mobile home park desires or attempts to make any
changes whatsoever in its operation.
A. The health officer is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of mobile home parks located
within Limerick Township in order that he may perform his duty of
safeguarding the health and safety of occupants of mobile home parks
and of the general public.
B. The health officer shall have the power to enter at reasonable times
upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and
investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter or
of regulations promulgated thereunder.
C. The health officer shall have the power to inspect the register
containing a record of all mobile homes and occupants using the mobile
home park.
§ 113-2 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 113-3
113:165
§ 113-4. Notice of violation; hearings; orders.
D. It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile home parks
and mobile homes contained therein or of the person in charge thereof
to give the health officer free access to such premises at reasonable
times for the purpose of inspection.
E. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the
owner thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such
mobile home park or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with this chapter or with any lawful regulations adopted
thereunder or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
A. Whenever the health officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give
notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom the permit was
issued, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require,
provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has
been sent by certified mail to the address listed on the current
annual permit application or when he has been served with such
notice by any other method authorized or required by the laws of
this state.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Limerick Township Board of
Supervisors, provided that such person shall file in the office of the
Limerick Township Board of Supervisors a written petition requesting
such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor
within 10 days after the day the notice was served. The filing of the
request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the
suspension, except in the case of an order issued under Subsection E
below. Upon receipt of such petition, the Limerick Township Board of
Supervisors shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give
the petitioner and the health officer written notice thereof. At such
§ 113-3 LIMERICK CODE § 113-4
113:166
§ 113-5. Additional rules and regulations.
The Limerick Township Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to make
and, after public hearing, to adopt such written regulations as may be
necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Such
regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this
chapter, and the penalty for violation of the provisions thereof shall be
the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as
hereinafter provided.
hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and
to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing
shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on which the
petition was filed, provided that, upon application of the petitioner, the
Limerick Township Board of Supervisors may postpone the date of the
hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period when, in its
judgment, the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reasons for
such postponement.
C. After such hearing, the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors shall
make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
regulations issued thereunder and shall issue an order in writing
sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice which shall be served
as provided in Subsection A(4) above. Upon failure to comply with any
order sustaining or modifying a notice, the permit of the mobile home
park affected by the order shall be revoked.
D. The proceedings at such a hearing, including the findings and decision
of the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors, together with a copy of
every notice and order related thereto, shall be entered as a matter of
public record in the office of the Limerick Township Board of
Supervisors, but the transcript of the proceedings need not be
transcribed unless judicial review of the decision is sought as provided
by this section. It shall be the duty of the person seeking such judicial
review to provide such transcript. Any person aggrieved by the decision
of the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors may seek relief
therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the
laws of this state.
E. Whenever the health officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he may deem
necessary to meet the emergency, including the suspension of the
permit. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, such
order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order
is directed shall comply therewith immediately but, upon petition to the
Limerick Township Board of Supervisors, shall be afforded a hearing as
soon as possible. The provisions of Subsections C and D shall be
applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter.
§ 113-4 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 113-6
113:167
§ 113-6. Location, space and general layout.
A. The mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site and shall
be so located that its drainage will not endanger any water supply. All
such mobile home parks shall be in areas free from marshes, swamps or
other potential breeding places for insects or rodents.
B. The area of the mobile home park shall be large enough to
accommodate:
(1) The designated number of mobile home spaces.
(2) Necessary streets and roadways.
(3) Parking areas for motor vehicles.
C. Each independent mobile home space shall contain a minimum of 2,500
square feet and shall be at least 40 feet wide. Each dependent mobile
home space shall contain not less than 1,000 square feet and shall be at
least 25 feet wide. Every mobile home space shall abut on a driveway or
other clear area with unobstructed access to a public street. Such
spaces shall be defined, and mobile homes shall be parked in such
spaces so that there will be a minimum of 15 feet between mobile
homes and so that no mobile home will be less than 10 feet from the
exterior boundary of the mobile home park.
(1) Independent mobile home spaces in existence on the effective date
of this chapter which have a width or area less than the minimum
prescribed above may continue to operate for a period not to
exceed one year from the effective date of this chapter, provided
that the health officer finds that:
(a) Immediate compliance with such minimum width and area
requirements would constitute an unreasonable hardship; and
(b) The owner is undertaking action reasonably calculated to
comply with such requirements during the time prescribed
herein.
(2) Upon such a finding, the health officer may issue a temporary
permit pending such corrective action.
D. It shall be unlawful to locate a mobile home less than 25 feet from any
public street or highway or so that any part of such mobile home will
obstruct any roadway or walkway in a mobile home park.
E. It shall be unlawful to allow:
(1) Any mobile home to be occupied in a mobile home park unless the
mobile home is situated on a mobile home space; or
(2) An independent mobile home to be located on a dependent mobile
home space.
§ 113-6 LIMERICK CODE § 113-6
113:168
§ 113-7. Service buildings.
F. Access roads with an all-weather surface shall be provided to each
mobile home space. Each access road shall provide for continuous
forward movement, shall connect with a street or highway and shall
have a minimum width of 20 feet.
G. Areas with an all-weather surface shall be provided for the parking of
motor vehicles. Such areas shall accommodate at least the number of
vehicles equal to double the number of mobile home spaces provided.
H. The all-weather surface required in Subsections F and G shall include
gravel, stone, concrete, macadam and/or similar materials.
I. Outside drying spaces or other clothes-drying facilities shall be
provided. When central outdoor clothes-drying space is provided, a
minimum of 2,500 square feet per 100 mobile home spaces shall be
furnished. Outdoor clothes-drying facilities may be installed on the
individual mobile home spaces as a part of the basic facilities.
A. Service building required.
(1) Each mobile home park shall be provided with at least one service
building adequately equipped with flush-type toilet fixtures and
other sanitary facilities as required in this chapter. No service
building shall contain less than one toilet for females and one toilet
for males, one lavatory and shower or bathtub for each sex and one
laundry tray.
(2) All sanitary facilities required to be provided by Subsections A
through D, inclusive, shall be located in a service building.
B. Number and location of facilities.
(1) Every mobile home park that accommodates dependent mobile
homes shall provide not less than the following facilities:
(a) For not more than 10 dependent mobile homes: one laundry
tray; two water closets, one lavatory and one shower or
bathtub for females; one water closet, one urinal, one lavatory
and one shower or bathtub for males; and one slop-water
closet, consisting of at least one flush-type toilet bowl
receptacle for emptying containers of human excreta, with an
adequate supply of hot and cold water for cleaning such
containers, which shall be a separate room of a service
building with a single direct opening to the outside.
(b) For more than 10 dependent mobile homes, the following
additional fixtures shall be provided: one lavatory and one
shower or bathtub for each sex for every additional 10
dependent mobile homes or fraction thereof; one water closet
for females for every additional 10 dependent mobile homes or
§ 113-6 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 113-7
113:169
§ 113-8. Water supply.
fraction thereof; one water closet for males for every additional
15 dependent mobile homes or fraction thereof, provided that
urinals may be substituted for not more than 1/3 of the
additional water closets required under this subsection.
(2) Dependent mobile home spaces shall be not more than 200 feet
from a service building.
C. Service buildings shall:
(1) Be located 15 feet or more from any mobile home space and, where
dependent mobile homes are accommodated, not more than 200
feet from a dependent mobile home space.
(2) Be of permanent construction and be adequately lighted.
(3) Be of moisture-resistant material to permit frequent washing and
cleaning.
(4) Have adequate heating facilities to maintain a temperature of 70°
F. during cold weather and to supply adequate hot water during the
time of peak demands.
(5) Have all rooms well ventilated, with all openings effectively
screened.
(6) Provide separate compartments for each bathtub or shower and
water closet and a sound-resistant wall to separate male and
female toilet facilities.
D. Laundry facilities.
(1) Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one laundry unit
to every 30 mobile home spaces and shall be in a separate
soundproof room of a service building or in a separate building.
(2) A laundry unit shall consist of not less than one laundry tray and
one clothes-washing machine.
A. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be
provided in each mobile home park, capable of furnishing a minimum of
150 gallons per day per mobile home space. Where a public supply of
water of such quality is available, connection shall be made thereto, and
its supply shall be used exclusively.
B. The water system of the mobile home park shall be connected by pipes
to all buildings and all mobile home spaces.
C. All water piping shall be constructed and maintained in accordance
with state and local law. The water piping system shall not be connected
with nonpotable or questionable water supplies and shall be protected
against the hazards of backflow or back-siphonage.
§ 113-7 LIMERICK CODE § 113-8
113:170
§ 113-9. Sewage disposal.
D. Where drinking fountains are provided for public use, they shall be of a
type and in locations approved by the health officer.
E. Individual water-service connections which are provided for direct use
by mobile homes shall be so constructed that they will not be damaged
by the parking of such mobile homes. The mobile home park water
system shall be adequate to provide 20 pounds per square inch of
pressure at all mobile home connections.
F. Every well shall be located and constructed in such a manner that
neither underground nor surface contamination will reach the water
supply from any source. A minimum distance of 150 feet shall be
maintained between the water supply and any cesspool. A minimum
distance of 100 feet shall be maintained between the water supply and
any other possible source of contamination, except that sewers or pipes
through which sewage may back up shall be located at least 50 feet
from any well or water-suction pipeline. Where such sewers or pipes
are specifically constructed to provide adequate safeguards and when
specifically authorized by the health officer, such sewers or pipes
through which sewage may back up may be closer than 50 feet but not
less than 30 feet from a well.
G. No well casings, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall be
located in any pit, room or space extending below ground level nor in
any room or space above ground which is walled in or otherwise
enclosed, unless such rooms, whether above or below ground, have free
drainage by gravity to the surface of the ground. The floor of rooms
above ground shall be at least six inches above the ground's surface. All
floors shall be watertight and sloped from the pump pedestal to the
drain. The pedestal shall be not less than 12 inches above the floor.
H. All water storage reservoirs shall be watertight and constructed of
impervious material, and all overflows and vents of such reservoirs
shall be effectively screened. Open reservoirs are prohibited. Manholes
shall be constructed with overlapping covers so as to prevent the
entrance of contaminated material. Overflow pipes from a reservoir
shall not connect to any pipe in which sewage or polluted water may
back up.
I. Underground stop- and wastecocks shall not be installed on any
connection.
A. All plumbing and sewage disposal systems in the mobile home park
shall comply with state and local laws and regulations.58
B. Each independent mobile home space shall be provided with at least a
three-inch sewer connection. The sewer connection shall be provided
58.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 140, Sewers and Sewage Disposal.
§ 113-8 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 113-9
113:171
§ 113-10. Refuse and garbage disposal.
with suitable fittings so that a watertight connection can be made
between the mobile home drain and the sewer connection. Such
individual mobile home connections shall be so constructed that they
can be closed when not linked to a mobile home and shall be capped so
as to prevent any escape of odors.
C. Sewer lines shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the health officer and in accordance with the recommendations of such
health officer. All sewer lines shall be adequately vented and shall be
laid with sufficient earth cover to prevent breakage from traffic.
D. Where the sewer lines of the mobile home park are not connected to a
public sewer, a method of sewage disposal certified satisfactory as
required in § 113-2B(1)(e) above shall be provided. The design of such
sewage treatment facilities shall be based on the maximum capacity of
the mobile home park. Effluents from sewage treatment facilities shall
not be discharged into any waters of the state except with prior
approval of the appropriate state authority and the local health officer.
The disposal facilities shall be located where they will not create a
nuisance or health hazard to the mobile home park or to the owner or
occupants of any adjacent property.
A. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park
shall be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage,
insect-breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution.
B. All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers,
which shall be located not more than 150 feet from any mobile home
space. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to
properly store all refuse.
C. Racks or holders shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such
container racks or holders shall be so designed as to prevent containers
from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and
to facilitate cleaning around them.
D. All refuse shall be collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable
collection service is not available from municipal or private agencies,
the mobile home park operator shall provide this service. All refuse
shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered
containers.
E. Where municipal or private disposal service is not available, the mobile
home park operator shall dispose of the refuse by incineration, burial or
transporting to an approved disposal site.
F. Refuse shall be buried only at locations and by methods approved by
the health officer and as may be permitted by other Township
ordinances.59
§ 113-9 LIMERICK CODE § 113-10
113:172
§ 113-11. Insect and rodent control.
§ 113-12. Electricity and outdoor lighting.
§ 113-13. Fuel storage tanks.
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall
be copper or other acceptable metallic tubing and shall be permanently
installed and securely fastened in place. All fuel storage tanks or cylinders
G. Refuse incinerators shall be constructed only with the approval of the
local health authority or other authority having jurisdiction. Such
approval shall be based on a review of the plans and specifications for
such incinerators and approval of the site where they will be located.
Such approval shall specify the type of material which may be placed in
the incinerator.
H. Incinerators shall be operated only when attended by some person
specifically authorized by the owner or operator of the mobile home
park.
I. Garbage shall be burned on the premises only in an approved
incinerator.
A. Insect- and rodent-control measures to safeguard public health as
required by the health officer shall be applied in the mobile home park.
B. Effective larvicidal solutions may be required by the health officer for
fly- or mosquito-breeding areas which cannot be controlled by other,
more permanent measures.
C. The health officer may require the mobile home park operator to take
suitable measures to control other insects and weeds.
D. Accumulations of debris which may provide harborage for rodents shall
not be permitted in the mobile home park.
E. When rats or other objectionable rodents are known to be in the mobile
home park, the park operator shall take definite action, as directed by
the health officer, to exterminate them.
A. An electrical outlet supplying at least 115 volts shall be provided for
each mobile home space. The installation shall comply with all
applicable state and local electrical codes and ordinances. Such
electrical outlets shall be grounded and weatherproof. No main power
supply line shall be permitted to lie on the ground or to be suspended
less than 18 feet above the ground.
B. Public streets, driveways and walkways shall be lighted at night with a
minimum illumination of at least 0.6 footcandle.
59.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 95, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
§ 113-10 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 113-13
113:173
shall be securely fastened in place and shall not be located inside or beneath
the mobile home or less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
§ 113-14. Fire prevention.
§ 113-15. Alterations; skirting; animals.
§ 113-16. Registration of occupants; reporting of communicable
diseases.
A. Mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other
flammable materials.
B. Portable fire extinguishers of adequate capacity shall be kept in service
buildings and at all other locations designated by the health officer and
shall be maintained in good operating condition.
C. Where a public water system with a water main of six inches or larger is
available to the mobile home park, standard fire hydrants shall be
located within 400 feet of each mobile home or building.
D. Where the water supply system does not provide a main of at least six
inches, there shall be provided a two-inch frost-protected water riser
within 300 feet of each mobile home or building.
E. Fires shall be made only in stoves, incinerators and other equipment
intended for such purposes.60
A. All plumbing and electrical alterations or repairs in the mobile home
park shall be made in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances
and regulations.
B. Skirting of mobile homes is permissible, but areas enclosed by such
skirting shall be maintained so as not to provide a harborage for
rodents or create a fire hazard.
C. No owner or person in charge of a dog, cat or other pet animal shall
permit it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of
any mobile home park.
A. Every mobile home park owner or operator shall maintain a register
containing a record of all mobile homes and occupants using the mobile
home park. Such register shall be available to any authorized person
inspecting the park and shall be preserved for a period of 10 years.
Such register shall contain:
(1) The names and addresses of all mobile home occupants stopping in
the park.
(2) The make, model and license number of the motor vehicle and
mobile home.
60.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 66, Burning, Outdoor.
§ 113-13 LIMERICK CODE § 113-16
113:174
§ 113-17. Operation and supervision.
The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall at
all times operate the park in compliance with this chapter and regulations
issued thereunder and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the
park and its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and
sanitary condition at all times.
§ 113-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No.
109]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of
any regulation adopted by the health officer pursuant to authority granted
by this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $600 or, in default of payment thereof, by imprisonment
in the Montgomery County Prison for a period of not more than 30 days.
Whenever such person shall have been notified by the health officer that he
is committing such violation of this chapter, each day that he shall continue
such violation shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine or
imprisonment. Such fines shall be collected as like fines are now collected
by law.
§ 113-19. Interpretation.
(3) The state, territory or county issuing the mobile home license.
(4) The dates of arrival and departure of each mobile home.
(5) Whether or not each mobile home is a dependent or independent
mobile home.
B. Every owner, operator, attendant or other person operating a mobile
home park shall notify the local health officer immediately of any
suspected communicable or contagious disease within the mobile home
park. In the case of diseases diagnosed by a physician as quarantinable,
the departure of a mobile home or its occupants or the removal
therefrom of clothing or other articles which have been exposed to
infection, without approval of the health officer, is prohibited.
A. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance
or code of this Township existing on the effective date of this chapter,
the provision which, in the judgment of the health officer, establishes
the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this
chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance
or code of the Township existing on the effective date of this chapter
which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of
the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are hereby
§ 113-16 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 113-19
113:175
Chapter 114
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 66.
Hunting — See Ch. 104.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 122.
declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict
with this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same provisions as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
chapter, are intended as a continuation of such provisions. The
provisions of this chapter shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under
the authority of any ordinance repealed by this chapter.
§ 113-19 LIMERICK CODE § 113-19
113:176
ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 209]
§ 114-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device propelled by a motor,
in which persons or property may be transported upon public streets or
highways, and including trailers or semi-trailers pulled thereby.
PARKLANDS — Tracts of real property owned or acquired by the Township
for public use, including, but not limited to, playgrounds, ball fields, picnic
grounds, equestrian trails, walking/jogging trails, other recreational areas
and facilities, and open space areas maintained in their natural state.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device propelled by a
motor that is not intended or registered to be utilized on the public streets
or highways. Recreational vehicles shall include, but not be limited to,
any mini-bike, dirt bike, go-cart, motorized three-wheeler or four-wheeler,
motor bike, snowmobile or other all-terrain vehicle.
§ 114-2. Rules and regulations established. [Amended 12-16-2014
by Ord. No. 354]
The Limerick Township Board of Supervisors shall have the right to
establish park regulations by resolution for all parklands owned or acquired
by Limerick Township, from time to time, not inconsistent with the rules set
forth in this article. Such regulations shall be effective upon approval of the
resolution by the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 114-3. Trespassing on adjacent lands prohibited.
There shall be no trespassing on adjacent lands of residents, nor any
harassment of the owners thereof.
§ 114-4. Enforcement.
Limerick Township shall exercise general supervision over persons
occupying or using the parklands and over the care, maintenance and
replacement of Township property and equipment in the parks and keep
such property and equipment in a clean and sanitary condition. In addition,
the Limerick Township Police Department is authorized to enforce the
provisions of this article.
§ 114-5. Fees.
Fees for the use of the facilities within the Township parklands shall be
established and revised, from time to time, by the Board of Supervisors
upon the recommendation of the Limerick Township Park and Recreation
§ 114-1 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 114-5
113:177
Committee. All donations received and/or fees collected for the use of the
Township parklands, or any part or facility thereof, shall be collected by the
Township and applied solely to the Township Parks and Recreation/Open
Space Fund.
§ 114-6. (Reserved)61
§ 114-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine not to exceed $600 and costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for not more than
30 days. All prosecutions for violations of this article shall be brought in
the name of Limerick Township. All fines shall be paid to the Township and
shall be applied solely to the Limerick Township Parks and Recreation/Open
Space Fund. Every day a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 114-8. Posting of regulations.
The Township Secretary shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, a summary
of the provisions contained in this article and shall post, or cause to be
posted, said summary at each of the Township parklands.
§ 114-9. Use of parklands by groups.
A. The use of the Township parklands, or any portion or facilities thereof,
by organizations or other groups of 10 of more persons shall be
scheduled in advance at the Township Office, in accordance with
Subsection H below.
B. No individual or group may reserve the exclusive use of any portion of
the Township parklands or facilities for any period in excess of two
years in advance.
C. Long-term reservations for use of portions of or facilities of the
parklands will be accepted and granted in accordance with these
regulations; provided, however, that one field of each type at each park
shall always be open and available for nonreserved use.
D. The first preference for use of all parklands shall be granted to
Township-sponsored events and such Township events shall supersede
the use of the parklands or any part or facilities thereof granted to any
other person or group.
E. Second preference for use of the parklands shall be granted to the
Spring-Ford Regional Recreation Commission, subject to the
regulations set forth herein limiting times and dates of use by
reservation holders.
61.Editor's Note: Former § 114-6, Additional rules, was repealed 12-16-2014 by Ord. No. 354.
§ 114-5 LIMERICK CODE § 114-9
113:178
F. Any person or group wishing to reserve a portion of or a facility within
the parklands for any period less than seven days in a calendar year
shall apply to the Township for a permit before occupancy. Application
for such permit must be made at least 10 business days prior to the time
the person or group desires to occupy the park. The person or group
must also pay the scheduled reservation fees as established and revised
from time to time pursuant to these regulations.
G. Requests for exclusive and/or reserved use of portions of or facilities
within the parklands for any period exceeding seven days in one
calendar year ("long-term reservation") must be made in writing, on
forms provided by the Township. The Township shall solicit long-term
reservation requests by publication, once in a newspaper of general
circulation, on or before January 7 of each year. The deadline for
submission of long-term reservation requests shall be February 7 of
each year. All requests shall be reviewed by the Limerick Township Park
and Recreation Committee, which shall formulate a proposed schedule
of reserved uses of the parkland facilities in accordance with such longterm
reservation requests at the Committee's regular meeting during
the month of February. Representatives of the persons or groups
requesting such long-term reservations are required to attend the
February meeting of the Limerick Township Parks and Recreation
Commission to assist in resolving any scheduling conflicts. At the
February meeting, the Parks and Recreation Committee will tentatively
assign reservations, attempting to accommodate all requests. In the
case of competing requests for the same facilities at the same times, the
Parks and Recreation Committee will encourage cooperation in
modifying requests to resolve the schedule conflicts. If the conflict
cannot be resolved, preference shall be given to the group
demonstrating the largest number of Limerick Township residents
enrolled, registered or participating in the program for which the
reserved facilities are sought.
H. The final schedule of reservations shall be determined by the Parks and
Recreation Committee at its regularly scheduled meeting during the
month of March. After the reservation schedule has been announced by
the Board of Supervisors, each group assigned reserved facilities shall
submit a signed agreement, certificate of insurance, and any fees
required within 10 business days to the Township, or the reservation
will be forfeited. After the March meeting of the Parks and Recreation
Committee, additional reservations may be made on a first-come, firstserved
basis in accordance with the availability of the facilities within
the parklands. Such reservations shall be made in writing on forms
provided by the Township at least 10 business days prior to the date of
the event for which the reservation is sought.
I. Insurance requirements. All groups reserving the exclusive use of any
portion of or facilities within the parklands for more than seven days in
a calendar year shall obtain and maintain liability insurance for the
benefit of such group, making the Township a named insured, as
§ 114-9 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 114-9
113:179
§ 114-10. Liability.
recommended from time to time by the Limerick Township Parks and
Recreation Committee and required by the Board of Supervisors.
A. All individuals and groups will be held responsible for any damage,
destruction, defacement or theft of property or facilities within the
parklands, which they or their members cause.
B. The Township assumes no responsibility for injuries to any persons or
damage to any property during any individual use or group use of the
parklands or any portion or facilities thereof.
C. The Township shall have no responsibility for any property lost or stolen
or left at or on the parklands.
§ 114-9 LIMERICK CODE § 114-10
113:180
Chapter 117
PAWNBROKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124. Precious metal dealers — See Ch. 131.
§ 117-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Limerick Township
Pawnbrokers Ordinance."
§ 117-2. Legislative intent.
It is the specific intent of this chapter to promote the safety, morals and
general welfare of the inhabitants of Limerick Township in their person
and property by holding pawnbrokers accountable for the proper reporting
procedures deemed necessary by the Police Department to assist in
recovering the stolen property of its inhabitants.
§ 117-3. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare shall be followed. Where the provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater
restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute, other
ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
§ 117-4. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
APPLICANT — Any individual, partnership, association, business
corporation, nonprofit corporation, common-law trust, joint-stock company
or any group of individuals, however organized, applying for a license to
act as a pawnbroker under this chapter and/or any person appearing as
owner, partner, officer, director, trustee or other official of a partnership,
association, business corporation, nonprofit corporation, common-law trust,
joint-stock company or any group of individuals, however organized, on
such application for license under this chapter.
IDENTIFICATION — A valid identification document issued by a state or
federal government, bearing a photograph and containing identifying data
such as name, date of birth, gender, physical description, and current
address of the person bearing the card, and, if available, at least one other
§ 114-10 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 117-4
113:181
corroborating means of identification; otherwise, identification sufficient to
reliably establish the person's true identity.
PAWNBROKER — Any person who:
PAWNBROKING — The business of a pawnbroker, as defined in this chapter.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, business corporation,
nonprofit corporation, common-law trust, joint-stock company or any group
of individuals, however organized.
PLEDGE — An article or articles deposited with a pawnbroker as security
for a loan in the course of his/her business as defined in this chapter.
PLEDGER — The person who obtains the loan from a pawnbroker and
delivers a pledge into the possession of a pawnbroker, unless such person
discloses that he/she is or was acting for another, in which case "pledger"
means the disclosed principal.
TRANSACTION — A purchase, sale or loan by a pawnbroker.
WORKING DAYS — Weekdays Monday through Friday, but not including
national holidays.
§ 117-5. License and renewal.
Engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of
personal property, securities or written evidences of indebtedness;
A.
Purchases personal property with an expressed or implied agreement
or understanding to sell back at a subsequent time at a stipulated price;
or
B.
Lends money upon goods, wares or merchandise pledged, stored or
deposited as collateral security.
C.
A. License. No person shall act as a pawnbroker in Limerick Township
unless licensed by the Township to engage in such business. No license
shall be issued to the applicant by the Township unless the applicant
has been licensed first by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as
required by the Pawnbrokers License Act, 63 P.S. § 281-1 et seq., as
amended.
B. License certificate. No person shall be licensed to act as a pawnbroker
in Limerick Township unless he/she has obtained a license certificate
from the Township for each location from which he/she seeks to engage
in business as a pawnbroker. The license certificate shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in the pawnbroker's place of business so that it is
easily visible to members of the public.
C. Renewal. A person seeking to obtain a license certificate shall pay an
annual license certificate fee for each location from which he/she seeks
to engage in business as a pawnbroker.
§ 117-4 LIMERICK CODE § 117-5
113:182
§ 117-6. Digital records required.
(1) The license year begins January 1. All licenses expire January 1
next following the date of issuance, regardless of the date of
issuance, and must be renewed by the applicant on or before the
date of expiration with the Township, for a fee.
(2) The license certificate fee is as set from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Pawnbrokers shall create and maintain digital records of all business
transactions. These records are to be kept in the English language.
B. Identification of pledger. All records shall contain an accurate
description of the person making the pledge, including:
(1) The name, age and address of the pledger, which the pawnbroker
shall verify by requiring proper identification to ensure the
accuracy of the represented information;
(2) A scan or digital photocopy of the identification furnished by the
pledger to verify his/her identity;
(3) An accurate physical description of the pledger, including race,
gender, eye and hair color and identifying marks;
(4) A digital photograph of the pledger. The photograph shall be in
color and shall be of the front of the pledger's face, not his/her
profile. When possible, the person's torso should also be visible in
the photograph; and
(5) A clearly visible thumbprint of the pledger on a form approved by
the Limerick Township Police Department.
C. Record of transaction. All records shall contain an accurate description
of the pledge and the transaction, including:
(1) The make, model, serial number, model number, description, color
and special markings of the pledge, along with the date, time and
location of the transaction and the currency amount paid to the
pledger; and
(2) A digital photograph of the pledge, which shall be in color and of
sufficient clarity to enable identification of the pledge.
D. Remittance. A copy of all records required by this chapter shall be
forwarded to the Limerick Township Police Department within five
working days of the transaction.
E. Retention. All records required by this chapter shall be retained for a
period of two years after the date of the payment of any loan, or when
the loan is not paid, two years after the date of the sale of the pledge.
§ 117-5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 117-6
113:183
§ 117-7. Stolen property.
A pawnbroker may seize any property offered in the pledge which he/
she has reason to believe is stolen property. The pawnbroker shall issue
a seizure receipt to the person presenting such property in pledge and
shall immediately deliver the seized property, together with a copy of the
seizure receipt, to the Limerick Township Police Department. If property is
identified as stolen by the Police Department, such property shall be held
until there is a final resolution as to the ownership of the property; or in the
case of an individual claiming ownership, the pawnbroker shall immediately
notify the Police Department, and such property shall be held until there is
a final resolution as to the ownership of the property. A property receipt for
the pledge seized and held as such shall be issued to the pawnbroker by the
Police Department.
§ 117-8. Holding period and inspection.
§ 117-9. Business with minors.
A pawnbroker shall not accept a pledge from any person under the age of
18 years.
§ 117-10. Violations and penalties.
These records shall be available for inspection by any law enforcement
officer during this period.
A. Holding period. The pledge shall be kept in unaltered condition and
available for inspection by law enforcement officials in the course of
their law enforcement duties for 10 working days after report of its
purchase has been filed with the Police Department. During the holding
period, the pledge shall be segregated from other inventory to ensure
that it is not placed in an area or section where personal property is
offered for sale. Where any item is held off the premises, the
pawnbroker shall make the item available for inspection within 24
hours after receiving a request for inspection by law enforcement
officials.
B. Inspection. A search warrant shall not be required unless the inspection
is made during hours other than those when the pawnbroker is open for
business. Any law enforcement official who has reason to believe any
item was not sold or exchanged by the lawful owner may direct the
pawnbroker to hold the item for a reasonable length of time that the law
enforcement official considers necessary to identify it.
A. Fines. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails, neglects or
refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000 plus costs and, in the event of default on payment
thereof, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this chapter continues or, in the case of multiple violations
§ 117-6 LIMERICK CODE § 117-10
113:184
of this chapter, each day that a violation of each section of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Suspension of license. In addition to the fines listed in Subsection A, a
pawnbroker who violates this chapter or any section thereof shall be
subject to suspension of his/her operating license for a period of 30
days.
(1) Pursuant to the Pawnbrokers License Act, 63 P.S. § 281-1 et seq., as
amended, the Township shall provide written notice of the
suspension to the Secretary of Banking for the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The Secretary of Banking shall then conduct a
hearing to ascertain if the pawnbroker's license shall be revoked.
(2) No license certificate shall be issued when any pawnbroker's
license has been revoked by the Secretary of Banking for the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, where the pawnbroker retains a
property interest in the location where the license was suspended
or where the pawnbroker retains a pecuniary interest in the
corporation or any affiliated business entities therein.
C. Cease operations. During any period of license suspension, the
pawnbroker shall cease operation at each and every location of the
pawnbroker's business.
(1) Cease operations order. The Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee shall issue a cease operations order for each business
location operated by the pawnbroker whose license(s) has/have
been suspended in accordance with the Limerick Township Code.
(a) The cease operations order shall identify the prohibited
operations and shall state that the applicable license has been
suspended for violation(s) of the Code.
(b) The cease operations order shall be in force for the full period
of any license suspension and shall set forth this period in the
order.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall not remove
any posted cease operations order until he/she is satisfied that
all suspended licenses have been restored, or the property
interests in the location have changed so that neither the
person under license suspension nor any member of that
person's immediate family, or in the case of a corporation, the
corporation or any affiliated business entities, retain a
pecuniary interest therein.
(2) License at cease operations location. No person shall be issued a
license for a business location that has been posted with a cease
operations order, as long as any person under a license suspension
or revocation, or any member of that person's immediate family, or
in the case of a corporation, the corporation or any affiliated
§ 117-10 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 117-10
113:185
Chapter 119
(RESERVED)
Chapter 122
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fireworks — See Ch. 87.
Hunting — See Ch. 104.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
business interests, retain a pecuniary interest in the property at
that location.
§ 117-10 LIMERICK CODE § 117-10
119:186
ARTICLE I
Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 7-6-1971 by Ord. No. 43]
§ 122-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISORDERLY CONDUCT — Any act, work or conduct causing or tending to
cause a disturbance of the peace and good order of the Township or causing
or tending to cause any danger, discomfort or annoyance to the inhabitants
of the Township using the roadways or residing in the Township, and
shall include loafing; fighting; drunkenness; vagrancy; begging; profanity
or indecent language or acts; the making or causing to be made of any
unnecessary noises or disturbances, clamor, din or other sounds tending
to disturb the peace and quiet of the community; and the carrying on of
any business, trade, transportation, recreation or amusement at a time in
a place or in a manner which causes any unnecessary noise or disturbance
or danger, and shall include reckless or careless driving or any other use
of vehicles by owners, occupants or users thereof as shall endanger the
safety or interfere with the comfort and convenience of persons using the
roadways or residing in the Township, and all such noises, disturbances and
acts are hereby prohibited. All noises or other sounds shall be considered
to be unnecessary and to constitute disorderly conduct, even though they
are no louder than is customary and are the unavoidable sounds or noises
attendant upon the ordinary use and occupation of premises or attendant
upon the ordinary operation or performance of business, trade,
transportation, recreation or amusement, if they are made during hours
other than the usual and customary hours for such work or activity. Except
in cases of emergency, no person shall carry on any activity at a time or in
a manner which causes unnecessary annoyance or disturbance of the peace
and quiet of the immediate neighborhood.
§ 122-2. Conduct and activities prohibited.
Without in any manner tending to limit or restrict the generality of the
above definition of and prohibition against disorderly conduct, the following
are hereby declared to constitute disorderly conduct:
A. The unnecessary sounding of automobile horns, sirens, bells, whistles
or other warning devices or the operation of any motor vehicle which
makes unnecessary or unusual noise caused by an improper muffler or
the backfire or racing of such motor in or about the operation of such
motor vehicle. The operators of motor vehicles shall at all times
exercise due care and foresight in the operation and handling and shall
not substitute the sounding or warnings for careful driving and the
maintenance of proper control over their respective vehicles. It is not
intended hereby to prohibit the use of such warning devices in
§ 122-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 122-2
122:187
§ 122-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No.
109]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay the costs of prosecution and a fine of not
more than $600 and, in default of the payment thereof, shall be imprisoned
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
emergencies or at times when, in the exercise of good judgment, a
prudent operator would use such devices.
B. The keeping or handling of dogs under such conditions or lack of
control or in such a manner that they disturb the peace, safety and
quiet of the immediate neighborhood.
C. Loafing, loitering or congregating on the street corners or in front or
about any place of business or other public place in the Township.
D. Acting in and about the streets or other public places of the Township in
a noisy, loud, boisterous and unseemly manner or in such a manner as
to disturb the peace and quiet of the community.
§ 122-2 LIMERICK CODE § 122-3
122:188
Chapter 124
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 122.
§ 124-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 124-2. License required. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 303;
5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 378]
From and after the effective date hereof, any person or organization not
exempted by Limerick Township Code § 124-6 hereof desiring to engage in
any transient retail business by visitation to private homes or residences
or on the public streets or highways of Limerick Township must first make
application to Limerick Township.
§ 124-3. Application for license; issuance; fee.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the text:
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — Engaging in peddling, soliciting or
taking orders, either by sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares or
merchandise upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground or from
house to house within the Township of Limerick.[Amended 9-6-2016
by Ord. No. 370]
B. The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Every person desiring to obtain a license to engage in transient retail
business within Limerick Township as required by § 124-2 hereof shall
make application for said license in person to the Township Manager.
[Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 303; 5-23-2017 by Ord. No.
378]
(1) In the event the applicant seeking a license to engage in a transient
retail business is a firm, corporation, or other entity, each
individual person seeking to engage in a transient retail business
on behalf of said firm, corporation, or other entity shall be required
to obtain a license.
(2) No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable from one
person to another.
B. Application information:
§ 122-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 124-3
122:189
(1) The applicant shall supply, over his signature, the following
information (if applicable):
(a) His name.
(b) His place and date of birth.
(c) His social security number.
(d) His address.
(e) His residence.
(f) The address at which he will receive notices under this
chapter.
(g) The name and address of his employer or principal and the
nature of his business activity.
(h) The types of goods, wares and merchandise he wishes to deal
with in such transient retail business.
(i) The nature of the business or activity in which the applicant
wishes to engage within the Township.
(j) The duration of the license (i.e., 30 days, one year).
(k) The days and hours of operation or solicitation.
(l) His motor vehicle operator's number and the issuing state
thereof.
(m) The registration number, model, make and color of the vehicle
or vehicles which the applicant intends to use.
(n) (Reserved)62
(o) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been
convicted in any jurisdiction of any crime and, if so, what
crimes, where and when.
(2) In addition, the applicant shall supply to Township the following (if
applicable): [Amended 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 378]
(a) A copy of his Pennsylvania state sales tax license.
(b) Proof of a food handler's license or health license.
(c) A completed and fully executed Pennsylvania State Police
Criminal Record Request Form and any fee associated with
such a request as set by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
the Pennsylvania State Police.
62.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1)(n), regarding the location of the business, was
repealed 9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 370.
§ 124-3 LIMERICK CODE § 124-3
122:190
§ 124-4. Conditions and rules of conduct.
Every person to whom a license has been issued hereunder shall, in the
carrying on of his business or activities in the Township, comply with the
following conditions and rules of conduct:
(d) A completed and fully executed State Police Criminal Record
Request Form for the state where the applicant resides and any
fee associated with such a request as set by the reporting
state.
(e) A completed and fully executed Pennsylvania Child Abuse
History Clearance Certification Form and any fee associated
with such a request as set by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania State Police, or the Pennsylvania
Department of Human Services.
C. Upon submission of a completed application and the payment of a fee in
the amount set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors,63 a license
shall be issued, within 15 business days of such submission, to the
applicant in the form of a card, which shall, unless revoked, entitle the
licensee to engage in the activities specified for the period requested
from the date of issuance. [Amended 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 378]
D. Licenses may be renewed for additional periods upon payment of the
fee hereinabove provided for and the submission of any amendment of
the original application necessary to reflect any changes in the
information therein contained.
E. No license to engage in transient retail business shall be issued to any
person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the
laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United States
within 10 years of the date of the application, nor to any person who has
violated any of the provisions of this chapter, nor to any person whose
license issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein
provided. [Added 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 378]
A. He shall carry his license card at all times and exhibit it upon request to
any peace officer or any person upon whom he shall call or with whom
he shall talk in carrying on his licensed activities.
B. His license card is not transferable, and he shall not permit or allow any
other person to use the same and shall immediately report its loss to the
Township Manager, should such event occur. His card shall not be
altered or defaced, nor shall he permit it so to be.
C. He shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling or business house
without the invitation or permission of the occupant and shall
immediately leave any premises upon request.
63.Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary/
Manager.
§ 124-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 124-4
122:191
§ 124-5. Revocation of license.
§ 124-6. Exemptions. [Amended 11-13-2008 by Ord. No. 303]
The following persons are exempted from the licensing requirements of this
chapter:
D. He shall not represent his license card to be an endorsement of himself
or of his goods, wares or services or of the goods, wares or services of
his employer.
E. He shall immediately surrender his license card upon revocation of his
license, as hereinafter provided.
F. He shall not conduct his soliciting operations at any Township park if
the Township has a contract with a third party to provide food services
to such park. [Added 9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 370]
G. He shall only engage in transient retail business within Limerick
Township from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and
10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Saturday and Sunday. [Added 5-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 378]
A. Any license hereafter issued may be revoked by the Board of
Supervisors upon the failure of the licensee to comply with the
standards of conduct established by § 124-4 or upon ascertainment that
the licensee has made any false statement in his application for a
license hereunder. Notice of revocation shall be given by written notice
served or sent, by registered mail, to the address designated for this
purpose in the license application.
B. Any person whose license has been revoked shall be entitled to appear
with counsel, if he desires, before the Board of Supervisors at a regular
or special meeting; and he will be heard on behalf of his request for a
reinstatement of his license.
A. Persons soliciting contributions on behalf of organizations or nonprofit
corporations exempted from the provisions of or duly registered
pursuant to the Act of December 19, 1990, P.L. 1200, No. 202 (10 P.S. §
162.1 et seq.), as amended, who, while soliciting, are possessed of a
card or other written evidence of their appointment or authority to
solicit for said organization or corporation.
B. Persons engaged in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated
by the owner thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any
charitable or philanthropic purpose.
C. Farmers and dairies selling their own farm and dairy produce on or
adjacent to their residence or farms.
D. Fire company, charitable nonprofit organization or similar community
groups granted nonprofit status by the Internal Revenue Service.
§ 124-4 LIMERICK CODE § 124-6
122:192
§ 124-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and the costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, shall be committed to the
county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 129
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 129, Plumbing, adopted 3-17-1992 by Ord. No. 143, was
repealed 3-4-2014 by Ord. No. 344.]
Chapter 131
PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pawnbrokers — See Ch. 117. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 124.
§ 131-1. Short Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Limerick Township
Precious Metal Dealers Ordinance."
§ 131-2. Legislative intent.
It is the specific intent of this chapter to promote the safety, morals and
general welfare of the inhabitants of Limerick Township in their person
and property by holding precious metal dealers accountable for the proper
reporting procedures deemed necessary by the Police Department to assist
in recovering the stolen property of its inhabitants.
§ 131-3. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare shall be followed. Where the provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater
E. Persons engaged in peddling, soliciting, or canvassing related to the
dissemination of information related to political, ideological, social, or
religious issues. [Added 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 378]
§ 124-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 131-3
122:193
restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute, other
ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
§ 131-4. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
APPLICANT — An individual, partnership, association, corporation or
business entity applying for a license to act as a precious metals dealer
under this chapter and/or any person appearing as owner, partner, officer,
director, trustee or other official of a partnership, association, corporation
or business entity on such application for license under this chapter.
DEALER — A precious metal dealer, as defined in this chapter.
IDENTIFICATION — A valid identification document issued by a state or
federal government, bearing a photograph and containing identifying data
such as name, date of birth, gender, physical description, and current
address of the person bearing the card, and, if available, at least one other
corroborating means of identification; otherwise, identification sufficient to
reliably establish the person's true identity.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, corporation or business
entity.
PRECIOUS METAL — Items containing or bearing 10 karat gold or greater
fineness, silver and/or platinum, including but not limited to jewelry and
silver services.
PRECIOUS METAL DEALER — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation or business entity, including an itinerant and/or transient
merchant, doing business in Limerick Township that purchases or makes
appraisals of precious metals and their alloys from the general public for
refining or resale to refiners, brokers or the public. The term includes any
individual who acts as an agent for such individual, partnership, association,
corporation or business entity. The term does not include financial
institutions licensed under federal or state banking laws, the purchaser
of precious metals who purchases from a seller seeking a trade-in or
allowance, the manufacturers of jewelry or of other items composed, in
whole or in part, of gold, silver or platinum, and the purchaser of precious
metals for his own use or ownership and not for resale or refining.
SELLER — A person who obtains payment from a dealer in return for the
sale of any precious metal, as defined in this chapter.
TRANSACTION — A purchase or appraisal of precious metals by a dealer,
as defined by this chapter.
WORKING DAYS — Weekdays Monday through Friday, but not including
national holidays.
§ 131-5. License and renewal.
§ 131-3 LIMERICK CODE § 131-5
122:194
§ 131-6. Digital records required.
A. License. No person shall act as a precious metal dealer in Limerick
Township unless licensed by the Township to engage in such business.
No license shall be issued to the applicant by the Township unless the
applicant has been licensed first by the County of Montgomery, as
mandated by the Precious Metals Act, 73 P.S. § 1931 et seq., as
amended.
B. License certificate. No person shall be licensed to act as a precious
metal dealer in Limerick Township unless he/she has obtained a license
certificate from the Township for each location from which he/she seeks
to engage in business as precious metal dealer. The license certificate
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the dealer's place of business
so that it is easily visible to members of the public.
C. Renewal. A person seeking to obtain a license certificate shall pay an
annual license certificate fee for each location from which he/she seeks
to engage in business as a precious metal dealer.
(1) The license year begins January 1. All licenses expire January 1
next following the date of issuance, regardless of the date of
issuance, and must be renewed by the applicant on or before the
date of expiration with the Township, for a fee.
(2) The license certificate fee is as set from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Precious metal dealers shall create and maintain digital records of all
business transactions upon a form approved by the Attorney General.
These records are to be kept in the English language.
B. Identification of seller. All records shall contain an accurate description
of the seller, including:
(1) The name, age and address of the seller, which the dealer shall
verify by requiring proper identification to ensure the accuracy of
the represented information;
(2) A scan or digital photocopy of the identification furnished by the
seller to verify the his/her identity;
(3) An accurate physical description of the seller, including race,
gender, eye and hair color and identifying marks;
(4) A digital photograph of the seller. The photograph shall be in color
and shall be of the front of the seller's face, not his/her profile.
When possible, the person's torso should also be visible in the
photograph; and
(5) A clearly visible thumbprint of the seller on a form approved by the
Limerick Township Police Department.
§ 131-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 131-6
122:195
§ 131-7. Stolen property.
A dealer may seize any precious metal offered in a sale which he/she has
reason to believe is stolen property. The dealer shall issue a seizure receipt
to the person presenting such property for sale and shall immediately
deliver the seized property, together with a copy of the seizure receipt,
to the Limerick Township Police Department. If property is identified as
stolen by the Police Department, such property shall be held until there is
a final resolution as to the ownership of the property; or in the case of an
individual claiming ownership, the dealer shall immediately notify the Police
Department, and such property shall be held until there is a final resolution
as to the ownership of the property. A property receipt for the pledge seized
and held as such shall be issued to the dealer by the Police Department.
§ 131-8. Holding period and inspection.
C. Record of transaction. All records shall contain an accurate description
of the property purchased and the transaction, including:
(1) Any serial number or other identifying marks or symbols, such as
engravings, types of gemstones and style of the property, along
with the date, time and location of the transaction; and
(2) A digital photograph of the property purchased, which shall be in
color and of sufficient clarity to enable identification of the
property.
D. Remittance. A copy of all records required by this chapter shall be
forwarded to the Limerick Township Police Department within five
working days of the transaction.
E. Retention. All records required by this chapter shall be retained for a
period of one year after the date of the transaction. These records shall
be available for inspection by any law enforcement officer during this
period.
A. Holding period. Each item of precious metal purchased by a dealer in
the course of his/her business shall be kept in unaltered condition and
available for inspection by law enforcement officials in the course of
their law enforcement duties for 10 working days after the report of its
purchase has been filed with the Police Department. During the holding
period, any item subject to the holding period shall be segregated from
other inventory to ensure that it is not placed in an area or section
where precious metals are offered for sale. Where any item is held off
the premises, the dealer shall make the item available for inspection
within 24 hours after receiving a request for inspection by law
enforcement officials.
B. Inspection. A search warrant shall not be required unless the inspection
is made during hours other than those when the dealer is open for
business. Any law enforcement official who has reason to believe any
§ 131-6 LIMERICK CODE § 131-8
122:196
§ 131-9. Business with minors.
A dealer shall not conduct a transaction for precious metals with any person
under the age of 18 without the written authority of the parent, guardian or
person in loco parentis of the underage person authorizing the sale. Such
written authority shall be attached to and maintained with the record of
transaction required by this chapter and as required by Section 1935 of the
Precious Metals Act, 73 P.S. § 1935.
§ 131-10. Weighing devices.
§ 131-11. Violations and penalties.
item was not sold or exchanged by the lawful owner may direct the
dealer to hold the item for a reasonable length of time that the law
enforcement official considers necessary to identify it.
A. All scales or other devices used by dealers to weigh precious metals
must be of a type approved for commercial use in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and must be inspected and sealed by the Pennsylvania
Bureau of Ride and Measurement Standards' Weights and Measures
Division.
B. Dealers must notify the Pennsylvania Bureau of Ride and Measurement
Standards' Weights and Measures Division whenever a weighing device
referred to in Subsection A above is moved from one location to
another.
A. Fines. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails, neglects or
refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000 plus costs and, in the event of default on payment
thereof, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this chapter continues or, in the case of multiple violations
of this chapter, each day that a violation of each section of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Suspension of license. In addition to the fines specified in Subsection A
above, a dealer who violates this chapter or any section thereof shall
have his/her license suspended for 90 days for the first offense and a
period of one year upon each succeeding offense.
C. Cease operations. During any period of license suspension, the dealer
shall cease operation at each and every location of the dealer's
business.
(1) Cease operations order. The Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee shall issue a cease operations order for each business
location operated by the dealer whose license(s) has/have been
suspended in accordance with the Limerick Township Code.
§ 131-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 131-11
122:197
Chapter 132
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 57.
Building construction — See Ch. 60.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 70.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 73.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 95.
§ 132-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file at the Limerick
Township Municipal Building located at 646 West Ridge Pike, Limerick,
Pennsylvania, being marked and designated as the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code
Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of
Limerick Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, for regulating and
governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures
are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation
of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the
(a) The cease operations order shall identify the prohibited
operations and shall state that the applicable license has been
suspended for violation(s) of the Code.
(b) The cease operations order shall be in force for the full period
of any license suspension and shall set forth this period in the
order.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall not remove
any posted cease operations order until he/she is satisfied that
all suspended licenses have been restored, or the property
interests in the location have changed so that neither the
person under license suspension nor any member of that
person's immediate family, or in the case of a corporation, the
corporation or any affiliated business entities, retain a
pecuniary interest therein.
(2) License at cease operations location. No person shall be issued a
license for a business location that has been posted with a cease
operations order, as long as any person under a license suspension
or revocation, or any member of that person's immediate family, or
in the case of a corporation, the corporation or any affiliated
business interests, retain a pecuniary interest in the property at
that location.
§ 131-11 LIMERICK CODE § 132-1
122:198
demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code on file at the Limerick Township Municipal Building are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this chapter.
§ 132-2. Modifications to standards.
§ 132-3. Effect on existing provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance repealed
hereby. No right or remedy of any character shall be lost, impaired or
affected by this chapter.
§ 132-4. Title.
This chapter, together with the 2009 Edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code, adopted herein, shall be known and may be cited as the
"Property Maintenance Code of the Township of Limerick."
A. The Property Maintenance Code § 101.1 is supplemented to read: "the
Township of Limerick."
B. The penalties and fines, as referenced in the Property Maintenance
Code § 103.5, shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of
the Second Class Township Code and the Limerick Township Code,
Chapter 70, § 15, entitled Violations and penalties, that are in effect at
the time of the violation.
C. The Property Maintenance Code § 112.4 is supplemented to read:
"Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having
been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
subject to the penalties and fines set forth in the Limerick Township
Code, Chapter 70, § 15 entitled Violations and penalties."
D. The Property Maintenance Code § 302.4 is supplemented to read: "All
premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or
plant growth in excess of six inches."
E. The Property Maintenance Code § 304.14: the dates inserted should
read June 1 to November 1.
F. The Property Maintenance Code § 602.3: the dates inserted should read
November 1 to May 1.
G. The Property Maintenance Code § 602.4: the dates inserted should read
November 1 to May 1.
§ 132-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 132-4
122:199
Chapter 133
PUBLIC WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 140. Wells and well drilling — See Ch.181.
§ 132-4 LIMERICK CODE § 132-4
122:200
ARTICLE I
Mandatory Connection
[Adopted 6-3-2014 by Ord. No. 352]
§ 133-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Limerick Township
Public Water Ordinance."
§ 133-2. Background; legislative intent.
It has been determined by the Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) that an area located in Limerick Township has been contaminated.
The area is identified on Exhibit "A" as "Impact Area 1," which is attached
hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit A.64 This article mandates the
connection and continued connection of all improved properties in the
impacted area to either the water lines to be constructed by the Township or
to the existing water lines of Pennsylvania American Water in the impacted
area. The water lines and the existing water lines of Pennsylvania American
Water in the impacted area are collectively referred to as the "Public Water
System," and constitute a public water system of Limerick Township. Water
for the public water system will be provided by Pennsylvania American
Water (the "water utility"). This article is enacted to require the mandatory
connection of all properties in the impacted area to the public water system.
§ 133-3. Connection requirements.
A. All improved properties located within the impacted area, whose
addresses are listed in Exhibit A,65 shall connect to the public water
system within 60 days following written notice to connect from the
Township.
B. In addition to the properties required to connect under § 133-2A, all
properties located in the impacted area which are hereafter improved
with a residential building or hereafter improved with a nonresidential
building, which is occupied or capable of being occupied, shall connect
to the public water system within 60 days following written notice to
connect from the Township. Residential buildings or nonresidential
buildings constructed, renovated or improved on properties required to
connect shall connect to the public water system prior to any
habitation, occupancy, or use, and no certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for any such improved property unless and until such connection
has been made.
C. Once a connection to the public water system has occurred, no property
owner shall disconnect a property from the public water system.
64.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
65.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 133-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 133-3
122:201
§ 133-4. Use of wells; abandonment of wells.
D. All connections to the public water system shall be subject to the
specifications of the water utility.
E. Connection by the Township. In the event that a property owner shall
neglect or refuse to connect a property to the public water system in
violation of this article for a period of 90 days after notice from the
Township to connect, then, in that event, the Township or its agents
may enter upon said property owner's property and construct the
connection to the public water system, and in that event, the costs of
such connection shall be upon the property owner and a lien in that
amount may be recorded against the property benefitted by the
improvement.
A. Within 60 days after notice from the Township to connect to the public
water system, and in conjunction with such connection, a property's
connection to a private well shall be disconnected. The disconnection
shall include, without limitation, the disconnection of any internal water
and plumbing system and any external water and plumbing system from
the private well.
B. In addition to the well disconnection, the well shall be closed and the
method of closure shall comply with any applicable regulations or
requirements of the Montgomery County Health Department and DEP.
C. Pursuant to the terms of a grant from DEP to the Township, the cost of
closure of the private wells for the properties listed in Exhibit A66 shall
be paid by DEP. The foregoing notwithstanding, where the owner of a
property listed in Exhibit A refuses to allow closure of the well on the
property for a period of 90 days from the date of the Township notice to
connect to the public water system, then the right of the property
owner to receive payment of the cost of the closure of the well shall
terminate, provided the Township first gives 30 days' written notice of
such termination to the property owner with opportunity for a hearing
before the Board of Supervisors of the Township. In addition, if the
property owner shall fail to perform or refuse to allow the disconnection
and closure of the private well within 90 days from the date of the
Township notice to connect to the public water system, the Township or
DEP, or their agents, may enter upon such owner's property and
perform the disconnection and closure as provided in § 133-3E and the
cost thereof shall be the responsibility of the property owner and a lien
in the amount of the cost may be recorded against the property as
provided in § 133-3E.
D. Except as provided in § 133-3C above, the cost of disconnecting and
closing the private well shall be paid by the property owner.
66.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 133-3 LIMERICK CODE § 133-4
122:202
§ 133-5. Protection of public water system.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently damage, destroy,
deface, block, or otherwise tamper with any water line or other structure
or equipment which is part of the public water system. Any person violating
this section shall be in violation of this article.
§ 133-6. Adoption of additional rules and regulations.
The Township reserves the right to adopt from time to time additional rules
and regulations as it deems necessary and proper relating to connections
to and use of the public water system, which rules and regulations shall be
construed as part of this article.
§ 133-7. Notice.
Any notice required by this article shall be given to the property owner
either by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
concurrently with first class mail. The mailing date of the notice shall be
considered the date of service and service shall be presumed to duly given
if the notice is not returned "undeliverable" by the post office.
§ 133-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
In addition to any other remedy available under law or equity any person
convicted of a violation of this article shall be subject to a criminal fine in an
amount not to exceed $1,000 per day per violation or suffer imprisonment
for a period of not more than 30 days, or both, together with costs of
prosecution. Each twenty-four-hour period during which failure to comply
continues shall constitute a separate offense. Enforcement of this article
E. In the event that a property owner shall fail to perform or refuse to
allow the disconnection and closure of the private well, the Township or
DEP, or their agents, may enter upon such owner's property and
perform the disconnection and closure of the private well. In that event,
the property owner shall be responsible for the cost thereof and a lien
in the amount of the cost thereof may be recorded against the property
by the Township or DEP.
F. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this § 133-3, existing wells
within Impacted Area 1 may continue to be used for industrial or
commercial, nonpotable purposes, provided that: 1) such use is
registered with the Township; 2) the property is connected to the public
water system for all potable uses; and 3) the owner of the property
conducts annual testing and reporting to DEP of water quality. No new
wells shall be installed at any properties within Impacted Area 1, except
for the purpose of groundwater investigation or remediation or except
for the replacement of an existing well used for industrial or
commercial nonpotable use with the new replacement well being used
only for industrial or commercial nonpotable use on the terms set forth
above.
§ 133-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 133-8
122:203
shall be brought by action filed with a district justice in the same manner
provided for enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure. The Township solicitor may assume charge
of the prosecution without the consent of the district attorney. All fines
and penalties collected for violation of this article shall be paid over the
Township treasury. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Township from
enforcing the provisions of this article by any other remedy available at
law or in equity, and the remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and
concurrent.
§ 133-8 LIMERICK CODE § 133-8
122:204
Chapter 135
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 133-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 133-8
122:205

ARTICLE I
Residential Rental Property Registration, Inspection and Licensing
[Adopted 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. 38167]
§ 135-1. Purpose and findings of fact.
A The purpose of this article shall be to protect and promote the public
health, safety and welfare of the Township's citizens and emergency
services responders, to establish rights and obligations of owners and
occupants relating to residential rental properties in the Township and
to encourage owners and occupants to maintain and improve the quality
of life and quality of rental housing within the Township. To accomplish
such goals, this article provides for the systematic registration, licensing
and inspection of residential rental properties within the Township, and
penalties, to ensure said properties are in compliance with applicable
Township-adopted building, property maintenance, fire, and other codes
and regulations.
A. In considering the adoption of this article, the Township makes the
following findings:
(1) There is a growing concern in the community with the appearance
and physical condition of many residential rental properties;
(2) There is a perception and appearance of greater incidence of
problems with the maintenance and upkeep of residential
properties which are not owner-occupied as compared to those that
are owner-occupied;
(3) Violations of maintenance codes are generally less severe and more
quickly corrected at owner-occupied properties as compared to
renter occupied residential rental properties;
(4) A residential rental inspection program can avoid life-threatening
problems, such as lack of functioning smoke detectors, faulty
mechanical equipment and inadequate or unsafe electrical
equipment;
(5) The Township is concerned with the condition of a property when
emergency services respond, and for the safety of such emergency
responders and general safety of the occupants;
(6) The Township desires to account for the number of renteroccupied,
residential rental properties to further the accountability
and safety of the property occupants;
(7) This Chapter is enacted under the authority of the Second Class
Township Code, 53 P.S. § 6601 et seq., and likewise in accordance
to applicable provisions of the Landlord-Tenant Act of 1951, the
67.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 135, Rental Property, adopted
12-3-1991 by Ord. No. 137.
§ 135-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 135-1
122:207
§ 135-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings. If a term is not defined in this article, but is defined in the
International Property Maintenance Code, International Fire Code, or the
Uniform Construction Code, as adopted and amended by Limerick
Township, then that definition shall apply to this section.
AGENT — Any person designated by the owner of a residential rental
property who has charge, care or control of said residential rental property.
TOWNSHIP — Limerick Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
CHANGE OF OCCUPANT — A change of occupant occurs when there is
a change in the identities of any person constituting the Occupant of the
residential rental unit on the residential rental registration or a change in
the number of persons occupying the residential rental unit.
CODE — Any state or local code or ordinance adopted, enacted or in effect,
as amended, in and for Limerick Township.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person charged with
administering and enforcing all the provisions of this article and of those
other applicable codes and statutes as noted in § 135-4D herein, any
assistants or deputies of the same, and any police officers duly appointed.
COMMON AREA — In multiunit buildings, space which is not part of an
individual regulated rental unit and which is shared among occupants of the
dwellings. Common areas shall be considered as part of the premises for
purposes of this article.
DWELLING — A building including one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A residential living area for one household that is used
for living and sleeping purposes and that has its own cooking facilities, and
a bathroom with a toilet and a bathtub and/or shower.
GUEST — A person on the premises of a regulated rental unit with the
actual and implied consent of an occupant of said regulated rental unit.
HOTEL UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a hotel or motel
forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and
sleeping only on a transient basis for a period of less than 30 days.
MANAGER — An adult individual designated by the owner of a regulated
rental unit under this article. The manager shall be the agent of the owner
for service of process and receiving notices or demands and to perform the
obligation of the owner under this article and under rental agreements with
occupants.
MULTIUNIT BUILDING — A building containing two or more dwelling units
completely separated from each other by vertical party walls, including
Uniform Construction Code, the International Property
Maintenance Code, the International Fire Prevention Code, and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 135-1 LIMERICK CODE § 135-2
122:208
but not limited to double houses, row houses, townhouses, condominiums,
apartment houses, conversion apartments and converted single-family
dwellings.
OCCUPANT — An individual who resides in a regulated rental unit.
OWNER — One or more person(s), jointly or severally, in whom is vested
all or part of the legal title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial
ownership and a right to present use and enjoyment of the premises,
including but not limited to a mortgage holder who is in possession of a
regulated rental unit. If the owner is an entity, the entity shall appoint an
agent or manager to act on behalf of the owner.
OWNER-OCCUPIED RESIDENTIAL UNIT — A dwelling unit in which at
least an owner of record of the property resides as his/her primary dwelling.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, limited partnership, trust, or any other entity.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property in Limerick Township, including
the land and all buildings and structures, on which one or more residential
rental units is located.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE — A document issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer to the owner, operator, responsible agent or manager
of a residential rental unit upon compliance with all applicable codes
granting permission to operate a residential rental unit in the Township.
Such license is required for lawful rental to third parties and occupancy
by third parties of any residential rental units under this article, unless
a Code Enforcement Officer has not inspected the unit or violations of
the applicable codes are being corrected and the unit operates under a
residential rental registration, or the residential rental unit is exempt from
the license provisions of this article.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY — Any parcel of real estate, identified
by a tax parcel number containing at least one residential rental unit.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGISTRATION — The form provided by the
Township to the owner of a parcel of land containing at least one residential
rental property evidencing the existence of said residential rental unit(s).
This registration shall be required to be submitted to the Township by
January 31 of each year and within 30 days of any change of occupant.
A residential rental registration shall continue to be required for lawful
rental and occupancy of residential rental units under this article, unless
the residential rental unit is exempt from the registration provisions of this
article. This registration does not warrant the proper zoning, habitability,
safety or condition of the residential rental unit in any way.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — A rooming house unit or dwelling unit let
for rent, other than an owner-occupied residential unit, which qualifies as
a dwelling unit under applicable Township ordinances. A residential rental
unit shall not include a hotel/motel, hospital unit, or nursing home unit and
any dwelling excepted out by § 134-4B.
§ 135-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 135-2
122:209
ROOMING HOUSE UNIT — A living unit that does not meet the definition
of a dwelling unit and that is not within a Township permitted hotel or bedand-
breakfast inn.
TENANT — An occupant of a residential rental unit with whom a legal
relationship with the owner is established by a written or oral lease or
other enforceable agreement under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
. UNRELATED PERSONS — Two or more persons who reside in a dwelling
unit and who are not related to each other through blood, adoption,
marriage or a formal foster relationship. A person who is only related as
a cousin shall be considered unrelated for the purpose of this article. The
term "related" shall be restricted to the following relationships: spouse,
parent, child, sibling, grandchild, great-grandchild, grandparents, greatgrandparents,
aunt, uncle, or any of these same relationships in a step or
in-law situation.
§ 135-3. Owner duties.
A. It shall be the duty of every owner, operator, responsible agent or
manager to keep and maintain all residential rental units in compliance
with all applicable codes and provisions of all applicable state laws and
regulations and all Township ordinances, and to keep said units in good
and safe condition.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, as owner, operator, responsible
agent or manager to conduct or operate, cause to rent, or permit the
occupancy of, any residential rental unit within the Township without:
(1) Registering with the Township the premises upon which the
residential rental unit is situate, in accordance with this article;
and
(2) Maintaining a current and valid license for each residential rental
unit upon the premises, in accordance with this article.
C. Owners of all properties possessing one or more residential rental units
and created after the effective date of this article shall register said
units with the Township, on forms to be provided by the Township,
within 30 days of any residential rental unit thereon being leased to a
tenant, and/or occupied by an occupant. Registration of properties
possessing one or more residential rental units shall pay a registration
fee as set forth by Township resolution.
D. The owner or manager shall receive notices and correspondence,
including service of process from the Township; to arrange for the
inspection of the residential rental unit(s) in accordance with this
article or in the event that the Code Enforcement Officer has identified
a need for inspection due to alleged violations at that residential rental
unit(s); to do or arrange for the performance necessary to insure
§ 135-2 LIMERICK CODE § 135-3
122:210
§ 135-4. Licenses and inspections.
continued compliance of the residential rental unit(s) with the current
codes, and other ordinances in effect in the Township.
E. It shall be the responsibility of every owner or agent to employ policies
and to manage the residential rental units under his/her control in
compliance with the provisions of this article, codes and applicable laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
F. The owner shall maintain acceptable physical conditions in common
areas, and the owner shall be required to ensure that common areas
and the outside premises are in compliance with applicable
commonwealth and Township laws, codes and ordinances.
G. Each owner of a residential rental unit shall notify the Code
Enforcement Officer in writing within 30 days after any change in
ownership of the premises or of the number of residential rental units
on the premises, and to submit new contact information for the new
owner or manager. Failure to so notify the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be considered a violation of this article.
H. The owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing within
30 days after the changing of a unit from owner-occupied to being a
residential rental unit for purposes of this article. Failure to so notify
the Code Enforcement Officer shall be considered a violation of this
article.
I. The owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of any
change of occupant residing in a residential rental unit within 30 days
of such a change. Failure to so notify the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be considered a violation of this article. Lack of notice from, or
knowledge of, the occupant's change shall not be a defense to a
violation of this article.
A. License requirement.
(1) A valid residential rental license, issued by the Township, shall be
required to be continuously maintained for each leased and/or
occupied residential rental unit in the Township. Owners shall
submit a residential rental registration by January 31 of each year
and within 30 days of change of occupant that contains the
following information:
(a) Applicant/owner name, address, phone number, and total
number of rental units owned in Limerick Township;
(b) Manager or agent name, address and phone number, if
applicable; and
(c) Occupant(s) full names, rental unit address(es), and phone
number;
§ 135-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 135-4
122:211
(2) Owners of a property possessing one or more dwelling units shall
be required to obtain a residential rental license for each dwelling
unit situate thereon prior to that unit being leased to a tenant and/
or occupied by an occupant.
(3) For a rooming house, a single residential rental license shall be
required for all units within the rooming house building.
(4) All registration for a residential rental license shall be made on
forms and applications provided by the Township.
(5) A residential rental license shall not be issued or renewed until the
owner has provided the Township with a certification of compliance
with Township rules, regulations and codes and full and complete
information as requested on the residential rental registration.
B. Exemptions. The following shall not be considered residential rental
units for the purpose of this article:
(1) Owner-occupied dwelling units, provided that not more than five
unrelated individuals, in addition to the owner and his/her
relatives, occupy the unit any given time;
(2) Hotel units;
(3) Hospitals and state-licensed nursing homes and personal care
homes;
(4) Bed-and-breakfast homes;
(5) One dwelling unit that is on the same lot as a second dwelling unit,
provided each unit is occupied by the owner and by persons who
are related to the owner;
(6) On-campus dormitories owned by an accredited college or
university;
(7) Dwelling units that are classified and occupied as in-law suites, and
which are registered with the Township;
(8) A dwelling unit that is occupied by an immediate family member is
exempt from this article. An immediate family member is parent,
grandparent, son, daughter, stepson, stepdaughter and
grandchildren.
C. License terms and fee.
(1) Each residential rental license shall be valid for a period of two
years from the date of issuance, or until such time as there is a
change in occupants in a residential rental unit, whichever occurs
first, and at which time the residential rental license shall expire
and a new inspection is required. It is the duty of the owner to
contact the Township to schedule the required inspection of a
residential rental unit 30 days prior to any new occupants.
§ 135-4 LIMERICK CODE § 135-4
122:212
(2) The owner shall pay the inspection fee as set forth by Township
resolution.
(3) The Township may not issue or renew a residential rental license
until such time as the owner has paid all fines, costs, or fees arising
from administration or enforcement of this article or while any
citations issued in relation to the residential rental unit are
pending.
D. Inspection.
(1) The interior and exterior of each residential rental unit shall be
subject to inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or duly
authorized agent as set forth in this article. The Code Enforcement
Officer and/or duly authorized agent shall inspect the residential
rental unit in accordance with the following:
(a) International Fire Code, 2009, or most recent version adopted
by the Township (Chapter 84).
(b) International Property Maintenance Code, 2009, or most
recent version adopted by the Township (Chapter 132).
(c) Any other applicable commonwealth or Township code,
regulation, or ordinance related to safe occupancy of the
residential rental unit.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer and/or duly authorized agent are
empowered to enforce this article and to take appropriate
measures to abate violations hereof, for and on behalf of the
Township, pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Second
Class Township Code and the Limerick Township Code, Chapter 70,
titled Code Enforcement, that are in effect at the time of the
violation.
(3) This article shall not be construed as to limit the Code Enforcement
Officer's authority to conduct inspections or enforcement actions
under any other Township code or ordinance, nor shall it be
construed to limit the Township's ability to require that any
property be made available for inspection whenever there is
probable cause that a violation of the Township codes or ordinances
may be present.
(4) To minimize disruption to occupants, owners are encouraged to
schedule inspections during times when a residential rental unit is
unoccupied, between tenants, or during times when occupants are
absent from the residential rental units, and to properly and timely
notify the occupants of any scheduled inspections.
(5) Search warrants. For the purpose of inspection in accordance with
this article, if entry to any premises, common area or residential
rental unit is denied the Code Enforcement Officer, or if access to a
§ 135-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 135-4
122:213
§ 135-5. Violations; nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of
license.
residential rental unit or a unit reasonably believed to be occupied
in violation of this article cannot be obtained for any reason, the
Code Enforcement Officer may apply to the appropriate authority
for an administrative search warrant. Without limitation, when
denied access, the Code Enforcement Officer may request a
warrant for any one of the following reasons:
(a) The inspection is part of a systematic inspection, permitting
and enforcement program;
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer has actual knowledge of, or
probable cause to believe, that there is an existing or potential
violation of applicable Township regulations in the residential
rental unit, including the registration requirements under this
article; and/or
(c) The entry is necessary for the purpose of reinspecting a
violation of a Township regulation previously observed by the
Code Enforcement Officer and which the Code Enforcement
Officer ordered to be corrected.
A. Notice of violations.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall provide written notice to the
owner of commonwealth and Township code and ordinance
violations after the completion of an inspection of a residential
rental unit. It is encouraged that a copy of said notice be provided
to the occupants of the residential rental unit.
(2) The owner shall be permitted 30 days from the date of the written
notice of violations to cure all violations enumerated therein. The
only exceptions to this thirty-day cure period are as follows:
(a) In the event the Code Enforcement Officer determines a
residential rental unit is unfit for human habitation, and/or that
the continued occupation of the residential rental unit poses an
imminent threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
occupants or to the neighboring occupants/owners, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall order said unit to be vacated
immediately, and to remain vacated until conditions are
corrected to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer.
(b) For serious violations that do not require the property to be
vacated, the Code Enforcement Officer may require said
violations be cured within 24 hours, or any other time period as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(c) For violations requiring more than 30 days to cure, the Code
Enforcement Officer may grant, in his or her discretion, the
§ 135-4 LIMERICK CODE § 135-5
122:214
additional time required to effect a cure, and this period shall
be noted in writing and provided to the owner.
B. Nonrenewal.
(1) A Code Enforcement Officer may delay and/or deny the renewal of
a residential rental license if there are outstanding violations of
Township codes for that residential rental unit that have not been
corrected at the time of license renewal.
(2) If the violations are not a threat to the safety of occupants or other
members of the public, a Code Enforcement Officer may permit the
current occupants to continue to reside in the premises for a
reasonable period of time established by a Code Enforcement
Officer in the notice of nonrenewal, with the time limit removed
when the violations of Township codes are corrected. A Code
Enforcement Officer may issue a temporary residential rental
license that is conditioned upon certain actions being taken within
a maximum time period.
C. Revocation. The immediate revocation of the license to rent a
residential rental unit shall occur if a Code Enforcement Officer
determines that violations of Township codes present a threat to the
safety of occupants or other members of the public. Such revocation
shall continue until violations of Township codes are corrected and the
property has been reinspected.
D. Suspension.
(1) A Code Enforcement Officer may suspend the license to rent a
residential rental unit until violations of Township codes have been
corrected within a time limit established by a Code Enforcement
Officer. Such suspension shall continue until such time as the
violation(s) of Township codes are corrected.
(2) If the violations are not a threat to safety of occupants or other
members of the public, a Code Enforcement Officer shall permit the
current occupants to continue to reside in the premises for a
reasonable period of time established by a Code Enforcement
Officer in the notice of suspension.
E. Reinstatement. A residential rental license shall be reinstated if the
owner of a residential rental unit corrects the reason for the revocation
of the residential rental license, and the owner has paid a residential
rental license reinstatement fee, if any, and all other fees and fines as
adopted by Township resolution.
F. Penalties. Any of the following may subject an owner to penalties as
provided for in this section and other Township ordinances and laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
§ 135-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 135-5
122:215
(1) Failure to abate a violation of Township codes and ordinances that
apply to the premises within the time directed by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(2) Failure to take steps to remedy and prevent violations of this article
by occupants of residential rental units as required by this article.
G. Procedure for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of license.
Following a determination that grounds for nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation of a residential rental license exist, a Code Enforcement
Officer shall notify the owner or manager of the action to be taken and
the reason therefor. Such notification shall be in writing, addressed to
the owner or manager, and shall contain the following information:
(1) The address of the premises and/or an appropriate identification or
description of the affected regulated rental unit(s);
(2) A description of the violation which has been found to exist;
(3) A statement that the residential rental license for said residential
rental unit(s) shall be suspended, revoked, or will not be renewed
for the next license period unless the violation is corrected within
the time deadline provided in the notice. In the case of a
revocation, the notice shall state the date upon which such
revocation will commence;
(4) A statement that during the residential rental license nonrenewal
or revocation, the property shall not be rented for occupancy
except for any temporary conditional license extension that a Code
Enforcement Officer may issue;
(5) Information regarding the appeal process.
H. Appeals. All appeals shall be conducted in accordance with the
ordinances of Limerick Township, any statute of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and any other applicable law.
I. Notifications.
(1) Notices of violations and residential rental license suspensions,
revocations and nonrenewal shall be sent to the owner, and
manager, if applicable, in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Second Class Township Code and the Limerick
Township Code, Chapter 70, titled Code Enforcement, that are in
effect at the time of the violation.
(2) The Township shall not be responsible for failing to provide notice
where the owner has not provided a current name and address for
the owner or the manager for the rental unit.
(3) For purposes of this action, any notice required hereunder to be
given to a manager shall be deemed as notice given to the owner.
§ 135-5 LIMERICK CODE § 135-5
122:216
§ 135-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 135-7. Miscellaneous provisions.
(4) There shall be a presumption that any notice required to be given
to the owner under this section shall have been received by such
owner if the notice was given to the owner in the manner provided
by this article, including a posting of the notice on the premises.
(5) A claimed lack of knowledge by the owner of any violation
hereunder cited shall not be a defense to residential rental license
nonrenewal, suspension or revocation or an eviction order as long
as all required notices involving such proceedings have been sent
to the last known address of the owner and notice was posted on
the property.
A. Basis for violations. It shall be unlawful for any person, as either owner
or manager of a residential rental unit, to operate said units without
registering the premises possessing said residential rental unit(s); and/
or maintaining a valid and current residential rental license, as issued
by the Township and authorizing such operation. It shall be unlawful for
any person, either owner or manager, to allow the number of occupants
of a residential rental unit to exceed the maximum number allowed by
Township codes, or to violate any other provision of this article. It shall
be unlawful for any owner, manager or occupants to violate this article.
B. Penalties. The penalties, fines and remedies shall be in accordance with
the applicable provisions in the Second Class Township Code and the
Limerick Township Code, Chapter 70, titled Code Enforcement, that are
in effect at the time of the violation, any statute of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or any applicable law.
C. Nonexclusive remedies. The penalty provisions of this article and the
residential rental license nonrenewal, suspension and revocation
procedures provided in this article shall not limit the ability of the
Township to enforce other Township codes, regulations or ordinances,
nor shall said penalty provisions limit the ability of the Township to
utilize the penalties, remedies and procedures under such Township
ordinances and state or federal law, if applicable.
A. Owners separately responsible. If any residential rental unit is owned
by more than one person, in any form of joint tenancy, as a partnership,
or otherwise, such person shall be jointly and severally responsible for
the duties imposed under the terms of this article, and shall be
separately subject to penalties for the violation of this article.
B. Stricter standards to apply. In the event that any provision of this article
is inconsistent with the provisions of any other ordinance in effect in the
Township, the provision applying the stricter standard shall apply.
§ 135-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 135-7
122:217
C. This article shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or
regulation existing prior to the effective date hereof, and any such
violations shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the
full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or
regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed.
§ 135-7 LIMERICK CODE § 135-7
122:218
Chapter 140
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Authority — See Ch. 5.
Building construction — See Ch. 60.
Sewers in flood hazard areas — See Ch. 89.
Sewage disposal in mobile home parks — See
Ch. 113.
Plumbing — See Ch. 129.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 151.
Street openings — See Ch. 153.
Discharge of sewage into wells — See Ch. 181.
§ 135-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 135-7
122:219

ARTICLE I
Sewer Use and Connection
[Adopted 7-19-2005 by Ord. No. 25468]
§ 140-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATE SYSTEM — A sewage system employing a treatment system
and for disposal by either subsurface absorption, or spray and stream
discharge as provided for in Chapter 73 of Title 25 of the Rules and
Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
which are incorporated herein by reference.
AUTHORITY — The Limerick Township Municipal Authority, a municipality
authority incorporated pursuant to provisions of the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and
supplemented, of the commonwealth.69
BUILDING WASTEWATER SYSTEM — The extension from the wastewater
drainage system of any improved property to the point of connection with
the lateral portion of the sewage system, directly to the sewage system
or alternate system serving the improved property. This shall include a
pressure line associated with a property owner installed and owned grinder
pump system.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — That person designated, from time to time, by
the Township and the Authority to perform certain activities with respect to
the sewer system, as provided herein.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT — The unit of measure by which the sewer
rates and connection charges shall be imposed upon each improved
property, as determined in this resolution or in any subsequent resolution
of the Township,70 which shall be deemed to constitute the estimated,
equivalent amount of domestic sanitary sewage discharge by a single-family
dwelling unit.[Added 8-14-2008 by Ord. No. 299]
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT CAPACITY — A measure calculated at the
rate of 230 gpd per EDU.[Added 8-14-2008 by Ord. No. 299]
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
68.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 254 provided for the repeal of former Art. I, Sewer
Regulations for Orchard Terrace Sewer District, adopted 6-18-1968 by Ord. No. 35; Art. II,
Holding Tanks, adopted 10-3-1972 by Ord. No. 48; Art. III, Private Sewage Disposal
Systems, adopted 10-2-1979 by Ord. No. 78; and Art. IV, Sewer Use and Connections,
adopted 11-5-1986 by Ord. No. 96. It also provided for the renumbering of former Art. V as
Art. II, resulting in the renumbering of former §§ 140-32 through 140-41 as §§ 140-10
through 140-19.
69.Editor's Note: This Act was repealed 6-19-2001 by P.L. 287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A
§ 5601 et seq.
70.Editor's Note: See Art. III, Sewer Rents, Fees and Charges.
§ 140-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-1
122:221
sewage at another site. "Holding tanks" include but are not limited to the
following:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property upon which there is erected a
structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use
by human beings or animals and from which structure domestic sanitary
sewage and/or industrial waste shall be discharged, which is located within
the area to be serviced by the sewer system and subject to being connected
to the sewer system.[Amended 8-14-2008 by Ord. No. 299]
INSPECTION FEE — The fee which the Township may charge to the
property owner if the Township inspects and tests the sewer line from the
property line to the structure to be served.[Added 8-14-2008 by Ord. No.
299]
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in
whole or in part into the soil or into any waters of the commonwealth.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any improved property located within
the Township that discharges industrial wastes directly or indirectly into the
sewage system or alternate system serving the improved property.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid, gaseous or radioactive substance
or form of energy rejected or escaping in the course of any industrial,
manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course of the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from
sewage, including such groundwater, surface water or stormwater as may
be present.
LATERAL — That part of the sewage system extending from a sewer to the
curbline or, if no curbline exists, to the property line to connect the building
wastewater system, including pressure line associated with a property
owner installed and owned grinder pump system serving an improved
property. If there shall be no improved property, the "lateral" shall mean the
part of the sewage system extending from the sewer to a point of future
connection to the building wastewater system, if and when said property is
improved.
MUNICIPALITY — Limerick Township.
OWNER — Any individual or any other form of legal entity whatsoever
organized by law with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any
property, improved or unimproved, located in the Township. Whenever used
in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, the term
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharges to a
holding tank.
A.
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by
a water-carrying system.
B.
VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where
water under pressure is not available.
C.
§ 140-1 LIMERICK CODE § 140-1
122:222
"owner" shall include the members of an association, partnership or firm
and the officers of any corporation, public private, or municipal.
PERMIT — A written permit issued by the Sewage Enforcement Officer,
permitting the construction of an individual sewage disposal system under
this article, issued in accordance with the requirements and regulations
provided under this article.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, municipality, municipality authority or other group or entity.
PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM — A privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank
or similar receptacle, or alternate system.
RURAL RESIDENCE — A structure occupied or intended to be occupied by
not more than two families on a tract of land of 10 acres or more.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (toilets, household showers,
dishwashers, washing machines, etc.)
SEWAGE SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, transporting, treating and disposing of sewage and industrial
wastes, situate in or adjacent to this Township and owned, maintained,
operated and/or leased by agreement by the Authority.
SEWERAGE — Any sewer, pipe, conduit or pumping system constituting a
part of the sewer system issued or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, transmitting, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage situate
in or adjacent to this Township, and owned by the Township.[Added
8-14-2008 by Ord. No. 299]
STREET — Includes any street, road, land, court, cul-de-sac, alley, public
way or public square.
TAPPING FEE — That fee which the Township may charge, pursuant to and
in accordance with Section 67502 of the Code and the provisions of Act 57
of 2003, as amended,71 and which fee is based upon the various components
identified in a report available at the Township office.[Added 8-14-2008 by
Ord. No. 299]
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Limerick, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, a township of the second class of the commonwealth, acting
by and through its Board of Supervisors or, in appropriate cases, acting by
and through its authorized representative.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential-type dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated.
§ 140-2. Use of public sewage system required.
71.See 53 P.S. § 67502(a) and 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5607, respectively.
§ 140-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-2
122:223
§ 140-3. Use of private wastewater systems prohibited.
§ 140-4. Notice to connect.
A. The owner of any improved property accessible to and whose principal
building is within 150 feet from the sewerage system shall connect all
buildings or structures discharging wastewater and/or industrial
wastes to the sewerage system within 60 days after notice to make such
connection. Such connection shall be made for the purpose of
discharging all wastewater and industrial wastes from such improved
property into the sewerage system and shall be made in accordance
with the regulations established by the Township and/or the Authority.
B. After connection of the property to the sewerage system has been
made, all wastewater and industrial wastes from the property shall be
conducted into the sewerage system, subject to such limitations and
restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall be
established by the Township or the Authority.
A. No private wastewater system shall be used and maintained at any time
upon any property which has been connected to a sewer or which is
required to be connected to a sewer. Every such private wastewater
system in existence shall be disabled and abandoned, cleansed and/or
filled in accordance with applicable Township regulations. Any such
private wastewater system which is not disabled, abandoned, etc., shall
constitute a nuisance, and such nuisance may be abated as provided by
law, at the expense of the owner of such improved property. Septic
tanks may, by special request to the Board of Supervisors, be used for
the discharge of stormwater and cellar waste waters.
B. No private wastewater system shall be connected with a sewerage
system.
C. No person shall place or deposit, or permit to be placed or deposited,
upon public or private property within this Township, any wastewater
or industrial wastes in violation of Subsection A. No person shall
discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural outlet within this
Township any wastewater or industrial wastes in violation of Subsection
A, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance
with limitations and restrictions as shall be established by the Township
and the Authority.
A. The notice by the Township to make a connection to a sewer, referred to
in § 140-2A, shall consist of a copy of this article, including any
amendments at the time in effect, and a written or printed document
requiring the connection. Notice may be given at any time after a sewer
is in place and operational to service the property.
B. If the owner of any improved property shall fail to connect such
improved property within 60 days following receipt of notice to
connect, the Township and/or the Authority may enter upon such
§ 140-2 LIMERICK CODE § 140-4
122:224
§ 140-5. Connection to and use of sewer system.
§ 140-6. Permits; connections.
improved property and construct such connection and may collect from
such owner the costs and expenses thereof in the manner permitted by
law.
A. Where an improved property, at the time connection to a sewer is
required, shall be served by a private sewerage system, the existing
sewer line shall be broken on the structure side of such system and
attachment shall be made, with proper fittings, to continue such sewer
line as a building wastewater system.
B. No building wastewater system shall be covered until it has been
inspected and approved by the Township and/or the Authority. If any
part of a building wastewater system is covered before so being
inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for inspection at the cost
and expense of the owner of the property to be connected to a sewer.
C. Every building wastewater system shall be maintained in a sanitary and
safe operating condition by the owner thereof.
D. Every excavation for the construction of a building wastewater system
shall be guarded adequately with barricades and lights to protect all
persons from damage and injury. Streets, sidewalks and other public
property disturbed in the course of installation of a building wastewater
system shall be restored to Township specifications at the cost and
expense of the owner of the property.
E. In the event the Township or the Authority determines that a building
wastewater system is in an unsafe or unsatisfactory condition, notice to
correct such condition shall be given to the owner of the property. If,
after receipt of such notice, the owner shall fail or refuse to remedy
such condition within 60 days of receipt of such notice, the Township or
the Authority may refuse to permit such person to discharge
wastewater and industrial wastes into the sewerage system until such
unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction of
the Township and the Authority.
F. The Township and the Authority reserve the right to adopt additional
rules and regulations as is deemed necessary and proper relating for
the connection to and use of the sewer and the sewerage system. Such
additional rules and regulations shall be construed as part of this
article.
A. No person shall uncover, shall connect with, shall make any opening
into or shall use, shall alter or shall disturb, in any manner, any sewer or
any part of the sewerage system without first obtaining a permit, in
writing, from the Authority.
§ 140-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-6
122:225
B. Application for a permit required under Subsection A above shall be
made by the owner or the duly authorized agent of such owner of the
improved property served or to be served to the Enforcement Officer.
C. No person shall make or shall cause to be made a connection of any
improved property with a sewer until such person shall have fulfilled
each of the following conditions:
(1) Such person shall have notified the Enforcement Officer of the
desire and intention of such person to connect such improved
property to a sewer.
(2) Such person shall have applied for and shall have obtained a permit
as required by Subsection A.
(3) Such person shall have given the Enforcement Officer at least 48
hours' notice of the time when such connection will be made so that
the Enforcement Officer may supervise and inspect or may cause to
be supervised and inspected the work of connection and necessary
testing.
(4) If applicable, such person shall have furnished satisfactory
evidence to the Enforcement Officer that any and all tapping fees,
connection charges, user charges and other fees and charges
which have been or may be charged to or imposed upon such
person, either by resolution of the Township or Authority or by
written agreement between such person and the Township or
Authority, have been paid in full.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, each improved
property shall be connected separately and independently with a sewer
through a building wastewater system. Grouping of more than one
improved property on one building wastewater system shall not be
permitted, except under special circumstances and for good sanitary
reasons or other good cause shown, but then only after special
permission of the Authority, in writing, shall have been secured and
only subject to such rules, regulations and conditions as may be
prescribed by the Authority.
E. All costs and expenses of construction of a building wastewater system
and all costs and expenses of connection of a building wastewater
system to a sewerage system shall be borne by the owner of the
improved property to be connected, and such owner shall indemnify
and shall save harmless the Township and the Authority from all loss or
damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of
construction of a building wastewater system or of connection of a
building wastewater system to a sewer, including said lateral where
none exits.
F. A building wastewater system shall be connected to a sewer at the
place designated by the Enforcement Officer and where, if applicable,
the lateral is provided. The invert of a building wastewater system at
§ 140-6 LIMERICK CODE § 140-6
122:226
§ 140-7. Holding tank regulations.
§ 140-8. Private sewage systems.
From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
owner to construct a rural residence or a property to be improved or
modified that will require a private sewage system modification or for a
the point of connection shall be at the same or a higher elevation than
the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the
connection of a building wastewater system to the lateral shall be made
secure and watertight.
A. Authority to regulate. Holding tanks for residential, commercial and
industrial purposes shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. The Township is hereby
authorized and empowered to undertake within the Township the
control and methods of holding-tank wastewater disposal and the
collection and transportation thereof.
B. Additional rules and regulations. The Authority is hereby authorized
and empowered to adopt such rules and regulations concerning
wastewater which it may deem necessary from time to time to affect the
purposes herein. All such rules and regulations adopted by the
Authority shall be in conformity with the provisions herein, all other
ordinances of the Township and all applicable laws and applicable rules
and regulations of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
C. Right of inspection; charges. The Township shall have the right and
power to establish the time and manner of inspection of the holding
tanks. Such inspections shall be made not less than three times a year.
The Township shall have the right and power to fix, charge and collect
charges for the inspection of holding tanks.
D. Authority to regulate collection and disposal of contents. The collection
and transportation of all wastewater from any improved property
utilizing a holding tank shall be done under the direction and control of
the Township, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at such site
or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Duties of property owner. The owner of an improved property that
utilizes a holding tank shall:
(1) Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance of this Township, the provision of any applicable law and
the rules and regulations of the Authority and any administrative
agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Permit only those approved by the Township to collect, transport
and dispose of the contents therein.
§ 140-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-8
122:227
property in a publicly sewer area but with its principle structure beyond
150 feet for a sewerage system without first securing a permit from the
Enforcement Officer of Limerick Township in accordance with the following
requirements:
A. General regulations.
(1) Prior to making application for construction of or modification of a
residence, the owner shall apply to the Enforcement Officer for a
permit.
(2) If an examination of the soil profile by the Enforcement Officer
indicates that the type of soil is acceptable for a conventional
subsurface wastewater system, the owner shall proceed with the
performance of percolation tests in accordance with the provisions
of the Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection as established in Title 25, Chapter 73, as
amended, which are incorporated herein by reference. If the
percolation tests are satisfactory, the owner shall install a
conventional subsurface wastewater system.
(3) If an examination of the soil profile by the Enforcement Officer
indicates that the type of soil is unacceptable for a conventional
wastewater system or if the results of the percolation test are not
satisfactory, the owner shall proceed with the installation of an
alternate wastewater system as approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection in Chapter 73 of Title 25
of the Rules and Regulations, as amended.
B. Private sewage system construction.
(1) All wastewater systems shall be constructed, maintained and
operated in accordance with the standards established by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection set forth in
Chapter 73 of Title 25 of the Rules and Regulations, as amended
which are incorporated herein by reference, and shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the Enforcement Officer.
(2) If the soil conditions and/or percolation test results do not qualify
the property for a conventional subsurface wastewater system in
accordance with the standards established by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection in Chapter 73 of Title 25
of the Rules and Regulations, as amended, which are incorporated
herein by reference, an alternate system approved by DEP and
recommended by the Enforcement Officer maybe considered.
These facilities shall be located on the property at a minimum
distance of 100 feet from any property lines, dwellings, roads or
watercourses.
C. Application for permit.
§ 140-8 LIMERICK CODE § 140-8
122:228
§ 140-9. Violations and penalties.
(1) Applications for permits required under this article shall be made
in writing, in accordance with forms prescribed by the Township
Supervisors, to the Enforcement Officer, who shall issue a written
permit only upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions of
this article and after payment of the required fees.
(2) All applications for permits shall be signed by the applicant and
shall set forth his residence and business address, together with
the name and address of the actual owner of the premises upon
which the system is to be installed. All substantiating data and
representations whatsoever pertinent to the application or the
proposed improvement shall be set forth in writing, and any oral
representations, whether made by the inspector or the Township
Board of Supervisors, shall be deemed irrelevant to the application.
(3) All applications shall set forth in writing and by definite
measurements located upon a plan or a sketch, drawn according to
scale, the location of the septic tank, inspection holes and
distribution box and the layout of the tile field by exact
measurements for future reference and for Township inspection,
showing also the specific locations of all such improvements with
respect to the existing buildings measured by distances and exact
directions.
D. Availability of public sewers. The Enforcement Officer shall refuse to
grant a permit for the construction of any individual wastewater
disposal system where public or community wastewater disposal
systems are reasonable or available.
E. Inspections.
(1) The Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make
such inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory
compliance with this article.
(2) It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of a property to give
the Enforcement Officer free access to the property at reasonable
times for the purpose of making such inspections as are necessary
to determine the compliance with the requirements of this article.
F. Fees. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate,
replace or repair an individual wastewater disposal system, a fee shall
be paid in the amount as established by a resolution adopted by the
Board of Supervisors.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall pay a
penalty to the Township in an amount not to exceed $600 per violation.
If the penalty is not voluntarily paid to the Township, the Township shall
initiate a civil enforcement proceeding before a Magisterial District
§ 140-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-9
122:229
Judge. In addition to, or in lieu of civil actions before a Magisterial
District Judge, townships may enforce ordinances in equity.
B. In any case where a penalty for a violation of this article has not been
timely paid and the person upon whom the penalty was imposed is
found to have been liable therefore in civil proceedings, the violator
shall be liable for the penalty imposed, including additional daily
penalties for continuing violations, plus court costs and reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Township in the enforcement
proceedings.
§ 140-9 LIMERICK CODE § 140-9
122:230
ARTICLE II
Licensing of Sewage Haulers
[Adopted 11-3-1993 by Ord. No. 158]
§ 140-10. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Limerick Township Sewage Hauler
Ordinance."
§ 140-11. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of the terms used in this article will be as defined in Chapter 140,
Sewers and Sewage Disposal.
§ 140-12. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any sewage collector or hauler to collect and
transport and/or dispose of sewage within Limerick Township without a
license from the Limerick Township Municipal Authority.
§ 140-13. License.
All sewage collectors and haulers shall obtain a license therefor by
application to the Limerick Township Municipal Authority. Said collector or
hauler may collect or transport such sewage within the Township from the
date of the issuance of the license until January 31 of the next calendar
year. Each licensee must renew the license no later than January 31 of
each calendar year. Any sewage collector or hauler to whom a license is
issued shall have the privilege of collecting and hauling sewage picked up
within the boundaries of Limerick Township, which license shall not be
transferable.
A. At the time of the application, the sewage collector/hauler shall provide
the following information on a form prepared by the Authority:
(1) The name of the sewage collector/hauler, business address and
telephone number of the business office to receive calls from
persons in the Township who receive collection service.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person having the
largest interest in the sewage collector/hauler.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the officers of the
corporation or general partners of the partnership, if applicable.
(4) The make, year, model and registration of each truck or vehicle
which is used in Limerick Township to haul, carry, transport or
collect sewage.
(5) A certificate of applicant's workers' compensation insurance as
required by law.
§ 140-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-13
122:231
§ 140-14. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article and grounds for suspension
or revocation of a license or the denial of a renewal license for any sewage
collector/hauler to:
§ 140-15. Conditions of license.
As a condition to the issuance and continued effectiveness of any license,
the licensee shall comply with the following:
(6) A certificate of insurance coverage covering complete third-party
public liability for both bodily injury and property damage, owner's
and collector's protective insurance and automobile insurance with
respect to personal injuries and property damage. Such insurance
shall be in amounts that shall be from time to time set forth by the
Authority by regulations adopted hereunder. Each and every policy
of insurance herein mentioned which is required pursuant to the
terms of this article shall carry within it an endorsement to the
effect that the insurance carrier will convey to Limerick Township
Municipal Authority, by certified mail, written notice of any
modifications, alterations or cancellation of any such policy or
policies or the terms thereof. The above-mentioned written notice
shall be mailed to Limerick Township Municipal Authority at least
10 days prior to the effective date of such modification, alteration
or cancellation.
(7) The approved disposal site where the sewage will be taken.
(8) Any appropriate or required state or federal licensing, including
but not limited to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and the Environmental Protection Agency.
(9) Such other information as the Authority shall deem appropriate
and necessary.
B. At the time of the application, the sewage collector/hauler shall pay to
the Authority a sum as provided for in the schedule of fees as adopted
by resolution of the Limerick Township Municipal Authority.
A. Collect or transport any sewage without a valid license as set forth
above.
B. Fail to provide for proper disposition of sewage collected or transported
within the Township.
C. Load or operate any vehicle within the Township or transport sewage in
such a manner to allow sewage to fall upon the public roadways or upon
land abutting public roads in Limerick Township.
D. Otherwise create a public nuisance.
§ 140-13 LIMERICK CODE § 140-15
122:232
§ 140-16. Granting, suspension or revocation of license.
The Authority shall have the right to refuse to issue a license to any sewage
collector/hauler or to revoke or suspend a license previously issued or
refuse to renew the same if said sewage collector/hauler, his or its agents,
servants or employees fail to comply with the provisions of this article or
any regulations adopted hereunder.
§ 140-17. Rules and regulations.
The transportation and collection of sewage by the sewage collector/hauler
shall be made in compliance with the regulations to be adopted by the
Limerick Township Municipal Authority to carry out the intent and purpose
of this article. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by resolution of
the Authority and, when so approved, shall have the same force and effect
of the provisions of the article. Said rules and regulations may be amended,
modified and repealed by resolution of the Authority.
§ 140-18. Enforcement.
A. Collection equipment and transportation vehicles. All collection
equipment and transportation vehicles shall comply with all the
appropriate rules and regulations and provisions as shall be adopted by
the Limerick Township Municipal Authority.
B. Exhibiting license. Each licensee shall at all times while in the process
of collecting or transporting sewage have and display in a proper
manner a valid registration sticker and have the license and/or a copy
thereof, issued by the Authority, which shall have been signed by the
Authority Administrator or his/her designee, within the vehicle being
employed in said collection or transportation and shall exhibit the same,
on demand, to the Authority Administrator or his/her designee or to any
police officer of the Township.
C. Compliance. The licensee shall at all times comply with the provisions
of this article and the regulations adopted hereunder and with the
provisions of the Code of Limerick Township.
A. Unlawful activities; public nuisance. It shall be unlawful and a public
nuisance for any person to violate or to cause or assist in a violation of
any provision of this article or to violate or to cause or assist in the
violation of any rule, regulation or resolution promulgated by the
Authority pursuant to this article.
B. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this article or any of
the regulations adopted hereunder or any person who engages in
unlawful conduct as defined in this article shall, upon conviction thereof
in a summary proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and not less than $50.
Each continuing day of any violation of this article or unlawful conduct
§ 140-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-18
122:233
§ 140-19. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed so as
to best achieve and effectuate the goals and purposes hereof.
as defined in this article shall constitute a separate offense punishable
by a like fine or penalty.
C. Injunction. In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the
Limerick Township Municipal Authority may institute a suit in the name
of Limerick Township in equity where unlawful conduct or a public
nuisance exists as defined in this article for an injunction to restrain a
violation of this article or any rules, regulations or resolutions
promulgated or issued by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to this
article.
D. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
article shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the Township from exercising any other
remedy provided by this article or otherwise provided at law or equity.
§ 140-18 LIMERICK CODE § 140-19
122:234
ARTICLE III
Sewer Rents, Fees and Charges
[Adopted 8-14-2008 by Ord. No. 29972]
§ 140-20. Imposition of rents, fees and charges.
As the public entity responsible for providing sanitary sewer service to
Limerick Township, the Township shall be responsible for imposing rents,
fees and charges to those properties connected to or required to connect to
the sewage system. Such rents, fees and charges will be collected for the
use of the sewage system, as well as the treatment of all sewage discharged
thereto and maintenance thereof. The Township shall impose and amend
such rents, fees and charges by resolution duly authorized and enacted by
the Board of Supervisors, as may be amended from time to time. A copy of
such resolution detailing the rents, fees and charges shall be available at
the Township Building.
§ 140-21. Tapping fees.
A. The Township shall impose at the time of application for connection a
tapping fee for each equivalent dwelling unit.
B. In the event the number of equivalent dwelling units increases for any
improved property after the date of original application for connection,
the owner of said improved property will be charged a tapping fee for
each equivalent dwelling unit in excess of the former total number of
equivalent dwelling units for said improved property based on the
appropriate tapping fee in effect for the improved property in question.
Said tapping fee will be payable contemporaneously with the
connection fee or at such time as an owner makes a formal application/
request to the Township for the acquisition and/or reservation of EDUs
in the Township's sewer system.
C. The tapping fee is $4,826. The report establishing the tapping fee
calculation and its backup cost documentation upon which the
Township relied in establishing this tapping fee is available for review
at the Township Building.
D. The tapping fee reimbursement allowance is $1,297. The report
establishing the reimbursement component upon which the Township
relied in establishing this allowance is available for review at the
Township Building.
72.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 9-2-2008.
§ 140-20 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 140-21
122:235
Chapter 147
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 147, Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Grading Control,
adopted 1-19-1988 by Ord. No. 98, as amended, was repealed
12-16-2014 by Ord. No. 356. See now Ch. 151, Stormwater
Management.]
Chapter 149
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 57.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 60.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 95.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 151.
§ 140-21 LIMERICK CODE § 140-21
122:236
ARTICLE I
Municipal Waste
[Adopted 10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 119]
§ 149-1. Definitions.
A. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE — Municipal waste which is not unacceptable
waste or nonprocessible waste.
COUNTY — The County of Montgomery, Pennsylvania.73
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
LANDFILL — A landfill with which the Waste Authority has contracted
to dispose of acceptable waste.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Limerick, a township of the Second
Class, located within the County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Municipal waste as defined in Section 103 of Act
97 and Section 103 of Act 10175 and any rules, regulations or policies
promulgated thereunder.
Any material or substance which, by reason of its composition or
characteristics, is:
Toxic or hazardous waste as defined in the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et
seq., or as defined in Section 6(e) of the Toxic Substances
Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2605(e) under Act 9774 or under any
other applicable laws of similar purpose of effect, including
but not limited to, with respect to each of such laws, any
replacement, amendment, expansion or supplement thereto
and any rules, regulations or policies thereunder; or
(a)
Special nuclear or by-product materials within the meaning
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.,
and any replacement, amendment, expansion or supplement
thereto and any rules, regulations or policies thereunder.
(b)
(1)
Any other material that any governmental agency or unit having
appropriate jurisdiction shall determine from time to time is
harmful, toxic or dangerous or otherwise ineligible for disposal in
the landfill.
(2)
73.Editor's Note: The former definition of "county ordinance or county waste flow ordinance"
and "date of Western County System operation," which immediately followed this
definition, were repealed 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288.
74.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
75.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.103 and 53 P.S. § 4000.103, respectively.
§ 149-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 149-1
122:237
NONPROCESSIBLE WASTE — White goods; automobile tires in
quantity; noncombustible items, stumps, logs, brush and other waste
which either weighs in excess of 25 pounds or exceeds one of the
following dimensions: four feet in length, four inches in diameter or
four inches in thickness; sludges; construction and demolition debris;
or leaf waste beyond that permitted by Act 101.76
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal
institution or agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other
governmental agency or any other legal entity or any group of such
persons whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, penalty,
imprisonment or denial or grant of any license or any combination of
the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors
of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLAN — The countywide municipal waste management plan developed
by the county and approved by DEP (Department of Environmental
Protection), as such has been and may hereafter be amended or revised
in compliance with law.
PLAN REVISION — The revision dated June 1990 to the County
Municipal Waste Management Plan developed by the county, to be
submitted to DEP and approved by a majority of the affected
municipalities within the county representing a majority of the county's
population.77
PROCESSIBLE WASTE — That portion of acceptable waste which is not
nonprocessible waste.
RECYCLING or RECYCLED — The collection, separation, recovery and
sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other
materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal
waste or the mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste
(other than through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable
materials other than a fuel for the operation of energy.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation and collection, prior to the
point of entry into the waste stream, for the purpose of recycling of
individual components of acceptable waste, such as, without limitation,
bottles, cans and other materials in accordance with Act
101.78[Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288]
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE — [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288]
Any material that, by reason of its composition, characteristics or
quantity, is ineligible for disposal at the landfill pursuant to the
provisions of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976,
(1)
76.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
77.Editor's Note: The former definition of "point of entry into the Western County System,"
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288.
78.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 149-1 LIMERICK CODE § 149-1
122:238
WHITE GOODS — Refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, window air
conditioners, hot-water heaters and other major home appliances.
42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., and the regulations thereunder or, except
for trace amounts normally found in household or commercial solid
waste, any other similarly applicable law, including but not limited
to the following laws and the regulations, if any, promulgated
under each: the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2601
et seq.; the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, 7
U.S.C. § 136 et seq.; the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.; the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq.; Act 97;79
the Hazardous Sites Cleanup Act, Act 108,80 enacted October 18,
1988; and any similar or substituted legislation or regulations or
amendments to the foregoing, as well as any other laws coextensive
with the foregoing;
Any other materials that any governmental body or unit having or
claiming appropriate jurisdiction shall determine from time to time
to be harmful, toxic, dangerous or otherwise ineligible for disposal
at the landfill;
(2)
Any waste that a landfill or other applicable facility is precluded
from accepting pursuant to any permit or governmental plan
governing such landfill or other applicable facility;
(3)
(4) Hazardous waste;
(5) Residual waste as defined in Act 101;81
Special nuclear or by-product materials within the meaning of
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq., and
any similar or substituted legislation or regulation or amendments
to the foregoing, including but not limited to any other laws
coextensive with the foregoing;
(6)
Asbestos, sludge, infectious waste, chemotherapeutic waste and
incinerator ash;
(7)
(8) White goods in quantity and/or automobile tires in quantity; and
Any other material that the Township or Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection reasonably concludes would require
special handling or present an endangerment to a disposal facility,
the public health or safety or the environment.82
(9)
79.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
80.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6020.101 et seq.
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
82.Editor's Note: The former definitions of "Waste Authority" and "Western County System or
system," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 12-13-2007 by Ord. No.
288.
§ 149-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 149-1
122:239
§ 149-2. Legislative intent. [Added 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 28884]
§ 149-3. Disposal. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288]
B. All other words and phrases as defined in Act 97 or Act 10183 shall have
the same meanings as set forth in Act 97 or Act 101, as they may
hereinafter be amended or supplemented by legislation regarding
municipal waste management or planning. [Amended 12-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 288]
A. The reduction of the amount of municipal waste and conservation of
recyclable materials is an important public concern by reason of the
growing problem of municipal waste disposal and its impact on the
environment. It is the intent of this article to promote, require and
regulate recycling activities in the Township and to protect the health,
safety and welfare of residents.
B. This article has been developed to meet and implement municipal
responsibilities established under Act 101.85
C. The policy to establish, implement or amend the municipal recycling
program shall be approved by resolution.
D. The Township's adoption of this article does not preclude the future
assignment of its responsibility as it relates to the coordination,
regulation and/or enforcement of recycling activities. Such assignment
of responsibilities will be accomplished in accordance with Section
304(c) of Act 10186 and would require the Township to enter into a
written agreement with the entity accepting such responsibilities.
However, under no circumstances will the Township relinquish its right
to select the methodology for conducting recycling, municipal waste
collector subscription service to individual customers, franchising or
bidding of municipal waste collector services on a partial or communitywide
basis or municipal waste collector services provided by a
municipality.
A. Disposal at other sites. Disposal of municipal waste collected or
generated within the municipality shall be only as permitted by rule,
regulation, ordinance or order duly issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Recycling. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit source
separation or recycling or to affect any sites at which source separation
or recycling may take place.
83.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
84.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former § 149-2, Legislative
intent.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101.
86.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.304(c).
§ 149-1 LIMERICK CODE § 149-4
122:240
§ 149-4. Regulations; enforcement. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord.
No. 288]
§ 149-5. Annual survey. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288]
All generators of municipal waste and all municipal waste collectors and
municipal waste transporters, any landfill operators, any transfer station
operators or any other parties involved in the collection, transportation,
processing or disposal of municipal waste of the municipality shall
cooperate in the taking and preparation of an annual survey to be
conducted by an engineering consultant designated by the Township or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 149-6. Restrictions. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288]
A. Compliance with the Township or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. The collection, transportation, processing
and disposal of municipal waste present or generated within the
municipality shall be subject to such further reasonable rules and
regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the Township
or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Adoption of regulations. Rules and regulations adopted by the Township
or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for the
municipal waste system shall be deemed rules and regulations adopted
under this article.
C. Consistency of regulations with ordinance and other laws. No rules or
regulations adopted by the municipality pursuant to this article shall be
in violation of or inconsistent with the provisions of this article, as well
as the provisions and purposes of Act 97, Act 101 or regulations
adopted thereunder or such other laws, regulations or requirements as
may be enacted by the United States of America, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection or the Pennsylvania Environmental Quality Board governing
municipal waste planning, collection, storage, transportation,
processing or disposal.
A. No person shall enter into any contract or conduct any other activity
concerning the collection, transportation, processing or disposal of
municipal waste in the municipality in contravention of the terms set
forth by the Township or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, this article or any rules and regulations
issued thereunder.
B. Recycling. Nothing contained in this article shall interfere with the
operation of any program for recycling.
C. This article shall be construed consistently with Act 97 and Act 101.87
87.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 149-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 149-6
122:241
§ 149-7. (Reserved)88
§ 149-8. Unlawful activities; nuisances. [Amended 12-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 288]
§ 149-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who engages in unlawful conduct as defined in this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, in a summary proceeding before a Magisterial
District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and not
less than $500 for each offense and, in default of payment thereof, shall be
D. The hours of operation for municipal waste collectors or haulers shall
be from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m., Saturday and Sunday. Any work, as referenced above,
performed outside of these hours will be considered a violation of this
chapter. [Added 4-18-2017 by Ord. No. 377]
A. Unlawful conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of this
article, any rule, regulation or order promulgated hereunder or any
rule, regulation or order promulgated by the Township and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or the
county consistent with this article.
(2) Transport, process, treat, transfer or dispose of or cause to be
processed, treated, transferred or disposed municipal waste
generated within the municipality except as provided for in this
article.
(3) Collect or transport municipal waste present or generated within
the municipality without a valid license for collection or
transportation issued by the Township and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
(4) Hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with the municipality, the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or the
county or their personnel in the performance of any duty under this
article or in the enforcement of this article.
(5) Act in a manner that is contrary to Act 97 or Act 101,89 regulations
promulgated thereunder, this article, rules or regulations
promulgated under this article.
B. Public nuisance. Any unlawful conduct set forth in Subsection A hereof
shall constitute a public nuisance.
88.Editor's Note: Former § 149-7, Municipal Waste Authority, was repealed 12-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 288.
89.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq. respectively..
§ 149-6 LIMERICK CODE § 149-9
122:242
committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each day
that there is a violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 149-10. (Reserved)90
§ 149-11. Injunctions; concurrent remedies. [Amended 12-13-2007
by Ord. No. 288]
§ 149-12. Intermunicipal agreement. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord.
No. 288]
§ 149-13. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed, so as
best to achieve and to effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article
shall be construed in pari materia with Act 97 and Act 101.92
A. Restraining violations. In addition to any other remedy provided in this
article, the Township and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection may institute a suit in equity where unlawful
conduct or public nuisance exists as defined in this article for an
injunction to restrain a violation of this article or rules, regulations,
orders or the terms of license promulgated or issued pursuant to this
article. In addition to an injunction, the court may impose penalties as
authorized by § 149-9 hereof.
B. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
article shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the Township or the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection from exercising any other remedy
provided by this article or otherwise provided at law or equity.
A. Entry into IMA. In order to implement the intent and terms of this
article, the municipality, pursuant to the authority of the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180,
codified at 53 P.S. § 481 to 53 P.S. § 490 (Purdon 1974 and Purdon
Supplement 1990),91 and Article IX, Section 5, of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall reserve the right to enter into an
intermunicipal agreement (IMA) between the county and other
municipalities, together with such changes consistent with this article,
if any, as may be approved by the officials of the parties executing the
same, such execution to be conclusive evidence of such approval.
B. Execution. Appropriate officers of this municipality are authorized and
shall have the power to execute an IMA on behalf of this municipality.
90.Editor's Note: Former § 149-10, Revocation of license, was repealed 12-13-2007 by Ord.
No. 288.
91.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 481 to 53 P.S. § 490 were repealed 1996, Dec. 19, P.L. 1158, No.
177, § 2(a), effective in 60 days. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
92.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et. seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 149-9 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 149-14
122:243
§ 149-14. Compliance with Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288]
The municipality will take such actions as are necessary to comply with
the rules and regulations set forth by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 149-14 LIMERICK CODE § 149-14
122:244
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 134]
§ 149-15. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Limerick Township
Recycling Ordinance."
§ 149-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events sponsored in whole or in part by
Limerick Township or conducted within Limerick Township and sponsored
privately which include but are not limited to fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics
and organized sporting events that will be attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residue, shrubbery and tree trimmings and
similar materials but not including grass clippings.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from the operations of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
as defined in the Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L.
380, No. 97, as amended, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater
treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include
source-separated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL WASTE COLLECTOR — Any person collecting or transporting
municipal waste or recyclable materials for owners or occupants of property
in Limerick Township and any business or institution within Limerick
Township which generates municipal waste or recyclable materials and
uses its own employees and equipment for the collection or transportation
of municipal waste or recyclable materials. All municipal waste collectors
shall be licensed pursuant to the provisions of Article III, Municipal Waste
Collectors, of this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
institution, cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal
government or agency, commonwealth institution or agency or any other
legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as a subject of rights and
duties. In any provision of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include
the officers and directors of any corporation or any other legal entity having
officers and directors.
§ 149-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 149-16
122:245
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by Limerick
Township for collection in accordance with this article and recycling
regulations which may be promulgated from time to time. Such material
may include but shall not be limited to aluminum cans, clear and colored
glass containers, tin, steel and bimetallic cans, clear and colored PET rigid
plastic bottles, natural and pigmented HDPE plastic bottles and newsprint
material. The list of "recyclable materials" may be changed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township.
RESIDENT — Any person which owns, leases or occupies a property located
in Limerick Township used as a residence.
§ 149-17. Source separation required.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory source separation
and collection of recyclable materials and leaf waste within Limerick
Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. No person shall dispose of
municipal waste, recyclable materials or leaf waste within Limerick
Township except in accordance with this article. The use of a municipal
waste collector will not relieve any person from compliance with this article.
§ 149-18. Residential recycling. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No.
288]
A. Recyclable materials. All residents of Limerick Township shall separate
recyclable materials from all municipal waste generated at their
properties. When placed at the curb for collection in accordance with
the provisions of this article, recyclable materials shall be placed in
separate, reusable containers which clearly identify the contents as
recyclables. Such containers shall be provided by the municipality. The
preparation for collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials
shall be made in accordance with the instructions provided by the
municipal waste collector.
B. Leaf waste. All residents of Limerick Township shall separate leaf waste
from all municipal waste generated at their property. When collection
procedures have been scheduled by the municipal waste collector, leaf
waste shall be placed in paper biodegradable bags provided by the
municipal waste collector. Residents must purchase biodegradable leaf
and yard waste collection bags from the Township or from an
authorized dealer as no plastic bags are permitted. Any resident who
otherwise provides for the proper disposal of leaf waste by composting
shall not be required to comply with the provisions of this subsection.
C. Collection. Collection of recyclable materials shall be made only by a
municipal waste collector at a minimum of once per week. Leaf waste
shall be collected by a municipal waste collector in accordance with the
schedules established annually by the municipal waste collector.
D. Multifamily residences. An owner, landlord or agent of an owner or
landlord of multifamily residential housing properties with four or more
§ 149-16 LIMERICK CODE § 149-18
122:246
§ 149-19. Commercial, institutional and municipal recycling.
[Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288]
All persons occupying commercial, institutional and municipal
establishments within Limerick Township shall separate high-grade office
paper, corrugated paper, bulk and leaf waste and all recyclable materials
and such other materials as may be changed from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township generated at such
establishments and from community activities, store the materials until
collection by a municipal waste collector and annually provide written
documentation and certification to Limerick Township of that total volume
of materials and the type of materials recycled. Such persons may comply
with the reporting requirements hereunder by requiring their municipal
waste collector to provide said documentation and certification directly to
the Township.
§ 149-20. Prohibited acts.
units or the residents of such multifamily residential properties acting
by and through a duly constituted homeowners' association shall
comply with their responsibilities under this article by establishing a
collection system for recyclable materials at each property and pickup
by a municipal waste collector. A collection system must include
suitable containers for collecting and sorting materials, easily
accessible locations for the containers and written instructions to the
occupants or residents concerning the use and availability of the
collection system. In addition, such owners, landlords, agents and
homeowners' associations shall annually provide written
documentation and certification to Limerick Township of the total
volume of materials and the types of materials recycled. Such owners,
landlords, agents and homeowners' associations may comply with the
reporting requirements hereunder by requiring their municipal waste
collector to provide said documentation and certification directly to the
Township. Owners, landlords and agents of owners or landlords who
comply with this article under this subsection shall not be liable for the
noncompliance of occupants of their building.
A. No person shall place municipal waste in containers used for the
separation and collection of recyclable materials.
B. No person shall place recyclable materials in containers used for the
separation and collection of municipal waste.
C. No person shall store municipal waste outside of an enclosed building
in other than closed watertight containers.
D. No person shall place containers for municipal waste or recyclable
materials at the curb or in the front yard of any lot except during the
period beginning at 6:00 p.m., prevailing time, on the day prior to the
scheduled collection and ending at 12:00 midnight on the day of a
§ 149-18 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 149-20
122:247
§ 149-21. Impairment of ownership.
Nothing in this article or any regulation promulgated pursuant hereto shall
be deemed to impair the ownership of separated materials by the persons
who generated them unless and until separated materials are placed at
curbside or similar location for collection by a municipal waste collector.
§ 149-22. Unauthorized collection prohibited.
From the time of placement of the recyclable materials at the curb or other
designated place for collection by a municipal waste collector pursuant
to the provisions of this article and any rules and regulations adopted
hereunder, the recyclable materials shall become and be the property of
the municipal waste collector. It shall be a violation of this article for any
person not duly authorized by Limerick Township to collect or pick up or
cause to be collected or picked up any recyclable materials placed at the
curb or other designated place for collection by a municipal waste collector
pursuant to the provisions of this article. Any and each such unauthorized
collection in violation hereof from one or more residences shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided in this
chapter.
§ 149-23. Rules and regulations.
The collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials by municipal
waste collectors and the preparation and collection of municipal waste and
recyclable materials by property owners and residents of the Township shall
be made in compliance with the regulations to be adopted by the Board of
Supervisors of Limerick Township to carry out the intent and purpose of this
article. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors and, when so approved, shall have the same force and
effect as the provisions of this article. Said rules and regulations may be
amended, modified or repealed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 149-24. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
scheduled collection. "Front yard" shall mean the area between the
street line and the first building on the lot.
A. Unlawful activities; public nuisance. It shall be unlawful and a public
nuisance for any person to violate, cause or assist in a violation of any
provision of this article or violate, cause or assist in the violation of any
rule, regulation or resolution promulgated by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to this article.
B. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this article or of the
regulations adopted hereunder or any person who engages in unlawful
conduct as defined in this article shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and not less than $50. Each
continuing day of any violation of this article or unlawful conduct as
§ 149-20 LIMERICK CODE § 149-24
122:248
§ 149-25. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed, so as
to best achieve and effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article
shall be construed in pari materia with the Solid Waste Management Act,
Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, as amended, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.,
the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act of
July 28, 1988, P.L. 556, No. 101, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., and the rules
and regulations adopted thereunder.
defined in this article shall constitute a separate offense punishable by
a like fine or penalty.
C. Injunction. In addition to any other remedy provided in this article,
Limerick Township may institute a suit in equity where unlawful
conduct or a public nuisance exists as defined in this article for an
injunction to restrain a violation of this article or any rules, regulations
or resolution promulgated or issued by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to this article.
D. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
article shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the Township from exercising any other
remedy provided by this article or otherwise provided at law or equity.
§ 149-24 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 149-25
122:249

ARTICLE III
Municipal Waste Collectors
[Adopted 9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 135]
§ 149-26. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Limerick Township
Municipal Waste Collectors Ordinance."
§ 149-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
BULK WASTE — Larger household items incapable of being placed in
appropriate containers for disposal, including but not limited to appliances,
furniture, mattresses, tires and other such items associated with residential
uses.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residue, shrubbery and tree trimmings and
similar materials but not including grass clippings.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from the operations of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
as defined in the Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L.
380, No. 97, as amended, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater
treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include
source-separated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL WASTE COLLECTOR — Any person collecting or transporting
municipal waste or recyclable materials for owners or occupants of property
in Limerick Township and any business or institution within Limerick
Township which generates municipal waste or recyclable materials and uses
its own employees and equipment for the collection or transportation of
municipal waste or recyclable materials. All municipal waste collectors shall
be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
institution, cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal
government or agency, commonwealth institution or agency or any other
legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as a subject of rights and
duties. In any provision of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include
the officers and directors of any corporation or any other legal entity having
officers and directors.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by Limerick
Township for collection in accordance with this article and recycling
regulations which may be promulgated from time to time. Such material
§ 149-26 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 149-27
122:251
may include, but shall not be limited to, aluminum cans, clear and colored
glass containers, tin, steel and bimetallic cans, clear and colored PET rigid
plastic bottles, natural and pigmented HDPE plastic bottles and newsprint
material. The list of "recyclable materials" may be changed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township.
RESIDENT — Any person which owns, leases or occupies a property located
in Limerick Township used as a residence.
§ 149-28. License required. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288]
It shall be unlawful for any municipal waste collector to collect and
transport municipal waste or recyclable material within Limerick Township
without a license from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 149-29. License application; nontransferability. [Amended
12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288]
A. All municipal waste collectors shall obtain a license by application to
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Registration. The municipal waste collector shall provide the following
information on a registration form prepared by the Township:
(1) The name of the municipal waste collector and the business
address and telephone number of the business office to receive
calls from persons in the Township who receive collection service.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person having the
largest ownership interest in the municipal waste collector.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the officers of the
corporation or general partners of the partnership, if applicable.
(4) The make, year, model and registration number of each truck or
vehicle which is used in Limerick Township to haul, carry, transport
or collect municipal waste or recyclable materials.
(5) A certificate of the applicant's workmen's compensation insurance
as required by law.
(6) A certificate of insurance coverage covering complete third-party
public liability for both bodily injury and property damage and
owner's and collector's protective insurance and automobile
insurance with respect to personal injuries and property damage.
Such insurance shall be in amounts that shall be from time to time
set forth by the Board of Supervisors by regulations adopted
hereunder. Each and every policy of insurance herein mentioned
which is required pursuant to the terms of this article shall carry
with it an endorsement to the effect that the insurance carrier will
convey to Limerick Township, by certified mail, written notice of
any modifications, alterations or cancellation of any such policy or
§ 149-27 LIMERICK CODE § 149-29
122:252
§ 149-30. Collection of recyclable materials, bulk waste and leaf
waste. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288]
policies or the terms thereof. The above-mentioned written notice
shall be mailed to Limerick Township at least 10 days prior to the
effective date of any such modification, alteration or cancellation.
(7) The approved disposal site where municipal waste will be taken.
(8) The processing and/or marketing facility where the recyclable
materials will be taken.
(9) Such other information as the Township shall deem appropriate
and necessary.
(10) The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection permit
number.
A. Provide for the collection of source-separated recyclable materials from
each resident, commercial, institutional and municipal establishment
and community activity served at a minimum of once per week in
accordance with regulations adopted hereunder and the Limerick
Township Recycling Ordinance93 and regulations adopted thereunder
and provide to such customers reusable containers for the storage and
collection of recyclable materials.
B. Provide for the collection of leaf waste at a minimum of once in the
spring and once per month in the fall, in accordance with regulations
adopted hereunder and Article II, Recycling, of this chapter and
regulations adopted thereunder and provide customers with paper
biodegradable bags for the storage and collection of leaf waste.
C. Establish procedures for the separation, storage and collection of
recyclable materials and leaf waste and provide residents adequate
notification of the procedures.
D. Issue warning notices of violations on forms provided by the Township
to residents failing to comply with procedures for the separation,
storage and collection of recyclable materials and leaf waste and
provide a copy of any such warning to the Township.
E. The municipal waste collectors shall be responsible for obtaining all
weight and volume quantity data. Said data shall be supplied to the
Township on a quarterly basis, and fourth-quarter data shall be supplied
to the Township by January 15 for the preceding year so that the
Township may submit reports in accordance with Act 10194 and other
applicable laws and submit applications for recycling performance
grants. The municipal waste collectors shall be responsible for
obtaining all weight and volume quantity data for leaf and yard waste
93.Editor's Note: See Art. II, Recycling, in this chapter.
94.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 149-29 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 149-30
122:253
§ 149-31. Prohibited acts. [Amended 12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article and grounds for
recommending to the Department of Environmental Protection for the
suspension or revocation of a license or the denial of a renewal license for
any municipal waste collector to:
and shall supply the data to the Township in accordance with the
guidelines in this section.
F. Offer to provide for the collection of bulk waste twice per year, once in
the spring and once in the fall, in accordance with regulations adopted
hereunder.
G. Municipal waste collectors shall dispose of any leaf waste at a
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection approved
facility.
H. Municipal waste collectors shall reject leaf and yard waste in plastic
bags or bags that are contaminated by nonleaf trash and full bags of
grass clippings.
I. (Reserved)95
J. Schedules and areas of operation. The licensee shall advise the
Township of its current rate schedule, its intended areas of operation in
the Township by streets, the terms of service and the scheduled days of
collection in different areas of the Township and of any changes to the
collection program.
K. Compliance. The licensee shall at all times comply with the provisions
of this article and the regulations adopted hereunder and with Article
II, Recycling, of this chapter and regulations adopted thereunder and
the provisions of the Code of Limerick Township.
A. Collect or transport any municipal waste, recyclable materials or leaf
waste from any resident failing to source-separate said materials in
violation of Article II, Recycling, of this chapter and regulations adopted
thereunder.
B. Commingle any source-separated recyclable materials or leaf waste
collected within the Township with any municipal waste.
C. Fail to provide for the proper disposition of any municipal waste,
recyclable materials or leaf waste collected or transported within the
Township.
D. Load or operate any vehicle within the Township or transport municipal
waste, recyclable materials or leaf waste within the Township in such a
manner as to allow municipal waste, recyclable materials or leaf waste
95.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection I, regarding the hours of operation for the collection of
recyclable materials, was repealed 4-18-2017 by Ord. No. 377.
§ 149-30 LIMERICK CODE § 149-31
122:254
§ 149-32. (Reserved)96
§ 149-33. Granting, suspension or revocation of license. [Amended
12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 288]
The Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township shall have the right to
recommend to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
to refuse to issue a license to any municipal waste collector or to revoke
or suspend a license previously issued or refuse to renew the same if said
municipal waste collector or his or its agents, servants or employees fail
to comply with any provision of § 149-28, 149-29, 149-30, or 149-31 of this
article or of any regulation adopted hereunder.
§ 149-34. Compliance required.
The collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials by municipal
waste collectors shall be made in compliance with the regulations to be
adopted by the Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township to carry out
the intent and purpose of this article. Such rules and regulations shall be
approved by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and, when so approved,
shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this article. Said
rules and regulations may be amended, modified and repealed by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 149-35. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
to fall upon the public roads or upon land abutting the public roads in
the Township.
E. Fail to replace the containers with their lids or covers in place at the
location of collection in an orderly manner.
F. Otherwise create a public nuisance.
A. Unlawful activities; public nuisance. It shall be unlawful and a public
nuisance for any person to violate, cause or assist in a violation of any
provision of this article or violate, cause or assist in the violation of any
rule, regulation or resolution promulgated by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to this article.
B. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this article or of the
regulations adopted hereunder or any person who engages in unlawful
conduct as defined in this article shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and not less than $50. Each
continuing day of any violation of this article or unlawful conduct as
defined in this article shall constitute a separate offense punishable by
a like fine or penalty.
96.Editor's Note: Former § 149-32, Conditions of license issuance, was repealed 12-13-2007
by Ord. No. 288.
§ 149-31 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 149-35
122:255
§ 149-36. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed, so as
to best achieve and effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article
shall be construed in pari materia with the Solid Waste Management Act,
Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, as amended, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.,
the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, Act of
July 28, 1988, P.L. 556, No. 101, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., and the rules
and regulations adopted thereunder.
C. Injunction. In addition to any other remedy provided in this article,
Limerick Township may institute a suit in equity where unlawful
conduct or a public nuisance exists as defined in this article for an
injunction to restrain a violation of this article or any rules, regulations
or resolution promulgated or issued by the Board of Supervisors
pursuant to this article.
D. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
article shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the Township from exercising any other
remedy provided by this article or otherwise provided at law or equity.
§ 149-35 LIMERICK CODE § 149-36
122:256
Chapter 151
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 60.
Construction activities — See Ch. 72.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 73.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 89.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 140.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
155.
Well and well drilling — See Ch. 181.
§ 149-36 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 149-36
122:257

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 151-1. Short title.
Short title. This chapter shall be known as the "Limerick Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 151-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines the identified floodplain areas management and flood
reduction efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
[Amended 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 366]
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development throughout a watershed can also harm surface
water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns,
accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of
streambeds and streambanks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted
through loss of recharge.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
minimization of impacts of development, redevelopment, and activities
causing accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is
fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare and the protection of
the people of the municipality and all of the people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by using project
designs that maintain the natural hydrologic regime and sustain high
water quality, groundwater recharge, stream base flow, and aquatic
ecosystems. The most cost-effective and environmentally advantageous
way to manage stormwater runoff is through nonstructural project
design that minimizes impervious surfaces and sprawl, avoids sensitive
areas (i.e., stream buffers, identified floodplain areas steep slopes), and
§ 151-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-2
122:259
§ 151-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare within the municipality by maintaining the natural hydrologic
regime and minimizing the impacts through provisions designed to:
considers topography and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic
regime. [Amended 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 366]
F. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
G. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
H. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
municipality.
A. Promote alternative project designs and layouts that minimize the
impacts on surface water and groundwater.
B. Promote nonstructural best management practices (BMPs).
C. Minimize increases in runoff stormwater volume.
D. Minimize impervious surfaces.
E. Manage accelerated stormwater runoff and erosion and sedimentation
problems and stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause these problems.
F. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
G. Utilize and preserve existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, requiring a
minimum of structures and relying on natural processes.
I. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain groundwater recharge,
to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality, and to
otherwise protect water resources.
J. Maintain existing base flows and quality of streams and watercourses,
where possible.
K. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at Chapter 93.4a of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code
requiring protection and maintenance of "existing uses" and
§ 151-2 LIMERICK CODE § 151-3
122:260
§ 151-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff and surface and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority
of:
§ 151-5. Applicability; regulated activities for project sites within
the Swamp Creek Watershed.
maintenance of the level of water quality to support those uses in
all streams, and the protection and maintenance of water quality in
"special protection" streams.
L. Address the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from the
development site.
M. Provide a mechanism to identify stormwater controls necessary to meet
NPDES permit requirements.
N. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program that
addresses nonstormwater discharges into the municipality's separate
storm sewer system.
O. Preserve the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
P. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
Q. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide
stormwater management and planning.
R. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities and BMPs that are implemented in
the municipality.
A. Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as
amended, the "Storm Water Management Act" (hereinafter referred to
as "the Act").
B. Water Resources Management Act of 2002, as amended.
C. First Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 55101 et seq.; Second Class
Township Code, 53 P.S. § 66501 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 66601 et seq.; and
the Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46201 et seq.
D. Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.97
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas within the Swamp Creek
watershed.
B. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter unless exempted by § 151-7:
97.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 151-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-5
122:261
§ 151-6. Applicability; regulated activities for project sites outside
the Swamp Creek Watershed.
(1) Land development.
(2) Subdivisions.
(3) Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime.
(4) Construction or reconstruction of or addition of new impervious or
semipervious surfaces (i.e., driveways, parking lots, roads, etc.).
(5) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(6) Redevelopment.
(7) Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made
channel. Constructing, erecting or installing any drainage dam,
ditch, culvert, drainpipe or bridge or any other structure or
obstruction affecting the drainage of any project site.
(8) Nonstructural and structural stormwater management BMPs or
appurtenances thereto.
(9) Earth disturbance activities of greater than 5,000 square feet.
(NOTE: This chapter applies to any earth disturbance activity
greater than or equal to 5,000 square feet that is associated with a
development or redevelopment project. Earth disturbance
activities of less than one acre that are associated with
redevelopment projects are exempt from the § 151-23 streambank
erosion requirements. Earth disturbance activities and associated
stormwater management controls are also regulated under existing
state law and implementing regulations. This chapter shall operate
in coordination with those parallel requirements; the requirements
of this chapter shall be no less restrictive in meeting the purposes
of this chapter than state law.)
(10) Any of the above regulated activities that were approved more than
five years prior to the effective date of this chapter and resubmitted
for municipal approval.
(11) Prohibited or polluted discharges.
(12) Any other activities that may affect stormwater runoff. Modifying,
disturbing, blocking, diverting or otherwise adversely affecting the
natural overland or subsurface flow of stormwater.
C. Table 151-5 summarizes the applicability requirements of the chapter
for project sites located within the Swamp Creek watershed. See table
at the end of this chapter, Appendix H.98
98.Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 151-5 LIMERICK CODE § 151-6
122:262
A. This chapter shall apply to all areas outside the Swamp Creek
watershed.
B. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter unless exempted by § 151-7:
(1) Land development.
(2) Subdivisions.
(3) Alteration of the natural hydrologic regime.
(4) Construction of or addition of new impervious or semipervious
surfaces (i.e., driveways, parking lots, roads, etc.).
(5) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(6) Diversion piping or encroachments in any natural or man-made
channel. Constructing, erecting or installing any drainage dam,
ditch, culvert, drainpipe or bridge or any other structure or
obstruction affecting the drainage of any project site.
(7) Nonstructural and structural stormwater management BMPs or
appurtenances thereto.
(8) Earth disturbance activities of greater than 5,000 square feet.
(NOTE: This chapter applies to any earth disturbance activity
greater than or equal to 5,000 square feet that is associated with a
development or redevelopment project. Earth disturbance
activities of less than one acre that are associated with
redevelopment projects are exempt from the § 151-23 streambank
erosion requirements. Earth disturbance activities and associated
stormwater management controls are also regulated under existing
state law and implementing regulations. This chapter shall operate
in coordination with those parallel requirements; the requirements
of this chapter shall be no less restrictive in meeting the purposes
of this chapter than state law.)
(9) Any of the above regulated activities that were approved more than
five years prior to the effective date of this chapter and resubmitted
for municipal approval.
(10) Prohibited or polluted discharges.
(11) Any other activities that may affect stormwater runoff. Modifying,
disturbing, blocking, diverting or otherwise adversely affecting the
natural overland or subsurface flow of stormwater.
C. Table 151-6 summarizes the applicability requirements of the chapter
for project sites located outside the Swamp Creek watershed. See Table
at the end of this chapter, Appendix I.99
99.Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 151-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-7
122:263
§ 151-7. Exemptions.
A. Exemptions for land use activities. The following land use activities are
exempt from the drainage plan submission requirements of this
chapter:
(1) Use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(2) Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan,
nutrient management plan, or erosion and sedimentation control
plan approved by the County Conservation District, including
activities such as growing crops, rotating crops, the tilling of soil,
and grazing animals. Installation of new or expansion of existing
farmsteads, animal housing, waste storage, and production areas
having impervious surfaces that result in a net increase in earth
disturbance of greater than 5,000 square feet shall be subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Forest management operations that are following the Department
of Environmental Protection's (DEP's) management practices
contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Guidelines for Forestry" and are operating under an
approved erosion and sedimentation plan and must comply with the
stream buffer requirements in § 151-22G.
(4) Road replacement, development, or redevelopment that has less
than 1,000 square feet of new, additional, or replaced impervious
surface/cover or, in the case of earth disturbance only, less than
5,000 square feet of disturbance, is exempt from this chapter for
project sites within the Swamp Creek Watershed but will be
required to adhere to the requirements within § 151-51.
(5) Road development that has less than 2,000 square feet of new or
additional impervious surface/cover or, in the case of earth
disturbance only, less than 5,000 square feet of disturbance, is
exempt from this chapter for project sites outside the Swamp Creek
Watershed but will be required to adhere to the requirements
within § 151-51.
B. Exemptions for land development activities. [Amended 3-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 366]
(1) The following land development and earthmoving activities are
exempt from the drainage plan submission requirements of this
chapter for project sites within the Swamp Creek Watershed:
(a) A maximum of 1,000 square feet of new, additional, or
replacement proposed impervious surface or, in the case of
earth disturbance, resulting in less than 5,000 square feet of
earth disturbance (as noted above).
§ 151-7 LIMERICK CODE § 151-7
122:264
(b) Up to a maximum of 5,000 square feet of disturbed earth.
These criteria shall apply to the total development even if the
development is to take place in phases. The date of the
municipal ordinance adoption shall be the starting point from
which to consider tracts as “parent tracts” upon which future
subdivisions and respective earth disturbance computations
shall be cumulatively considered.
(2) The following land development and earthmoving are exempt from
the drainage plan submission requirements of this chapter for
projects outside the Swamp Creek Watershed:
(a) A maximum of 2,000 square feet of new, additional or
replacement proposed impervious surface or, in the case of
earth disturbance, resulting in less than 5,000 square feet of
earth disturbance;
(b) Up to a maximum of 5,000 square feet if disturbed earth. These
criteria shall apply to the total development even if the
development is to take place in phases. The date of the
municipal ordinance adoption shall be the starting point from
which to consider tracts as “parent tracts” upon which future
subdivisions and respective earth disturbance computations
shall be cumulatively considered.
(3) The activities exempted above are still encouraged to implement
the voluntary stormwater management practices as indicated in
Appendix B.100
C. Additional exemption criteria.
(1) Exemption responsibilities. An exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to
protect public health, safety, and property.
(2) HQ and EV streams. An exemption shall not relieve the applicant
from meeting the special requirements for watersheds draining to
identified high-quality (HQ) or exceptional-value (EV) waters and
source water protection areas (SWPA) and requirements for
nonstructural project design sequencing (§ 151-20).
(3) Drainage problems. If a drainage problem is documented or known
to exist downstream of or is expected from the proposed activity,
then the municipality may require the applicant to comply with this
chapter.
(4) Emergency exemption: emergency maintenance work performed
for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare. A written
description of the scope and extent of any emergency work
performed shall be submitted to the Limerick Township within two
100. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 151-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-7
122:265
§ 151-8. Compatibility with other ordinances or legal requirements.
calendar days of the commencement of the activity. If the Limerick
Township finds that the work is not an emergency, then the work
shall cease immediately, and the requirements of this chapter shall
be addressed as applicable.
(5) Maintenance exemption: any maintenance to an existing
stormwater management system made in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the Municipal Engineer or Limerick
Township.
(6) Even though the developer is exempt, he is not relieved from
complying with other regulations.
(7) Refer to § 151-51 for activities not requiring a grading review.
A. Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
B. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent
requirements for stormwater management, the specific requirements
contained in this chapter shall be followed.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters that do not
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting
provisions in other municipal ordinances or regulations shall be
construed to retain the requirements of this chapter addressing state
water quality requirements.
§ 151-7 LIMERICK CODE § 151-8
122:266
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 151-9. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 151-10. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising
livestock, including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing,
mushroom growing, nursery, and sod operations and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is
not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also,
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for approval to engage
in any regulated activity defined in §§ 151-5 and 151-6 of this chapter.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Engineering or site drawings maintained by the
contractor as he constructs the project and upon which he documents the
actual locations of the building components and changes to the original
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of
government, or any other similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied, or maintained."
§ 151-9 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-10
122:267
contract documents. These documents, or a copy of same, are turned over
to the Municipal Engineer at the completion of the project.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water
begins to overflow onto an identified floodplain area.[Amended 3-15-2016
by Ord. No. 366]
BASE FLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water
diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area that utilizes woody and
herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Methods, measures, or
practices used to prevent or reduce surface runoff and/or water pollution,
including, but not limited to, structural and nonstructural stormwater
management practices and operation and maintenance procedures. See
also "nonstructural best management practice (BMP)."
BUFFER — The area of land immediately adjacent to any stream, measured
perpendicular to and horizontally from the top-of-bank on both sides of a
stream (see "top-of-bank").
CHANNEL — An open drainage feature through which stormwater flows.
Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly
full.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, or headward cutting of
channels and waterways caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Montgomery County Conservation
District.
CONVEYANCE — A facility or structure used for the transportation or
transmission of something from one place to another.
CULVERT — A structure with its appurtenant works that carries water
under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — A man-made barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid. A dam may include a refuse bank, fill, or structure for
highway, railroad, or other purposes which impounds or may impound water
or another fluid or semifluid.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Montgomery County Planning Commission,
Montgomery County Conservation District, and/or agent of the governing
body involved with the administration, review, or enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter by contract or memorandum of understanding.
§ 151-10 LIMERICK CODE § 151-10
122:268
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL, QUALIFIED — A Pennsylvania registered
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, or registered
professional land surveyor trained to develop stormwater management
plans.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely soon
after a rainfall event and become dry until the next rainfall event.
DEVELOPER — A person who seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the municipality.
DEVELOPMENT — Any human-induced change to improved or unimproved
real estate, whether public or private, including, but not limited to, land
development, construction, installation, or expansion of a building or other
structure, land division, street construction, drilling, and site alteration
such as embankments, dredging, grubbing, grading, paving, parking or
storage facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling, or clearing. As used in
this chapter, "development" encompasses both new development and
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract or parcel of land where any
regulated activity set forth in §§ 151-5 and 151-6 is planned, conducted, or
maintained.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The outside bark diameter at
breast height which is defined as 4.5 feet (1.37 meters) above the forest
floor on the uphill side of the tree.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge that is not
confined to a single point location or channel, including sheet flow or
shallow concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE —
DISCHARGE POINT — The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
DISTURBED AREA — Unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — A man-made waterway constructed for irrigation or stormwater
conveyance purposes.
(Verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin, or
other point of interest;
A.
(Noun) The rate and volume of flow of water such as in a stream,
generally expressed in cubic feet per second (see "peak discharge").
B.
§ 151-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-10
122:269
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed, located such that overland or
pipe flow from the project site would be directed towards it by gravity.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transport stormwater runoff that includes channels, swales,
pipes, conduits, culverts, and storm sewers.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the municipality after the
drainage plan has been approved.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater management
system, if any, to be used for a given development site, the contents of
which are established in § 151-12. The drainage plan shall also include
requirements necessary to satisfy the grading requirements as established
in § 151-51.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land development,
agricultural plowing or tilling, timber-harvesting activities, road
maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands, or
diminishes the course, current, or cross section of a watercourse, floodway,
or body of water.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including water/
stream channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN (ESPC PLAN) —
A plan that is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
Said plan must be submitted to and approved by the Montgomery County
Conservation District before construction can begin.
EXCEPTIONAL-VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality that
satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93,
Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed alteration. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land,
the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover
is proven to generate a lower curve number or Rational "C" value, such as
forested lands.
FEMA and FIA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency and the
Federal Insurance Administration who have jurisdiction over the National
§ 151-10 LIMERICK CODE § 151-10
122:270
Flood Insurance Program and its related studies and regulations. FEMA is
the parent agency of the FIA.[Added 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 366]
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this
commonwealth.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.[Added 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 366]
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.[Added 3-15-2016 by Ord. No.
366]
FLOODPLAIN — The identified floodplain area as determined by the
Floodplain Administrator.[Amended 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 366]
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR — The appointed Limerick Township
Official designated to administrate and enforce the Limerick Township’s
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.[Added 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 366]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining identified floodplain area that is reasonably required to carry
and discharge the one-hundred-year-frequency flood. Unless otherwise
specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood
insurance studies provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA). In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year-frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent
evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50
feet from the top-of-bank.[Amended 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 366]
FLUVIAL GEOMORPHOLOGY — The study of landforms associated with
river channels and the processes that form them.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
associated activities necessary for the management of forest lands. These
include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high
water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion berm. The
space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE —
(noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel, or natural ground, specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or
the bottom of an excavation.
B.
§ 151-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-10
122:271
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or man-made waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses used to convey surface
water.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells
and springs and is often between saturated soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from rain or overland flow.
HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having quality which exceeds
levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and
recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code Title 25,
Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
HOTSPOTS — Areas where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph representing the discharge of water versus time
for a selected point in the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains
quality and quantity of stormwater, base flow, storage, and groundwater
supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), formerly the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS), into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A
soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which
are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — Any areas of the Township, classified
as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS),
and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 2,
2016, and issued by the FEMA, or the most recent official version thereof,
adopted by FEMA, including all digital data developed as part of the FIS
and the above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments, are hereby adopted by the Township and declared to be a part
of this chapter.[Added 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 366]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, pavements, driveway areas, or roofs. Any surface areas designed
to be gravel or crushed stone shall be regarded as impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILL — Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remain
undeveloped but are within or in very close proximity to urban or densely
developed areas. Infill development usually relies on existing infrastructure
and does not require an extension of water, sewer, or other public utilities.
§ 151-10 LIMERICK CODE § 151-10
122:272
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the underground water (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, or seepage
trenches).
INFLOW — The flow entering the stormwater management facility and/or
BMP.
INLET — The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream that flows only part of the time.
Flow generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal
precipitation or groundwater discharge.
INVERT — The lowest surface, the floor or bottom of a culvert, drain, sewer,
channel, basin, BMP, or orifice.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata that includes one of the following:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.101
C.
A seasonal high-water table, whether perched or regional, determined
by direct observation of the water table or indicated by soil mottling.
A.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill
the voids between the fragments.
B.
A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition that is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
C.
101. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1)
§ 151-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-10
122:273
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance used as a reach in watershed-specific hydrologic models.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow, and slope. Open channels may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MAXIMUM DESIGN STORM — The maximum (largest) design storm that is
controlled by the stormwater facility.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency, or joint planning commission. Also referred
to as "Township Engineer."
MUNICIPALITY — Limerick Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL CONDITION — Predevelopment condition.
NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME — See "hydrologic regime."
NATURAL RECHARGE AREA — Undisturbed surface area or depression
where stormwater collects and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes
the underground and groundwater.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Methods
of controlling stormwater runoff quantity and quality, such as innovative
site planning, impervious area and grading reduction, protection of natural
depression areas, temporary ponding on site, and other techniques.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,
which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A conveyance channel that is not enclosed.
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where
the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the
commonwealth.
OUTFLOW — The flow exiting the stormwater management facility and/or
BMP.
§ 151-10 LIMERICK CODE § 151-10
122:274
OUTLET — Point of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater, or
artificial drain.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption of
this chapter.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of parking areas as temporary
impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL — The computer-based hydrologic model
developed at Pennsylvania State University.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Limerick
Township.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
POST-CONSTRUCTION — Period after construction during which disturbed
areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning, and
all proposed improvements in the approved land development plan are
completed.
PRECONSTRUCTION — Prior to commencing construction activities.
PREDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — Undeveloped/natural condition.
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide
storage or filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before they
enter the system, but not necessarily designed to meet the water quality
volume requirements of § 151-22.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow.
REACH — Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance used in the
watershed-specific hydrologic models.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
RECONSTRUCTION — Demolition and subsequent rebuilding of impervious
surface.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Original documents revised to suit the as-built
conditions and subsequently provided by the engineer to the client. The
§ 151-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-10
122:275
engineer reviews the contractor's as-builts against his/her own records
for completeness, then either turns these over to the client or transfers
the information to a set of reproducibles, in both cases for the client's
permanent records.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any development that requires demolition or removal
of existing structures or impervious surfaces at a site and replacement
with new impervious surfaces. Maintenance activities such as top-layer
grinding and repaving are not considered to be redevelopment. Interior
remodeling projects and tenant improvements are also not considered to be
redevelopment.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that have an
impact on stormwater runoff quality or quantity and that are specified in
§§ 151-5 and 151-6 of this chapter.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Defined under NPDES
Phase II regulations as earth disturbance activity of one acre or more with a
point source discharge to surface waters or the municipality's storm sewer
system or five acres or more regardless of the planned runoff. This includes
earth disturbance on any portion of, part of, or during any stage of a larger
common plan of development.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
REPAVING — Replacement of the impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
REPLACEMENT PAVING — Reconstruction of and full replacement of an
existing paved (impervious) surface.
RETENTION BASIN — A structure in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Retention basins are designed for
infiltration purposes and do not have an outlet. The retention basin must
infiltrate stored water in one day to three days.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average of once every 25 years or, stated in another way, the probability of a
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent
chance).
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches, and
other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from
a roof and leads it away from the structure.
§ 151-10 LIMERICK CODE § 151-10
122:276
ROOFTOP DETENTION — The temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces using controlled-flow roof
drains in building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO — Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.102
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water or air.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, or retention or detention basin located
and designed in such a way as to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other
material transported by water during construction.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the underground water.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in
shallow, defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to
a runoff parameter called "curve number" (CN).
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREA (SWPA) — The zone through which
contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking-water
well or surface water intake.
SPECIAL PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds that have been
designated by DEP as EV or HQ waters.
SPILLWAY — A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the
maximum design storm that is controlled by the stormwater facility.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.103
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Subdivision and Land Development
103. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 151-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-10
122:277
change in storage) with "outflow" defined as a function of storage volume
and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm "event"
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years (see "return
period").
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching
the ground surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Those subareas of a
watershed in which some type of detention is required to meet the plan
requirements and the goals of Act 167.104
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate, or quantity. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention
and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The watershed plan, known as
the "Swamp Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan," for
managing those land use activities that will influence stormwater runoff
quality and quantity and that would impact the Swamp Creek watershed
adopted by Berks County and Montgomery County as required by the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167).105
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
applicant or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the particular site of interest according to this chapter.
STREAM — A natural watercourse.
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream
essential to maintaining water quality (see "buffer").
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated
water of the commonwealth.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
104. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., the Storm Water Management Act.
105. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., the Storm Water Management Act.
§ 151-10 LIMERICK CODE § 151-10
122:278
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface waters, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time required for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point
of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP-OF-BANK — Highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross
section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel
and over the floodplain.
UNDEVELOPED CONDITION — Natural condition (see also
"predevelopment condition").
VERNAL POND — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by
shallow water for variable periods from winter to spring but may be
completely dry for most of the summer and fall.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
WELLHEAD —
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The surface and subsurface area
surrounding a water supply well, well field, or spring supplying a public
water system through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move
toward and reach the water source.
A. A structure built over a well.
B. The source of water for a well.
§ 151-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-10
122:279
WET BASIN — Pond for urban runoff management that is designed to detain
urban runoff and always contains water.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
WOODS — A natural ground cover with more than one viable tree of a DBH
of six inches or greater per 1,500 square feet which existed within three
years of application; a cover condition for which SCS curve numbers have
been assigned or to which equivalent Rational Method runoff coefficients
have been assigned.
§ 151-10 LIMERICK CODE § 151-10
122:280
ARTICLE III
Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 151-11. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of
any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any earth
disturbance activity may not proceed until the property owner or applicant
or his/her agent has received written approval of a drainage plan from
the municipality, obtained an NPDES permit for stormwater discharges
associated with construction activities, if greater than one acre of land
disturbance, from the local Conservation District and/or DEP, and an
adequate erosion and sediment control plan review by the Conservation
District. The Township shall be provided with a copy of all outside agency
permit applications and final approval or permit.
§ 151-12. Drainage plan contents.
The drainage plan shall consist of a general description of the project,
including sequencing items described in § 151-20, calculations, maps, and
plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and
erosion and sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of
the computations, erosion and sediment control plan, and post-construction
stormwater management (PCSWM) plan shall refer to the associated maps
by title and date. All drainage plan materials shall be submitted to the
municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat, and well
organized; otherwise, the drainage plan shall not be accepted for review
and shall be returned to the applicant. The following items shall be included
in the drainage plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of the project, including those areas described
in § 151-20B.
(2) General description of proposed permanent stormwater
management techniques, including construction specifications of
the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
(4) An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and
letters of adequacy from the Conservation District, as applicable.
(5) A general description of proposed nonpoint source pollution
controls.
§ 151-11 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-12
122:281
(6) The drainage plan application (Appendix C-1).106 The Township
reserves the right to revise the application from time to time to
comply with the terms and conditions of this Chapter 151.
(7) The drainage plan checklist (Appendix C-2).107
(8) The development or construction schedule.
B. Maps. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch
by thirty-six-inch sheets and/or shall be prepared in a form that meets
the requirements for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds
of Montgomery County. If the SALDO has more stringent criteria than
this chapter, then the more stringent criteria shall apply. The contents
of the map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipal
boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of slopes greater
than 25%, five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other waters of the
commonwealth within the project area.
(4) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries, stream
buffers, existing drainage courses, areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved, and the total extent of the upstream area draining
through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and water lines within 50 feet of property lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil names, boundaries and limitations (in
tabular format).
(7) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that would be added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(9) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 25%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(10) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(11) The date of submission.
106. Editor's Note: Appendix C-1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
107. Editor's Note: Appendix C-2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 151-12 LIMERICK CODE § 151-12
122:282
(12) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size, with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(17) Location of all open channels, as well as indicating where they are
draining after they leave the site (storm sewer, defined drainage
swale, stream channel, waters of the commonwealth, etc.).
(18) Overland drainage patterns and swales.
(19) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement to all stormwater management
facilities that would provide ingress to and egress from a public
right-of-way.
(20) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities, both
temporary and permanent, and all post-construction stormwater
management facilities, BMPs, systems, etc.
(21) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(22) A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved plan must be approved by the municipality
and the Conservation District and/or DEP (if greater than one acre
of land disturbance) and that a revised erosion and sediment
control plan must be submitted to the Conservation District for a
determination of adequacy, as applicable.
(23) The following signature block for the design engineer: "I, (Design
Engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby certify that the
drainage plan meets all design standards and criteria of the
Limerick Township Stormwater Management Ordinance."
C. Supplemental information to be submitted to the municipality.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted by the applicant and shall include:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project
designed in accordance with § 151-20.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
§ 151-12 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-12
122:283
§ 151-13. Plan submission.
The municipality shall require receipt of a complete drainage plan, as
specified in this chapter.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(e) Development stages or project phases, if so proposed.
(f) An operations and maintenance plan in accordance with
§ 151-31 of this chapter.
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan.
(3) A description of the effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes
and peak flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing
municipal stormwater collection system that may receive runoff
from the project site.
(4) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) district
office when utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is
proposed.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All PCSWM BMP facilities must be located on a plan and described
in detail. The PCSWM plan package should include, at a minimum,
pre- and post-drainage area plans, an overall PCSWM plan,
PCSWM details sheets, landscaping or conservation plans, etc.
(2) When infiltration measures such as seepage pits, beds, or trenches
are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic tanks,
infiltration areas and wells must be shown. Minimum setback
distances should be identified from water supply wells, septic
areas, and any adjacent or downgradient buildings and/or
structures with below-grade floors or inhabitable space.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
A. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or
approvals for the programs listed below shall be part of the plan:
(1) NPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activities.
(2) DEP joint permit application.
(3) PennDOT highway occupancy permit and/or Limerick Township
road opening permit, as applicable.
§ 151-12 LIMERICK CODE § 151-13
122:284
§ 151-14. Drainage plan review.
(4) Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management).
(5) Chapter 106 (Identified Floodplain Area Management). [Amended
3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 366]
(6) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
B. The plan shall be coordinated with the state and federal permit process
and the municipal SALDO review process.
C. For projects that require SALDO approval, the drainage plan shall be
submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary plan submission
where applicable for the regulated activity.
D. For regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval, see
§ 151-11, General requirements.
E. Six copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted and distributed as
follows:
(1) Two copies to the municipality accompanied by the requisite
municipal review fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) Two copies to the County Conservation District.
(3) One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
(4) One copy to the County Planning Commission/Department.
F. Any submissions to the agencies listed above that are found to be
incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the
applicant with a notification in writing of the specific manner in which
the submission is incomplete.
A. The Municipal Engineer shall review the drainage plan for consistency
with this chapter, the Limerick Township Stormwater Management
Ordinance, and the respective Act 167 stormwater management plan.
Any found incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be
returned to the applicant.
B. The Municipal Engineer shall review the drainage plan for any
subdivision or land development against the municipal SALDO
provisions not otherwise superseded by this chapter.
C. The Conservation District, in accordance with established criteria and
procedures, shall review the drainage plan for consistency with
stormwater management and erosion and sediment pollution control
requirements and provide comments to the municipality. Such
comments shall be considered by the municipality prior to final
approval of the drainage plan.
§ 151-13 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-14
122:285
D. For activities regulated by this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall
notify the applicant and the municipality in writing, within 30 calendar
days, whether the drainage plan is consistent with the Limerick
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance and Act 167 stormwater
management plan for the Swamp Creek watershed.
(1) If the Municipal Engineer determines that the drainage plan is
consistent with the Stormwater Management Ordinance, the
Municipal Engineer shall forward a letter of consistency to the
Municipal Secretary, who will then forward a copy to the applicant.
(2) If the Municipal Engineer determines that the drainage plan is
inconsistent or noncompliant with the Stormwater Management
Ordinance, the Municipal Engineer shall forward a letter to the
Municipal Secretary with a copy to the applicant citing the
reason(s) and specific ordinance sections for the inconsistency or
noncompliance. Inconsistency or noncompliance may be due to
inadequate information to make a reasonable judgment as to
compliance with the Stormwater Management Ordinance. Any
drainage plans that are inconsistent or noncompliant may be
revised by the applicant and resubmitted when consistent with this
chapter. The Municipal Secretary shall then notify the applicant of
the Municipal Engineer's findings. Any inconsistent or
noncompliant drainage plans may be revised by the applicant and
resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
E. For regulated activities specified in §§ 151-5 and 151-6 of this chapter
that require a building permit, the Municipal Engineer shall notify the
Municipal Building Code Official in writing, within a time frame
consistent with the municipal Building Code108 and/or municipal
SALDO, whether the drainage plan is consistent with the Stormwater
Management Ordinance. The Municipal Building Code Official shall
forward a copy of the consistency/inconsistency letter to the applicant.
Any drainage plan deemed inconsistent may be revised by the applicant
and resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
F. For regulated activities under this chapter that require an NPDES
permit application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the Municipal
Engineer's letter stating that the drainage plan is consistent with the
Stormwater Management Ordinance to the Conservation District and/
or DEP. In addition, a short summary of the proposed post-construction
stormwater management design and proposed BMPs should also be
forwarded to the Conservation District and/or DEP. DEP and the
Conservation District may consider the Municipal Engineer's review
comments in determining whether to issue a permit.
G. The municipality shall not grant preliminary or final approval to any
subdivision or land development for regulated activities specified in
§§ 151-5 and 151-6 of this chapter if the drainage plan has been found
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Building Construction.
§ 151-14 LIMERICK CODE § 151-14
122:286
§ 151-15. Modification of plans.
by the Municipal Engineer to be inconsistent with the Stormwater
Management Ordinance. All required permits from DEP must be
obtained prior to approval of any subdivision or land development.
H. No building permits for any regulated activity specified in §§ 151-5 and
151-6 of this chapter shall be approved by the municipality if the
drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with the Stormwater
Management Ordinance, as determined by the Municipal Engineer and
Conservation District, or without considering the comments of the
Municipal Engineer and Conservation District. All required permits
from DEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a building permit.
I. The applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of all
stormwater management facilities included in the approved drainage
plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with
the design plans shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer for final
approval. In no case shall the municipality approve the record drawings
until the municipality receives a copy of an approved declaration of
adequacy and/or highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT District
Office, NPDES permit, and any other applicable permits or approvals
from DEP or the Conservation District. The above permits and
approvals must be based on the record drawings.
J. The municipality's approval of a drainage plan shall be valid for a period
not to exceed five years commencing on the date that the municipality
signs the approved drainage plan. If stormwater management facilities
included in the approved drainage plan have not been constructed or, if
constructed, record drawings of these facilities have not been approved
within this five-year time period, then the municipality may consider the
drainage plan inconsistent or noncompliant and may revoke any and all
permits. Drainage plans that are determined to be inconsistent or
noncompliant by the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance
with § 151-16 of this chapter.
A. A modification to a submitted drainage plan under review by the
municipality for a development site that involves the following shall
require a resubmission to the municipality of a modified drainage plan
consistent with § 151-13 of this chapter and be subject to review as
specified in § 151-14 of this chapter:
(1) Change in stormwater management facilities or techniques;
(2) Relocation or redesign of stormwater management facilities; or
(3) Is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on
the drainage plan as determined by the Municipal Engineer.
B. A modification to an already approved or inconsistent or noncompliant
drainage plan shall be submitted to the municipality, accompanied by
the applicable municipal review and inspection fee. A modification to a
§ 151-14 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-15
122:287
§ 151-16. Resubmission of inconsistent or noncompliant drainage
plans.
An inconsistent or noncompliant drainage plan may be resubmitted with
the revisions addressing the Municipal Engineer's concerns documented in
writing. It must be addressed to the Municipal Secretary in accordance with
§ 151-13 of this chapter, distributed accordingly, and be subject to review
as specified in § 151-14 of this chapter. The applicable municipal review
and inspection fee must accompany a resubmission of an inconsistent or
noncompliant drainage plan.
drainage plan for which a formal action has not been taken by the
municipality shall be submitted to the municipality accompanied by the
applicable municipal review and inspection fee.
§ 151-15 LIMERICK CODE § 151-16
122:288
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management
§ 151-17. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in the municipality that do not
fall under the exemption criteria shown in § 151-7 shall submit a
drainage plan consistent with this chapter and the respective Act 167
stormwater management plan to the municipality for review. The
stormwater management criteria of this chapter shall apply to the total
proposed development even if development is to take place in stages.
B. The applicant is required to find practicable alternatives to the surface
discharge of stormwater, the creation of impervious surfaces, and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth and must maintain, as
much as possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
C. The drainage plan must be designed consistent with the sequencing
provisions of § 151-20 to ensure maintenance of the natural hydrologic
regime, to promote groundwater recharge, and to protect groundwater
and surface water quality and quantity. The drainage plan designer
must proceed sequentially in accordance with Article IV of this chapter.
D. Stormwater drainage systems shall be designed in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
E. Existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered in any manner which could cause property
damage without permission of the affected property owner(s) and shall
be subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this chapter.
F. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge, whether proposed to be
concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas, shall be subject
to any applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If diffused
drainage discharge is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other impacts will result from the
concentrated discharge.
G. Where a development site is traversed by existing streams, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such streams.
The terms of the easement shall conform to the stream buffer
requirements contained in § 151-22G, of this chapter.
H. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or
delineated wetlands shall be subject to approval by DEP through the
§ 151-17 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-17
122:289
joint permit application or the environmental assessment approval
process or, where deemed appropriate, by the DEP general permit
process. When there is a question as to whether wetlands may be
involved, it is the responsibility of the applicant or his agent to show
that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands; otherwise,
approval to work in the area must be obtained from DEP.
I. Any proposed stormwater management facilities regulated by this
chapter that would be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by PennDOT.
J. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., is encouraged where soil
conditions permit in order to reduce the size or eliminate the need for
detention facilities or other structural BMPs.
K. All stormwater runoff shall be pretreated for water quality prior to
discharge to surface or groundwater.
L. All regulated activities within the municipality shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes of this
chapter, through these two elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control during earth disturbance activities
(e.g., during construction); and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (i.e., after construction), including
operations and maintenance.
M. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the requirements of this chapter are met.
N. Post-construction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by § 151-22.
O. Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be
addressed as required by Article VII.
P. All BMPs used to meet the requirements of this chapter shall conform to
the state water quality requirements and any more-stringent
requirements as set forth by the municipality.
Q. Techniques described in Appendix D, Low-Impact Development
Practices, of this chapter109 shall be considered because they reduce
the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter and the
state water quality requirements.
R. In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the
applicant shall consider the following:
109. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 151-17 LIMERICK CODE § 151-17
122:290
§ 151-18. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
(1) Total contributing area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site's soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high-water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(9) Streambank erosion.
(10) Effectiveness of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(11) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(12) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(13) Maintenance requirements.
(14) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(15) Recreational value.
S. The applicant may meet the stormwater management criteria through
off-site stormwater management measures as long as the proposed
measures are in the same subwatershed as shown in Appendix A.110
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
110. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 151-17 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-18
122:291
§ 151-19. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
§ 151-20. Nonstructural project design (sequencing to minimize
stormwater impacts).
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way or require access from a state highway shall be
subject to approval by PennDOT.
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers, or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the municipality receives an approval from the
Conservation District of an erosion and sediment control plan for
construction activities.
B. DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more, under
25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP permit for
stormwater discharges associated with construction activities is
required for land disturbances greater than one acre.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available on the project
site at all times.
F. Additional erosion and sediment control design standards and criteria
are recommended to be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed.
They shall include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain maximum infiltration capacity. Additional measures, such
as placement of orange construction fencing around proposed
infiltration BMPs during construction to minimize or eliminate
traffic overtop of these areas, and the temporary sealing off of
pipes and inlet connections to infiltration BMPs to prevent
sediment clogging should be given consideration.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire drainage area contributory to the infiltration BMP has
achieved final stabilization.
§ 151-18 LIMERICK CODE § 151-20
122:292
A. The design of all regulated activities shall include the following to
minimize stormwater impacts.
(1) The applicant shall find practicable alternatives to the surface
discharge of stormwater, such as those listed in Appendix E, Table
E-4,111 the creation of impervious surfaces, and the degradation of
waters of the commonwealth and must maintain, as much as
possible, the natural hydrologic regime of the site.
(2) An alternative is practicable if it is available and capable of
implementation after taking into consideration existing technology
and logistics in light of overall project purposes and other
municipal requirements.
(3) All practicable alternatives to the discharge of stormwater are
presumed to have less adverse impact on quantity and quality of
waters of the commonwealth unless otherwise demonstrated.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the regulated activities were
designed in the following sequence. The goal of the sequence is to
minimize the increases in stormwater runoff and impacts to water
quality resulting from the proposed regulated activity.
(1) Prepare an existing resource and site analysis map (ERSAM)
showing environmentally sensitive areas, including, but not limited
to, steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils,
vernal pools, stream buffers, hydrologic soil groups, wooded areas,
and potential infiltration areas. Land development, any existing
recharge areas, and other requirements outlined in the municipal
SALDO shall also be included.
(2) Establish a stream buffer according to § 151-22G.
(3) Prepare a draft project layout avoiding sensitive areas identified in
§ 151-20B(1).
(4) Identify site-specific existing conditions drainage areas, discharge
points, recharge areas, and hydrologic soil groups A and B (areas
conducive to infiltration). Infiltration should still be considered in
well-draining soils listed as hydrologic soil group C, but additional
soils testing should be performed to verify on-site conditions and
placement of these BMPs.
(5) Evaluate nonstructural stormwater management alternatives:
(a) Minimize earth disturbance.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces.
(c) Break up large impervious surfaces.
111. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 151-20 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-20
122:293
§ 151-21. Groundwater recharge.
Maximizing the groundwater recharge capacity of the area being developed
is required. Design of the infiltration facilities shall consider groundwater
recharge to compensate for the reduction in the recharge that occurs when
the ground surface is disturbed or impervious surface is created. It is
recommended that roof runoff be directed to infiltration BMPs that may be
designed to compensate for the runoff from parking areas. These measures
are required to be consistent with § 151-3 and to take advantage of utilizing
any existing recharge areas. Infiltration may not be feasible on every site
due to site-specific limitations such as soil type. If it cannot be physically
accomplished, then the design professional shall be responsible to show
that this cannot be physically accomplished. Appropriate soils testing and/
or geotechnical evaluation should be included as part of any documentation
for infiltration BMPs. If it can be physically accomplished, then the volume
of runoff to be infiltrated shall be determined from § 151-21A(2).
(6) Satisfy the groundwater recharge (infiltration) objective § 151-21,
and provide for stormwater pretreatment prior to infiltration.
(7) Provide for water quality protection in accordance with § 151-22
water quality requirements.
(8) Provide streambank erosion protection in accordance with § 151-23
streambank erosion requirements.
(9) Determine into what management district the site falls (Appendix
A),112 and conduct an existing conditions runoff analysis.
(10) Prepare final project design to maintain existing conditions
drainage areas and discharge points, to minimize earth disturbance
and impervious surfaces, and, to the maximum extent possible, to
ensure that the remaining site development has no surface or point
discharge.
(11) Conduct a proposed conditions runoff analysis based on the final
design that meets the management district requirements
(§ 151-24).
(12) Manage any remaining runoff prior to discharge through detention,
bioretention, direct discharge, or other structural control.
A. Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas
shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions
and shall be constructed on soils that have the following
characteristics:
112. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 151-20 LIMERICK CODE § 151-21
122:294
(a) A minimum depth of 24 inches, preferably 36 inches, between
the bottom of the BMP and the top of the limiting zone (e.g.,
SHWT, groundwater, bedrock, etc.).
(b) An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional
stormwater load and dewater completely as determined by
field tests conducted by the applicant's design professional.
(c) The infiltration facility shall be capable of completely
infiltrating the recharge (infiltration) volume (Rev between 24
hours to 72 hours.
(d) Pretreatment shall be provided prior to infiltration.
(2) The size of the infiltration facility shall be based upon the net twoyear
volume approach, where the recharge (infiltration) volume
(Rev to be captured and infiltrated shall be the volume difference
between the predevelopment two-year, twenty-four-hour storm
event and postdevelopment two-year, twenty-four-hour storm
event.
(3) The recharge volume calculated using this section is the minimum
volume the applicant must control through an infiltration BMP
facility. However, if a site has areas of soils where additional
volume of recharge can be achieved, the applicant is encouraged to
infiltrate as much of the stormwater runoff from the site as
possible.
B. Soils. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be required to
determine the suitability of infiltration facilities. The evaluation shall be
performed by a qualified design professional and at a minimum address
soil permeability, depth to bedrock, and subgrade stability. The general
process for designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is
under consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of
subgrade stability; infiltration may not be ruled out without
conducting these tests.
(2) Provide field tests such as double ring infiltrometer or hydraulic
conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed infiltration surface)
to determine the appropriate hydraulic conductivity rate.
Percolation tests are not recommended for design purposes.
(3) Design the infiltration structure for the required recharge volume
(Rev) based on field-determined capacity at the level of the
proposed infiltration surface.
§ 151-21 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-21
122:295
(4) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by the applicant's
design professional, it must be demonstrated to the municipality
that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
C. Stormwater hotspots. Below is a list of examples of designated
hotspots. If a site is designated as a hotspot, it has important
implications for how stormwater is managed. First and foremost,
untreated stormwater runoff from hotspots shall not be allowed to
recharge into groundwater where it may contaminate water supplies.
Therefore, the Rev requirement shall NOT be applied to development
sites that fit into the hotspot category (the entire WQv must still be
treated). Second, a greater level of stormwater treatment shall be
considered at hotspot sites to prevent pollutant washoff after
construction. The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) NPDES
stormwater program requires some industrial sites to prepare and
implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan.
(1) Examples of hotspots:
(a) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities.
(b) Vehicle fueling stations.
(c) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities.
(d) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities.
(e) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.).
(f) Industrial sites based on Standard Industrial Codes.
(g) Marinas (service and maintenance).
(h) Outdoor liquid container storage.
(i) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities.
(j) Public works storage areas.
(k) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
(l) Commercial container nursery.
(m) Other land uses and activities as designated by an appropriate
review authority.
(2) The following land uses and activities are not normally considered
hotspots:
(a) Residential streets and rural highways.
(b) Residential development.
(c) Institutional development.
(d) Office developments.
§ 151-21 LIMERICK CODE § 151-21
122:296
§ 151-22. Water quality requirements.
The applicant shall comply with the following water quality requirements of
this article:
(e) Nonindustrial rooftops.
(f) Pervious areas, except golf courses and nurseries [which may
need an integrated pest management (IPM) plan].
(3) While large highways [average daily traffic volume (ADT) greater
than 30,000] are not designated as stormwater hotspots, it is
important to ensure that highway stormwater management plans
adequately protect groundwater.
D. Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in
SWPAs as defined by the local municipality or water authority.
E. Infiltration facilities shall be used in conjunction with other innovative
or traditional BMPs, stormwater control facilities, and nonstructural
stormwater management alternatives.
F. Extreme caution shall be exercised where salt or chloride (municipal
salt storage) would be a pollutant since soils do little to filter this
pollutant and it may contaminate the groundwater. The qualified design
professional shall evaluate the possibility of groundwater
contamination from the proposed infiltration facility and perform a
hydrogeologic justification study if necessary. Specific consideration
should be given to the particular type of salt or deicing material to be
used within this watershed in regards to its potential long-term effects
on the soils, especially in areas that contain clay soil.
G. The infiltration requirement in HQ or EV waters shall be subject to the
Department's Chapter 93 antidegradation regulations.
H. An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins where the
possibility of groundwater contamination exists. A detailed
hydrogeologic investigation may be required by the municipality.
I. The municipality shall require the applicant to provide safeguards
against groundwater contamination for land uses that may cause
groundwater contamination should there be a mishap or spill.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a plan that
demonstrates compliance with post-construction state water quality
requirements.
B. The BMPs shall be designed, implemented, and maintained to meet
state water quality requirements and any other more-stringent
requirements as determined by the municipality.
§ 151-21 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-22
122:297
C. To control post-construction stormwater impacts from regulated earth
disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can be met by
BMPs, including site design, which provide for replication of
preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions so that
post-construction stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical,
chemical, or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. As
described in the DEP Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy
(#392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the
following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions;
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to ensure the
filtering out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the
stormwater runoff; and
(3) Streambank and streambed protection: management of volume and
rate of post-construction stormwater discharges to prevent
physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
D. Storage and treatment facilities.
(1) Developed areas shall provide adequate storage and treatment
facilities necessary to capture and treat stormwater runoff. If site
conditions allow for infiltration, the water quality volume and the
recharge volume are the same volume and may be managed in a
single facility. If infiltration cannot be physically accomplished, the
water quality volume should be calculated using the net two-year
volume approach described in § 151-21A(2). In this case, the water
quality volume may be captured and treated by methods other than
infiltration BMPs.
(2) This volume requirement can be accomplished by the permanent
volume of a wet basin or the detained volume from other BMPs.
Where appropriate, wet basins shall be utilized for water quality
control and shall follow the guidelines of the BMP manuals
referenced in Appendix F.
(3) The water quality volume shall take a minimum of 24 hours to be
discharged from a BMP facility. Release of the water quality volume
can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water
quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The design of the
facility shall provide for protection from clogging and unwanted
sedimentation.
E. For areas within defined special protection subwatersheds that include
EV and HQ waters, the temperature and quality of water and streams
shall be maintained through the use of temperature-sensitive BMPs and
stormwater conveyance systems.
§ 151-22 LIMERICK CODE § 151-22
122:298
§ 151-23. Streambank erosion requirements.
F. To accomplish the above, the applicant shall submit original and
innovative designs to the Municipal Engineer for review and approval.
Such designs may achieve the water quality objectives through a
combination of different BMPs.
G. If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through the site, the
applicant shall create a stream buffer extending a minimum of 50 feet
to either side of the top-of-bank of the channel. The buffer area shall be
maintained with and encouraged to use appropriate native vegetation.
(Refer to Appendix B of the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, latest version, for plant lists.) if the applicable rear or
side yard setback is less than 50 feet or a stream traverses the site, the
buffer width may be reduced to 25% of the setback and/or to a minimum
of 10 feet. If an existing buffer is legally prescribed (i.e., deed,
covenant, easement, etc.) and it exceeds the requirements of this
chapter, the existing buffer shall be maintained. [NOTE: Limerick
Township may select a smaller buffer width (above) if desired, but the
selected buffer may not be less than 10 feet]. This does not include
lakes or wetlands.
H. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office must be provided to
the municipality. The issuance of an NPDES construction permit [or
permit coverage under the statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies
the requirements of § 151-22A.
A. In addition to the control of water quality volume (in order to minimize
the impact of stormwater runoff on downstream streambank erosion),
the primary requirement is to design a BMP to detain the proposed
conditions two-year, twenty-four-hour design storm to the existing
conditions one-year flow using the SCS Type II distribution.
Additionally, provisions shall be made (such as adding a small orifice at
the bottom of the outlet structure) so that the proposed conditions oneyear
storm takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from the facility from a
point where the maximum volume of water from the one-year storm is
captured (i.e., the maximum water surface elevation is achieved in the
facility). Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the
invert of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility).
B. The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be
three inches in diameter where possible, and a trash rack shall be
installed to prevent clogging. On sites with small drainage areas
contributing to this BMP that do not provide enough runoff volume to
allow a twenty-four-hour attenuation with the three-inch orifice, the
calculations shall be submitted showing this condition. Orifice sizes less
than three inches can be utilized, provided that the design will prevent
clogging of the intake.
§ 151-22 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-24
122:299
§ 151-24. Stormwater peak rate control.
§ 151-25. Calculation methodology.
A. Peak rate control.
(1) Within the Swamp Creek watershed, the criteria for peak runoff
rate control are designed to reduce the post-development peak flow
to 50% of the predevelopment peak flow. Development sites must
control proposed conditions runoff rates to 50% of the existing
conditions runoff rates for the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-,
and one-hundred-year storm events.
(2) For all other areas of the Township, the design storm criteria for
peak runoff rate control are designed to reduce the postdevelopment
peak flow to the predevelopment peak flow.
Development sites must control proposed conditions runoff rates to
the existing conditions runoff rates for the two-, five-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year storm events.
B. The calculated peak discharges within the Swamp Creek Watershed
shall apply regardless of whether the grading plan changes the
drainage area by subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if
discharges from multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the site.
In this case, peak discharge in any direction may be a 100% release
rate, provided that the overall site discharge meets the weighted
average release rate.
C. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed
to safely convey off-site flows through the development site.
D. Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only
the proposed impact area utilizing stormwater management measures
shall be subject to the peak rate control standards noted above. In other
words, unimpacted areas bypassing the stormwater management
facilities would not be subject to the peak rate control standards.
E. Alternate criteria for redevelopment sites. For redevelopment sites, one
of the following minimum design parameters shall be accomplished,
whichever is most appropriate for the given site conditions as
determined by Limerick Township:
(1) Meet the full requirements specified by Subsections A through D;
or
(2) Reduce the total impervious surface on the site by at least 20%,
based upon a comparison of existing impervious surface to
proposed impervious surface.
§ 151-24 LIMERICK CODE § 151-25
122:300
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites with a drainage area of
greater than 200 acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRCS Soil Cover Complex
Method. Table 151-25 summarizes acceptable computation methods,
and the method selected by the design professional shall be based on
the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site. Note that successors to the methods listed in Table 151-25 are also
acceptable, such as WinTR55 for TR-55 and WinTR20 for TR-20. The
municipality may allow the use of the Rational Method to estimate peak
discharges from drainage areas that contain less than 200 acres. The
Soil Cover Complex Method shall be used for drainage areas greater
than 200 acres.
Table 151-25 Acceptable Computation Methodologies for
Stormwater Management Plans
Method Developed by Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans where
limitations described in TR-55
HEC-1/HEC-HMS U.S. Army
Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of a full
hydrologic computer is
desirable or necessary
PSRM Penn State
University
Applicable where use of a
hydrologic model is desirable
or necessary; simpler than
TR-20 or HEC-1
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites less than 200 acres
or as approved by the
municipality and/or Municipal
Engineer
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by
the municipality and/or
Municipal Engineer
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms according to the region in which they are
located as presented in Table E-1 in Appendix E of this chapter.113 If a
hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1/HEC-HMS is used
for stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall be
24 hours.
113. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 151-25 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-25
122:301
C. The following criteria shall be used for runoff calculations:
(1) For development sites not considered redevelopment, the ground
cover used in determining the existing conditions flow rates shall
be as follows:
(a) Wooded sites shall use a ground cover of "woods in good
condition." A site shall be considered to be a wooded site
where a biological community dominated by trees and other
woody plants exists that covers an area of 10,000 square feet
or more and contains at least 100 trees with at least 50% of
those trees having a dbh of two inches or greater. (Duerksen,
Christopher J., with Suzanne Richman, Tree Conservation
Ordinances, Planning Advisory Service Report Number 446,
American Planning Association, Chicago, Illinois, and Scenic
America, Washington, D.C., August, 1993.)
(b) The undeveloped portion of the site including agriculture, bare
earth, and fallow ground shall be considered as "meadow in
good condition," unless the natural ground cover generates a
lower curve number (CN) or Rational "C" value (i.e., woods) as
listed in Table E-2 or E-3 in Appendix E of this chapter.114
(c) Off-site land use conditions used to determine storm flows for
designing storm facilities shall be based on existing land uses
assuming winter or poor land cover conditions.
(2) For development considered redevelopment sites, the ground cover
used in determining the existing conditions flow rates for the
developed portion of the site shall be based upon actual land cover
conditions.
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times-of-concentration for overland flow
and return periods presented in the appropriate curves from the
PennDOT Storm-Duration-Frequency Chart. (Region 4 is included in
Figure E-3. The user should refer to the Atlas 14, Volume 2, Storm-
Duration-Frequency Chart.) Times-of-concentration for overland flow
shall be calculated using the methodology presented in Chapter 3 of
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or
replaced from time to time by NRCS). Times-of-concentration for
channel and pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's Equation.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from
Table E-2 in Appendix E of this chapter.115
114. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
115. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 151-25 LIMERICK CODE § 151-25
122:302
§ 151-26. Design requirements for stormwater management
facilities and conveyance systems.
F. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table E-3 in Appendix E
of this chapter.116
G. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning Equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with accepted published values.
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
I. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the Storage-
Indication Method. The design storm hydrograph shall be computed
using a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. The
municipality may approve the use of any generally accepted full
hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff
volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces
a full hydrograph.
A. Stormwater facilities.
(1) All wet basin designs shall incorporate biologic controls consistent
with the West Nile guidance found in Appendix G.117
(2) Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin)
required or regulated by this chapter designed to store runoff and
requiring a berm or earthen embankment shall be designed to
provide an emergency spillway to handle flow up to and including
the one-hundred-year proposed conditions. The height of
embankment must provide a minimum one foot of freeboard above
the maximum pool elevation computed when the facility functions
for the one-hundred-year proposed conditions inflow. Should any
stormwater management facility require a dam safety permit under
DEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning
dam safety. Chapter 105 may be required to pass storms larger
than the one-hundred-year event.
(3) Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts,
bridges, outfalls, or stream enclosures) and any work involving
wetlands governed by DEP Chapter 105 regulations (as amended
116. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
117. Editor's Note: The West Nile guidelines are on file in the Township offices.
§ 151-25 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-26
122:303
or replaced from time to time by DEP) shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and will require a permit from DEP.
(4) Any other drainage conveyance facility that does not fall under
Chapter 105 regulations must be able to convey, without damage to
the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year
design storm with a minimum one foot of freeboard measured
below the lowest point along the top of the roadway. Any facility
that constitutes a dam as defined in DEP Chapter 105 regulations
may require a permit under dam safety regulations. Any facility
located within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT
minimum design standards and permit submission requirements.
(5) Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel not governed by
Chapter 105 regulations must be able to convey, without damage to
the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year
design storm. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater
management facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be designed to
convey the design flow to or from that structure. Roadway
crossings located within designated identified floodplain areas
must be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design
storm. Any facility located within a PennDOT right-of-way must
meet PennDOT minimum design standards and permit submission
requirements. [Amended 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 366]
(6) Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open
channels and at all points of discharge.
(7) The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The
municipality reserves the right to disapprove any design that would
result in construction in or continuation of a stormwater problem
area.
(8) Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin)
required or regulated by this chapter designed to store runoff and
requiring a berm or earthen embankment shall be designed to
provide the following (at a minimum):
(a) The maximum water depth shall not exceed six feet for a
detention basin. A facility designed to have a permanent pool
(i.e., retention basin) shall not exceed a maximum water depth
of two feet and shall be enclosed within a fence approved by
the Township Engineer.
(b) The minimum top width of all dams/embankments/berms shall
be 10 feet.
(c) The interior side slopes shall not be greater than five
horizontal to one vertical. The top or toe of nay slope shall be
located a minimum of five feet from a property line.
§ 151-26 LIMERICK CODE § 151-26
122:304
(d) All basins shall be structurally sound and shall be constructed
of sound and durable materials. The completed structure and
the foundation of all basins shall be stable under all probable
conditions of operation. An emergency spillway shall be
provided for the basin and shall be capable of discharging the
one-hundred-year peak rate of runoff that enters the basin
after development, in a manner that will not damage the
integrity of the facility and will not create a downstream
hazard. Where practical, the emergency spillway shall be
constructed in undisturbed ground. Emergency spillways shall
be constructed of concrete pavers, gabions, or other similar
materials approved by the Township Engineer. An easement for
inspection and repair shall be provided when the conveyance
structure crosses property boundaries.
(e) All basins not including groundwater recharge and/or water
quality storage shall include an outlet structure to permit
draining the basin to a completely dry position between 24
hours and 72 hours following the end of the design rainfall,
unless the Township Engineer finds that the downstream
conditions may warrant other design criteria for stormwater
release. All basins that do include groundwater recharge and/
or water quality storage shall include an outlet structure to
permit draining the basin to the level of the groundwater
recharge and/or water quality storage between 24 hours and
72 hours following the end of the design rainfall.
(f) A cutoff trench of relatively impervious material shall be
provided beneath all embankments requiring fill material. The
keyway shall be a minimum of eight feet wide, minimum of
three feet deep and have 1:1 side slopes.
(g) All structures passing through detention basin embankments
shall have properly spaced anti-seep collars installed around
the pipe barrel within the normal saturation zone of the
detention basin berms. The anti-seep collars and their
connections to the pipe barrels shall be watertight. The antiseep
collars shall extend a minimum of two feet beyond the
outside of the principal pipe barrel. The maximum spacing
between collars shall be 14 times the minimum projection of
the collar measured perpendicular to the pipe. A minimum of
two anti-seep collars shall be installed on each outlet pipe.
(h) All discharge control devices with appurtenances shall be
made of reinforced concrete and stainless or hot dip galvanized
steel. Bolts/fasteners are to be stainless or galvanized steel.
(i) Minimum slope within a basin that does not include
groundwater recharge and/or water quality storage shall be
2% positive grade to the low flow channel.
§ 151-26 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-26
122:305
(j) Design storms for the computation of retention basin (where
approved) volumes shall be based upon a twenty-four-hour
storm with one-hundred-year return period (a storm with a
one-percent chance of occurrence each year).
(k) The effect on downstream areas if the basin embankment fails
shall be considered in the design of all basins. Where possible,
the basin shall be designed to minimize the potential damage
caused by such failure of the embankment.
(l) All structures (detention basins, cisterns, etc.), other than
those used for groundwater recharge volume and water quality
volume, must completely drain between 24 hours and 72 hours
after the end of the design storm, unless the Township
Engineer finds that downstream conditions may warrant other
design criteria for stormwater release.
(m) Soils used for the construction of basins shall have low
erodibility factors ("K" factors).
(n) Unless permitted by the Floodplain Administrator, stormwater
management facilities shall not be located within floodplains or
within the identified floodplain areas or alluvial soils.
[Amended 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 366]
(o) Detention basin shall be designed to facilitate regular
maintenance, mowing and periodic silt removal and reseeding.
Shallow broad basins are preferred to steep-sided basins.
(p) All detention and retention basin embankments shall be placed
in eight-inch maximum lifts to a minimum 95% dry density.
Prior to proceeding to the next lift, compaction shall be
checked by the Township Engineer or an approved soils
engineer who shall provide the Township Engineer with a
written report. Compaction tests shall be performed using the
modified proctor method in accordance with ASTM D-1577.
Compaction tests shall be run on the leading and trailing edge
as well as the top of the berm.
(9) Minimum floor elevations for all structures that would be affected
by a basin, other temporary impoundments, or open conveyance
systems where ponding may occur shall be two feet above the onehundred-
year water surface. If basement or underground facilities
are proposed, detailed calculations addressing the effects of
stormwater ponding on the structure and waterproofing and/or
floodproofing design information shall be submitted for approval.
(10) A concentrated discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property
shall be within an existing natural drainageway or watercourse, or
otherwise an easement shall be required.
§ 151-26 LIMERICK CODE § 151-26
122:306
(11) All groundwater recharge facilities shall be designed to empty
between 24 hours and 72 hours. All water quality facilities shall be
designed so that water is released slowly for a minimum of 24
hours subsequent to any storm event. All infiltration, detention or
retention facilities the volume of which will be used for stormwater
management (predevelopment versus post-development) shall be
designed to empty between 24 hours and 72 hours subsequent to
any storm event. Volumes that will not be available within 24 hours
subsequent to any storm event shall not be used for stormwater
management (predevelopment versus post-development).
B. Stormwater conveyance systems.
(1) General.
(a) Storm sewers, culverts, bridges and related installations shall
be provided:
[1] To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses and in
such a manner as to protect the natural character of the
watercourses and to provide regulated discharge;
[2] To insure adequate drainage of all low points along the line
of streets; and
[3] To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area
drained and to prevent substantial flow of water across
intersections.
(b) All storm sewer system components shall conform to current
PennDOT standards.
(c) Drainage structures, which drain watershed areas in excess of
1/2 square mile (320 acres), or which have a span of eight feet
or more, shall be designed for a maximum expected runoff as
calculated using the Soil Conservation Service Technical
Release 55, "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds (less than
2,000 acres)."
(d) The design storm for the above structures shall be a onehundred-
year storm. A water obstruction permit shall be
obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection for the waterway opening before final design is
undertaken.
(e) The cartway over the culvert or bridge shall be as wide as the
ultimate width of the roadway approaches. Additional width
may be required to provide sidewalk on one or both sides of the
cartway.
(2) Storm sewer design and construction requirements.
§ 151-26 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-26
122:307
(a) All storm sewer pipes, culverts and bridges (excluding
detention and retention basin outfall structures), gutters and
swales conveying water originating only from within the
boundaries of the development site shall be designed for a
twenty-five-year storm event. All storm sewer pipes, culverts
and bridges (excluding detention and retention basin outfall
structures) conveying water originating from off site shall be
designed for a fifty-year storm event. Drainage easements shall
be provided to contain and convey the one-hundred-yearfrequency
flood throughout the development site. Easements
shall begin at the furthest upstream property line of the
proposed development site in a watershed.
(b) All storm sewer pipes and inlets intended to drain to detention
facilities shall be designed to accommodate the one-hundredyear
storm if the bypass or overflow runoff will not reach the
basin by overland flow. In cases where the bypass or overflow
runoff will flow over land, a stable swale shall be constructed to
accommodate the excess runoff.
(c) Storm sewer pipes, other than those used as roof drains,
detention basin underdrains, and street subbase underdrains,
shall have a minimum diameter of 18 inches and be made of
reinforced concrete pipe, smooth lined corrugated
polyethylene pipe, or approved equivalent. Where installation
conditions merit, structural calculations that address the
actual design requirements will be required.
(d) Storm sewer pipes and culverts shall be installed on sufficient
slopes to provide a minimum velocity of three feet per second
when flowing full.
(e) All storm sewer pipe and culverts shall be laid to a minimum
depth of two feet from finished subgrade to the crown of pipe
in paved areas and two feet from finished grade to the crown of
pipe in grassed areas.
(f) Curves in pipes or box culverts without an inlet or manhole are
prohibited. Tee joints, elbows and wyes are also prohibited.
(g) Manholes, inlets, headwalls and endwalls proposed for
dedication or located along streets or subject to vehicular
traffic, shall conform to the requirements of the PennDOT,
Bureau of Design, Standards for Roadway Construction in
effect at the time the design is submitted, or as otherwise
modified by the municipality.
(h) Headwalls and endwalls shall be used where stormwater runoff
enters or leaves the storm sewer horizontally from a natural or
man-made channel. PennDOT Type "DW" headwalls and
endwalls shall be utilized.
§ 151-26 LIMERICK CODE § 151-26
122:308
(i) Stormwater roof drains, sump pumps, and pipes shall not
directly discharge water into a street right-of-way or discharge
into a sanitary sewer or storm sewer.
(j) All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage
systems, wetlands and areas of surface water concentration
shall be maintained in their existing condition unless an
alteration is approved by the municipality and any other
necessary approving body.
(k) Flow velocities from any storm sewer may not result in erosion
of the receiving channel.
(l) Minimum pipe size is 18 inches.
(m) Minimum pipe slope shall be 0.005 foot/foot.
(n) Minimum drop across junctions shall be two inches. At changes
in pipe diameter, pipe crowns shall be matched at junctions
(manhole, inlet or junction box).
(o) Maximum distance between junctions shall be 300 feet.
(p) Runoff to proposed storm sewers and inlets shall be calculated
using the Rational Method.
(q) The time of concentration to inlets for grate capacity
calculations shall be assumed five minutes.
(r) All storm sewer systems shall be analyzed for both inlet and
outlet control (including tailwater effects) by using the
equations and nomographs as shown in the FHA's Hydraulic
Design Services No. 5. In lieu of this, computer programs that
calculate the actual hydraulic grade line for the storm sewer
system can be used, provided all losses (friction, bend,
junction, etc.) are taken into account. Documentation for the
program must be submitted for approval.
(s) Inlet capacities shall be calculated using PennDOT or
manufacturer's nomographs. Documentation for
manufacturer's nomograph must be provided to the Township
Engineer.
(t) Manning "n" values used for design of pipes and culverts shall
be in accordance with accepted published values.
(u) All storm sewer crossings of streets shall be perpendicular to
the street center line.
(v) Storm facilities not located within a public right-of-way shall be
contained in and centered within an easement. Easements
shall follow property boundaries where possible.
§ 151-26 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-26
122:309
(w) Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open
channels and at all points of discharge.
(3) Shoulders in cut areas (without swales).
(a) Water flowing in the shoulder shall not encroach more than 2/3
the shoulder width during a twenty-five-year-frequency storm
of five-minute duration.
(b) The maximum velocity as determined by Manning's Equation
shall not exceed the allowable velocities for the specific type of
shoulder material.
(c) Inlets shall be provided to control the shoulder encroachment
and water velocity.
(4) Swales adjacent to shoulders.
(a) Swales in cut areas shall be designed to prevent the passage of
water on the cartway during a twenty-five-year-frequency
storm of five-minute duration.
(b) The maximum velocity as determined by Manning's Equation
shall not exceed the allowable velocities for the specific type of
shoulder material.
(5) Curb sections.
(a) The maximum encroachment of water on the roadway
pavement shall not exceed three inches in depth at the curb
during a twenty-five-year-frequency storm of five-minute
duration.
(b) Inlets shall be provided to control the encroachment of water
on the pavement.
(6) Inlets: general.
(a) At street intersections, inlets shall be placed in the tangent
portion, rather than the curved portion, of the curbing.
(b) If the capacity of the shoulder, swale, curb section, or
depressed median section exceeds the assumed inlet
capacities, the inlet capacities shall govern the spacing of
inlets.
(c) If the capacity of the shoulder, swale, curb section, or
depressed median section is less than the inlet capacities, then
the shoulder, swale, curb section or depressed section capacity
shall govern the spacing of inlets.
(7) Energy dissipators. Energy dissipators shall be placed at the
outlets of all storm sewer pipes, culverts, and bridges where flow
§ 151-26 LIMERICK CODE § 151-26
122:310
velocities exceed maximum permitted channel velocities as
specified below:
(a) Three feet per second where only sparse vegetation can be
established and maintained because of shade or soil condition.
(b) Four feet per second where normal growing conditions exist
and vegetation is to be established by seeding.
(c) Five feet per second where a dense, vigorous sod can be
quickly established or where water can be temporarily
diverted during establishment of vegetation. Netting and
mulch or the equivalent methods for establishing vegetation
shall be used.
(d) Six feet per second where there exists a well-established sod of
good quality.
(8) Swales. The following conditions shall be met for all swales:
(a) Capacities and velocities shall be computed using the Manning
Equation. The design parameters shall be as follows:
[1] Vegetated swales shall meet the following two design
considerations:
[a] The first shall consider swale stability based upon a
low degree of retardance ("n" = 0.03).
[b] The second shall consider swale capacity based upon a
high degree of retardance ("n" = 0.05).
[2] All vegetated swales shall have a minimum slope of 1%
unless approved by the Municipal Engineer.
[3] The "n" factors to be used for paved or rip-rap swales or
gutters shall be based upon accepted engineering design
practices as approved by the municipality.
(b) All swales shall be designed to concentrate low flows to
minimize siltation and meandering.
§ 151-26 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-26
122:311

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 151-27. Inspections.
A. The Township Engineer or his designee shall have full and complete
authority to inspect all phases of the regulated activities undertaken at
the project site, as deemed appropriate by the Township Engineer,
including the full right of ingress and egress to the property.
B. Any and all approved plans, which are authenticated by a registered
professional engineer, shall be available on the project site at all times
and shall be subject to inspection and inquiry. Engineering design notes
shall accompany all plans which involve structural or mechanical
measures and shall serve as supporting evidence that structures meet
design standards and specifications specified herein.
C. During any stage of the work, if the Township Engineer or his designee
determines that the work is not in accordance with the approved plan,
the Township shall have the authority to terminate, stop or suspend
activities not in compliance with such approvals and/or permits as may
be issued until a revised plan is submitted and approved by the
Township, as specified in this chapter, and until the deficiencies are
corrected.
D. A final inspection of all work shall be conducted by the Township
Engineer or his municipal designee to confirm compliance with the
approved drainage plan prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit.
§ 151-27 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-27
122:313

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 151-28. Township drainage plan review and inspection fee.
§ 151-29. Expenses covered by fees.
The applicant will be required to pay any required fees by Limerick
Township.
A. The fee for a permit shall be fixed by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors from time to time.118
B. The applicant shall bear all costs of inspections required or permitted
hereunder and shall deposit with Limerick Township such sums as the
Board of Supervisors shall determine to guarantee payment of the costs
of such inspections. The costs of inspections shall be in accordance with
the established schedule of fees and collection procedures for matters
pertaining to this section.119
118. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
119. Editor's Note: The current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 151-28 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-29
122:315

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 151-30. Performance guarantee.
§ 151-31. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of
stormwater controls and BMPs.
A. For subdivisions and land developments, the applicant shall provide a
financial guarantee to the Township for the timely installation and
proper construction of all stormwater management controls as:
(1) Required by the approved drainage plan equal to or greater than
the full construction cost of the required controls; or
(2) The amount and method of payment provided for in the SALDO.
B. For other regulated activities, the Township may require a financial
guarantee from the applicant.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Township shall
commence until approval by the Township of a stormwater control and
BMP operations and maintenance plan that describes how the
permanent (e.g., post-construction) stormwater controls and BMPs will
be properly operated and maintained.
B. The following items shall be included in the stormwater control and
BMP operations and maintenance plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of
Montgomery County, shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by
thirty-six-inch sheets. The contents of the maps(s) shall include, but
not be limited to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater controls and BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks;
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
(e) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
§ 151-30 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-31
122:317
§ 151-32. Township review of stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and waterlines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added;
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings;
and
(i) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement to all stormwater controls
and BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress from a
public right-of-way.
(2) A description of how each permanent stormwater control and BMP
will be operated and maintained, and the identity and contact
information associated with the person(s) responsible for
operations and maintenance;
(3) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan; and
(4) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater controls and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or
removed only after approval by the municipality.
C. The stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan for
the project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots that are to be separately owned
and in which streets, sewers, and other public improvements are to
be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater controls and BMPs
may also be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality.
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs shall be the
responsibility of the owner or private management entity.
D. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 151-31 LIMERICK CODE § 151-32
122:318
§ 151-33. Adherence to approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater control
and BMP required by an approved stormwater control and BMP operations
and maintenance plan or to allow the property to remain in a condition
which does not conform to an approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
§ 151-34. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 151-35. Stormwater management easements.
§ 151-36. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
A. The municipality shall review the stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan for consistency with the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and any permits issued by DEP.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing whether or not the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan is
approved.
C. The municipality may require a "record drawing" of all stormwater
controls and BMPs and an explanation of any discrepancies with the
operations and maintenance plan.
A. The applicant shall sign an operations and maintenance agreement with
the municipality covering all stormwater controls and BMPs that are to
be privately owned. The maintenance agreement shall be transferred
with transfer of ownership. The agreement shall be substantially the
same as the agreement in Appendix H of this chapter.120
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of
all permanent stormwater controls and BMPs. The agreement shall be
subject to the review and approval of the municipality.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the applicant
or property owner if necessary for access for inspections and
maintenance or the preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance,
infiltration, and detention areas and other stormwater controls and
BMPs by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the
easement shall be specified in any agreement under § 151-34.
120. Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 151-32 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-36
122:319
§ 151-37. Recording of approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan and related agreements.
§ 151-38. Township Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and
Maintenance Fund.
A. Prior to final approval of the site's drainage plan, the applicant shall
sign and record the maintenance agreement contained in Appendix H,
which is attached and made part hereof,121 covering all stormwater
control facilities that are to be privately owned.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities.
The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Municipal Solicitor and governing body.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs will be placed, constructed, or implemented, as described in the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan, shall
record the following documents in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds
for Montgomery County, within 15 days of approval of the stormwater
control and BMP operations and maintenance plan by the Township:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 151-34; and
(3) Easements under § 151-35.
B. The Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of failure on the part of the owner to comply
with this section.
A. Persons installing stormwater controls or BMPs shall be required to pay
a specified amount to the Township Stormwater Control and BMP
Operation and Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of periodic
inspections and maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit shall
be determined as follows:
(1) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be privately owned and
maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections
performed by the municipality for a period of 10 years, as
estimated by the Township Engineer. After that period of time,
inspections will be performed at the expense of the Township.
(2) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and maintained by
the Township, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The Township Engineer
will establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by
the applicant.
121. Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 151-36 LIMERICK CODE § 151-38
122:320
(3) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The Township Engineer shall
determine the present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to
the approval of the governing body.
B. If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreational facility (e.g., ball field or lake), the Township may reduce or
waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the
value of the land for public recreational purpose.
C. If, at some future time, a stormwater control or BMP (whether publicly
or privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers
or other storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund
deposit will be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and
connecting to the storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of
the deposit remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be
returned to the depositor.
D. If stormwater controls or BMPs are accepted by the Township for
dedication, the Township may require persons installing stormwater
controls or BMPs to pay a specified amount to the Township
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to help
defray costs of operations and maintenance activities. The amount may
be determined as follows:
(1) The amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the municipality.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
E. If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreational facility (e.g., ball field or lake), the municipality may adjust
the amount due accordingly.
F. Limerick Township may require applicants to pay a fee to the Township
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to
cover long-term maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
G. Limerick Township may require applicants to pay a fee to the Township
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to
cover stormwater-related problems that may arise from the land
development and earth disturbance.
§ 151-38 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-38
122:321

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 151-39. Prohibited discharges.
Note: The following language taken from DEP's NPDES program and model
NPDES ordinance is required to be incorporated into this chapter.
A. No person in the municipality shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater
discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer system, which
are not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided in
Subsection B below and discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
B. Discharges that may be allowed based on a finding by the municipality
that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to pollution to
surface waters of the commonwealth are:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(5) Air-conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Spring water from crawl space pumps.
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
C. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters
of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the municipality will
notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the municipality under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
§ 151-39 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-39
122:323
§ 151-40. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 151-39B
above:
§ 151-41. Roof drains.
§ 151-42. Alteration of BMPs.
municipality, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and washwater to enter the separate storm sewer system
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks; and
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the separate storm sewer system that has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the
municipality.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where advantageous to do so.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted on a case-by-case basis as determined by the municipality.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater control or BMP unless it is part of an approved
maintenance program without the written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater control or BMP or within a drainage easement that would
limit or alter the functioning of the stormwater control or BMP without
the written approval of the municipality.
§ 151-39 LIMERICK CODE § 151-42
122:324
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 151-43. Right of entry.
§ 151-44. Public nuisance.
§ 151-45. Enforcement generally.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of the stormwater controls or
BMPs in regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater control and BMP owners and operators shall allow persons
working on behalf of the municipality ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater control or BMP in the
municipality such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/
or sampling of the discharges from such stormwater control or BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a
stormwater control or BMP is a violation of this article.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
Any movement of the landscape, vegetation or any ground cover
performed in violation of this chapter shall be restored to its
previous condition, including replacement of excavated earth,
removal of illegally placed fill and restoration of grades and
planting;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
§ 151-43 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-45
122:325
§ 151-46. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 151-47. Violations and penalties.
(6) Implementation of stormwater controls and BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the municipality or designee, and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance or pollution or which endangers the life, health, or
property of others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The Municipal Engineer or designee has inspected and approved
the corrections to the stormwater controls and BMPs or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law,
or rule and regulation has been corrected.
C. A permit or approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this chapter.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
thereof, to undergo imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this section continues shall constitute a
separate offense and the applicable fines are cumulative.
§ 151-45 LIMERICK CODE § 151-47
122:326
§ 151-48. Notification of violation.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the municipality shall provide written notification of the
violation. Such notification shall state the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply
within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions
of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not
prevent the municipality from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be
the responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred to comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 151-49. Enforcement.
The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the drainage plan shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer
or other qualified persons designated by the Township.
B. In addition, the municipality, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
A. A set of design plans approved by the Township shall be on file at the
site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the Township.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to undertake
any regulated activity under § 151-5 and 151-6 on any property except
as provided for in the approved drainage plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any
control structure required by the drainage plan pursuant to this chapter
or to allow the property to remain in a condition that does not conform
to the approved drainage plan.
C. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor, or other qualified person verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings.
§ 151-47 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-49
122:327
§ 151-50. Appeals.
D. After receipt of the certification by the Township, a final inspection shall
be conducted by the Township Engineer or designated representative to
certify compliance with this chapter.
E. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit and at the request of the
applicant, the governing body will schedule a hearing to discuss the
noncompliance if there is no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property. The expense of a hearing shall be the applicant's
responsibility.
F. Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the
certification of completion pursuant to § 151-49C(1) has been secured.
The occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner and/or
applicant for all subdivisions and land developments in the Township.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of Limerick Township or its
designee may appeal to Limerick Township within 30 days of that
action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of Limerick Township may appeal
to the County Court of Common Pleas in the County where the activity
has taken place within 30 days of the Township's decision.
§ 151-49 LIMERICK CODE § 151-50
122:328
ARTICLE X
Earth Disturbance Activities
§ 151-51. Grading requirements.
The following requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities associated within Tables 151-5 and 151-6122 and must
be met prior to commencement of regulated earth disturbance activities, as
applicable:
A. Definitions. Definitions listed in the section are in addition to the
definitions listed in § 151-10. As used in this section, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context:
ALLUVIAL SOILS — An azonal great group of soils, developed from
transported and relatively recently deposited material (alluvium),
characterized by a weak modification (or none) of the original material
by soil-forming processes.
CUT AND/OR FILL — The process of earth moving by excavating part of
an area and/or using excavated material from embankment or fill areas.
RUNOFF (HYDRAULICS) — That portion of the precipitation and a
drainage area or watershed that is discharged from the area in stream
channels; types include surface runoff, groundwater runoff or seepage.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of
origin by air, water, gravity or ice and has come to rest on the earth's
surface, either above or below sea level.
SLOPE — The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal,
usually expressed in percent or degrees.
SOIL DRAINAGE — A condition of the soil, referring to the frequency
and duration of periods when the soil is free of saturation.
SUBSOIL — Material immediately underlying topsoil, consisting of but
not limited to, either singly or in combination, clay, sand, gravel or
crushed rock but not including bedrock or other impervious surface,
as more fully defined and set forth in the most recently adopted and
approved Montgomery County Soil Survey exclusive of the A Horizon.
TOPSOIL — The topmost layer of ground cover containing humus in
some concentration capable of supporting plant growth, as more fully
defined and set forth in the most recently adopted and approved
Montgomery County Soil Survey under the designation of the A
Horizon, but not including subsoil as heretofore defined.
VEGETATION DISTURBANCE — Activities involving relandscaping,
disturbing the landscape or vegetation or any ground cover within a
project site.
122. Editor's Note: Tables 151-5 and 151-6 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 151-51 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-51
122:329
B. Activities which are exempt from the grading requirements of this
section (§ 151-51). The following activities require no grading review:
(1) Improvements, such as driveway paving, minor regrading or
activities on a property which do not adversely affect the natural
overland or subsurface flow of stormwater or the drainage of any
premises or adversely disturb the landscape.
(2) Farming, gardening, lawn installation or lawn restoration.
(3) Work within the ultimate right-of-way of a public street or alleyway
to be offered for dedication or previously ordained by the Township,
county or commonwealth, or any park, playground, recreation area
or open space dedicated to and accepted by the Township, county
or commonwealth.
C. Standards for grading activities. Except for those activities exempted
by § 151-51B, the following standards shall apply to all activities
permitted or allowed under §§ 151-5 and § 151-6 of this chapter:
(1) The permittee is responsible for the prevention of damage to other
property or personal injury, which may be affected by the activity
requiring an approval.
(2) No person, firm or corporation shall modify, fill, excavate, pave,
grade or regrade land in any manner so close to a property line as
to endanger or damage any adjoining street or alley or any other
public or private property without supporting and protecting such
property from settling, cracking, erosion, sediment, flooding or any
other physical damage or personal injury which might result.
(3) Notwithstanding any other term or provision of this section, no
person, firm or corporation shall cause or allow to be removed
greater than 50% of the existing topsoil from any site, and in no
event shall the topsoil existing on any site be reduced to less than a
depth of eight inches as measured from the underlying subsoil,
except as may be modified by the Township Engineer by issuance of
a conditional permit, which permit shall be issued to modify the
terms of this section only based upon sound engineering practices
and subject to appeal by any party in interest, including the
applicant, the Township or any other interested or affected party
filing an appeal to be heard by the Township Board of Supervisors
in the same manner as an application or petition to rezone. Further,
it is the intention of this section to achieve conservation of both
topsoil and subsoil in such a manner that disturbance of the subsoil
will achieve a balance on each and every disturbed site, resulting in
the removal of no subsoil; however, no more than 800 cubic yards
of subsoil per disturbed acre may be removed from any site to be
relocated on a site or area not part of the proposed development
and in single and common deed with the disturbed area, except as
this subsection may be modified by the Township Engineer by
issuance of a conditional permit, which permit shall be issued to
§ 151-51 LIMERICK CODE § 151-51
122:330
modify the terms of this section only based upon sound engineering
practices and subject to appeal by any party in interest, including
the applicant, the Township or any other interested or affected
party filing an appeal to be heard by the Township Board of
Supervisors in the same manner as an application or petition to
rezone.
(4) No person, firm or corporation shall deposit or place any debris or
any other material whatsoever or cause such to be thrown or
placed in any drainage ditch or drainage structure in such a
manner as to obstruct free flow.
(5) No person, firm or corporation shall fail to adequately maintain, in
good operating order, any drainage facility on his premises. All
drainage ditches, culverts, drainpipes and drainage structures
shall be kept open and free flowing at all times.
(6) The owner of any property on which any work has been done
pursuant to an approval granted under this section shall
continuously maintain and repair all graded surfaces and
antierosion devices, retaining walls, drainage structures or means
and other protective devices, plantings and ground cover installed
or completed.
(7) All graded surfaces shall be permanently seeded, sodded and/or
planted or otherwise protected from erosion within 30 days,
weather permitting, and shall be tended and/or maintained until
growth is well established. The disturbed area and duration of
exposure shall be kept to a minimum, using temporary erosion and
sediment control measures immediately as outlined in the Erosion
and Sediment Control Handbook, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
(8) All trees in an area of extreme grade change shall be protected
with suitable tree wells, unless the necessity for removal is
established. Precautions shall be taken to prevent the unnecessary
removal of trees.
(9) When required, adequate provisions shall be made for dust control
measures as are deemed acceptable by the Township Engineer.
(10) All plans and specifications submitted for an approval shall include
provisions for both interim (temporary) and ultimate permanent
erosion and sediment control. The design, installation and
maintenance of erosion and sediment control measures shall be
accomplished in accordance with standards and specifications
established by the County Soil Conservation District, as adopted
from standards and specifications of the United States Soil
Conservation Service and as outlined in the then-applicable and
current handbook of administrative regulations or guidelines, as
may be adopted and enacted by the County Soil Conservation
District.
§ 151-51 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-51
122:331
(a) Technical standards for the design and installation of erosion
and sediment control measures are on file with the Township of
Limerick, the office of the County Conservation District and
other governmental agency offices.
(b) Standards and specifications adopted for the purposes of this
section and by the County Conservation District include but
are not limited to the following basic conservation measures:
[1] Temporary cover on critical areas.
[2] Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on
prepared seedbed.
[3] Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on
unprepared seedbed.
[4] Sodding.
[5] Mulching.
[6] Temporary diversion.
[7] Permanent diversion.
[8] Grassed waterway or outlet.
[9] Grade stabilization structure.
[10] Debris basin.
[11] Drain.
[12] Drainage, mains or laterals.
D. A quality-control program is critical for fills; therefore, wherever fill
material is to be used, the person, firm or corporation shall be
responsible for testing to determine its dry density as per ASTM D1556.
It is recommended that the density of any load-bearing layer supporting
or to be incorporated in a road surface, detention basin or erosion swale
shall be not less than 90% of the maximum density.
(1) The inspection procedure shall follow the general procedure as
stated in § 151-27.
(2) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and shall be
subject to review at all times.
(3) The degree of compaction required shall be determined by the
Township Engineer following the guidelines in this section.
(4) A soils investigation report is required if load-bearing fill is
proposed, which shall consist of test borings, laboratory testing and
engineering analysis to correlate surface and subsurface conditions
with the proposed plan. The results of the investigation shall be
§ 151-51 LIMERICK CODE § 151-51
122:332
presented in a report by a registered professional soils engineer
and shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and
supporting ability of existing soils and rocks on the site,
conclusions and recommendations to ensure stable soil conditions
and groundwater control as applicable. The Township of Limerick
may require such supplemental reports and data as is deemed
necessary by the Township Engineer. Recommendations included
in such reports and approved by the Township Engineer shall be
incorporated in the plan or specifications. In addition:
(a) Fills toeing out on natural slopes steeper than two horizontal to
one vertical shall not be made unless a report is received which
is deemed acceptable by the Township Engineer. The report
shall be made by a registered professional soils engineer,
certifying that he has investigated the property and made soils
tests and that, in his opinion, such steeper slopes will safely
support the proposed fill.
(b) Natural and/or existing slopes exceeding five horizontal to one
vertical shall be benched or continuously stepped into
competent materials prior to placing all classes of fill.
§ 151-51 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-51
122:333
Chapter 153
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 75.
Streets in mobile home parks — See Ch. 113.
Peddling in streets — See Ch. 124.
Sewers — See Ch. 140.
Streets in subdivisions — See Ch. 155.
Vehicle and traffic regulations — See Ch. 170.
§ 151-51 LIMERICK CODE § 151-51
122:334
ARTICLE I
Street Excavations
[Adopted 7-5-1988 by Ord. No. 100123]
§ 153-1. Definitions.
§ 153-2. Permit requirements.
A. The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meanings
hereby respectively ascribed thereto:
ENGINEER — The Township Engineer or other person duly authorized
and appointed by the governing body to perform the duties of engineer.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Limerick.
PERMIT — A document issued by the person designated by the
governing body regulating the opening and closing of excavations in
dedicated streets pursuant to this article.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
STREET — The right-of-way of any dedicated public street, avenue,
boulevard, highway or alley in the Township of Limerick, except for
state highways, to which this article shall not apply.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Limerick.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drill any hole or make any opening
or excavation in any street in the Township without first having
obtained from the Township a permit pursuant to this article.
B. All work authorized by permit shall be done in strict conformity with
said permit and in strict conformity with the provisions of this article.
C. No permit shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall have
complied with the following conditions:
(1) Payment of the permit fee, per proposed street opening, which sum
shall be for the use of the Township, provided that the fee or fee
schedule shall be adopted by the Board of Supervisors in the nature
of a resolution, and said fee or fee schedule may be amended, from
time to time, by further resolution of the Board of Supervisors.124
(2) The applicant shall deposit with the Township a security deposit,
the amount of which will be determined by the Township. Such
123. Editor's Note: This ordinance supersedes former Art. I, Street Openings, adopted 7-2-1974
by Ord. No. 55, as amended.
124. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 153-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 153-2
122:335
§ 153-3. Application for permit.
Each person requesting a permit under this article shall file an application
therefor with the Township, which application shall state the following:
§ 153-4. Conditions of permit.
Any permit granted pursuant to this article shall be granted for a designated
purpose at a specific location and for a specified period of time. The permit
may contain any further conditions that may be required by the Township.
All work performed pursuant to a permit issued under this article shall be
done strictly in accordance with the terms of this article and strictly in
deposit may be applied by the Township toward the cost of
restoration of the street opened or excavated. Any balance
remaining on said security deposit may be returned by the
Township to the permit holder, or the Township, in its discretion,
may retain any balance as liquidated damages. In the event that
said security deposit is not sufficient to cover all costs of
restoration, then and in that event the permit holder shall pay
to the Township the amount of such deficiency within 10 days of
written notification by the Township to the permit holder of the
amount of the deficiency.
(3) Any person, in lieu of depositing the security deposit as
hereinabove provided, may submit a performance bond with
corporate surety in such amount as determined by the Township
and shall include such conditions as the Township may require and
approve. In the event that said bond is approved by the Township
and thereafter any person having submitted such bond violates the
provisions of this article, the Township, in its sole and absolute
discretion, may cancel and return the bond to said person and
require said person to deposit a cash security deposit as
hereinabove stated.
D. In the case of an emergency, a person may open or excavate any street
without first having obtained a permit pursuant to this article. In that
event, said person shall, within 24 hours of the commencement of work,
apply for a permit pursuant to this article. In the event that said work
for said emergency occurs during a holiday or such other day when the
Township Office is closed and a permit cannot be obtained, the required
permit, under the terms of this article, shall be obtained the first
working day thereafter.
A. The purpose for which such opening or excavation is made.
B. The location and approximate dimensions of each of the openings or
excavations.
C. An estimate of the length of time required for the work to be done under
said permit.
§ 153-2 LIMERICK CODE § 153-4
122:336
accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in any permit issued
hereunder.
§ 153-5. Safety precautions; other requirements.
§ 153-6. Notice to Township.
Upon starting of the work, the permit holder shall notify the Township for
the supervision and inspection of the backfill and restoration.
§ 153-6.1. Restrictions on openings in newly paved streets.
No street opening or excavation shall be permitted and no permit pursuant
to this article shall be granted for any street opening or excavation of
any newly paved street for any purpose whatsoever within three years
from the date of completion of the paving, except for emergency repairs
or for services to an entirely new building to be erected, and then only
with special permission having been granted by the Board of Supervisors,
upon written recommendation by the Township Engineer. In the event that
any opening or excavation shall take place for any purpose whatsoever,
including emergency, within the first year from the date of completion of
paving of any street, then and in that event the person performing such
work shall pay to the Township the sum of $1,000 for the use of the
Township for the repair and restoration of said street. Said payment of
$1,000 for the use of the Township shall be in addition to all costs to said
person for the refilling and restoration of said street opening or excavation,
which shall be the sole responsibility of the person making such street
opening or excavation.
§ 153-6.2. Manner of operation, backfill and restoration.
A. During the progress of the work, the holder of the permit shall provide
and maintain such fences, barriers, "street closed" and warning signs,
red lights and other danger signals and watchmen, as may be necessary
to prevent accidents to the public, pursuant to and in compliance with
the standards established by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, as set forth in Title 67, Pennsylvania Code, Chapter
131, as may be amended or supplemented from time to time, a copy of
which is available in the Township Office.
B. The traveling public, during the progress of the work, shall at all times
be provided for and shall be inconvenienced as little as possible.
Drainage gutters and inlets to storm sewers shall be kept clean and
unobstructed. The amount of trench opened and also the amount
unfilled at the conclusion of the workday, if any, shall at all times be
subject to the decision of the Township Engineer.
A. All openings or excavations of streets, excepting drill holes, shall,
before completion, be cut with a power saw and not with an air
jackhammer or similar device.
§ 153-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 153-6.2
122:337
B. Any person opening or excavating any street shall, upon completion of
the project and after notification of the Township, immediately and
completely backfill such openings or excavations, mechanically tamping
the same so as to prevent any settling thereof, and shall restore the
surface to the same condition as it was prior to the making of such
opening or excavation; and prior to the expiration of the permit, shall
remove from the site of work all debris, tools and equipment.
C. All backfilling and restoration shall be done in strict conformance with
the detailed sketches for backfilling and restoration, which are
hereinafter set forth as Exhibit A and Exhibit B, respectively, and which
are a part of this article.125
D. Where test holes have been drilled, they shall be filled and sealed with
hot tar.
E. Permanent restoration and backfilling of any opening and/or
excavations shall be as follows:
(1) A bed of screenings two inches under the utility conduit.
(2) From the bottom of the conduit to a level eight inches below the
surface of the trench shall be backfilled with 2A modified stone
aggregate, mechanically tamped in four-inch intervals.
(3) Before completing backfill of the trench, a saw cut shall extend a
minimum of 12 inches beyond the trench opening on all sides of the
excavation.
(4) The next six inches shall be backfilled with concrete or bituminous
concrete base course (BCBC) and shall extend a minimum of 12
inches on each side of the trench. If the contractor opts for BCBC,
he shall be held responsible for any settlement within one year of
the final restoration.
(5) The next two inches shall be an application of bituminous wearing
course properly graded to the surface of the street and sealed at
the saw cut with an approved asphalt sealing material.
F. Temporary restoration. During winter construction periods, the trench
shall be backfilled as in the first three items of the specifications for
permanent restoration in Subsection E above. The final step shall be a
temporary application of bituminous stockpile mix to bring the trench
to street grade. Periodically, inspection shall be made to maintain the
trench in a condition satisfactory to the Township. On or before May 31
following the date the street cut was first made, the permittee shall
permanently restore the cut as in Subsection E(4) and (5) above.
G. Where major street openings or excavations are done on a newly
constructed street or a street repaved within three years prior to the
125. Editor's Note: Exhibits A and B are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 153-6.2 LIMERICK CODE § 153-6.2
122:338
§ 153-6.3. Liability and responsibility.
The party or parties to whom or for whom a permit may be issued shall
assume all responsibility for the excavations made, shall indemnify and save
harmless the Township from all loss, costs and damages done or ascribed
to any act of commission or omission by such applicant in the performance
of the work and shall pay the Township costs of every kind incurred in
contesting suits on said account, and, upon notice from the Township, will
assume the defense of any such suits.
§ 153-6.4. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, association, firm or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $300, and costs of prosecution; provided, however, that
no permit shall be issued to any person or persons, association, firm or
corporation under this article until all fines and costs thereupon imposed
hereunder shall have been paid.
§ 153-6.5. Installation of underground facilities by public utility
companies.
From and after the enactment of this article, it shall be lawful for any public
service company, any firm, person or persons or any corporation to install
and lay underground conduits for carrying electric light, electric power,
telephone and/or telegraph wires under any street within the Township of
Limerick, such installation and work to be done under and subject to the
supervision and approval of the Township Road Foreman; and provided,
however, that such public service company or companies or party making
the installation shall and will obtain a permit and assume and pay any
and all costs, expenses, damages and liability of every kind and nature
incident to and arising out of such installation and shall assume all liability
date of issuance of said permit, the entire street covered by the permit
issued at the location where the work is to be done, in the discretion of
the governing body, shall be retopped with paving materials prescribed
by the Township. The work of resurfacing shall be examined and
inspected by the Township. Upon satisfactory completion of said
resurfacing, the Township shall return to the permit holder any deposit
and/or bond as provided for in this article. In the event that said person
shall fail to restore or resurface said street in a satisfactory manner,
the Township may perform said work and apply any amount of the
security and/or bond against the costs incurred by the Township for
said restoration. In addition, in the event that the cost of said work
should exceed the amount of the deposit and/or bond, the permit holder
shall pay to the Township the deficiency within 10 days of the date of
written notification by the Township to the permit holder. No further
permit shall be issued to any person unless and until all deficiencies so
billed by the Township to said person shall have been paid in full.
§ 153-6.2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 153-6.5
122:339
as hereinbefore set forth in said article and shall conduct the work in the
manner therein set forth and shall and will, at its or their own proper cost
and expense, restore such excavation in accordance with the specifications
set forth herein.
§ 153-6.5 LIMERICK CODE § 153-6.5
122:340
ARTICLE II
Sidewalks and Curbs
[Adopted 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
§ 153-7. Construction and repair. [Amended 6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
332]
The Limerick Township Board of Supervisors may require a property owner
of Limerick Township to install sidewalks and curbing on their respective
property at the sole expense of the property owner after receiving written
notice from Limerick Township Manager to install sidewalks and curbs. The
construction of any new sidewalks or curbs and the repairing of any existing
sidewalks or curbs in the Township of Limerick, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, shall be done in conformance with the specifications,
regulations and/or provisions of the Limerick Township Code Chapter 153,
Article II, §§ 153-7 through 153-18.
§ 153-8. Grades.
The grade to which every curb, gutter or sidewalk shall be hereafter laid,
constructed or repaired, other than that established in an approved
subdivision plan, shall be that fixed and designated by the Township
Engineer representing the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Limerick, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 153-9. Sidewalk width and location.
The space between the street side of the curb and the street side of the
paved edge of the sidewalk shall be three feet six inches, and the sidewalk
paved width shall be four feet zero inches in all new developments or street
construction. In existing developed sections of the Township and where
sidewalks have been constructed prior to the date of this article, existing
conditions shall be taken into consideration by the Township of Limerick in
applying the width and location regulations.
§ 153-10. Drainage slope.
Finished sidewalks and curbs shall have a grade from the inner edge of the
sidewalk to the outer edge of the curb of 1/4 of an inch to the foot.
§ 153-11. Inspection of work.
All work done hereunder shall be inspected by the Township Engineer
or authorized representative representing the Board of Supervisors of the
Township of Limerick, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
§ 153-12. Responsibility for repair; notice.
It shall be the duty of the owners of the land abutting upon any curbs
and/or sidewalks to keep them in such repair and condition that they may
not be or become dangerous to the welfare and safety of the traveling
§ 153-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 153-12
122:341
public. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Limerick, Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania, is hereby empowered to notify property owners when
sidewalks and curbs are in need of repair or renewal, and the repair or
renewal thereof shall be made by the property owners within 30 days
after said written notice is given to said property owners. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to place the responsibility of determining
when sidewalks may become dangerous to the welfare and safety of the
traveling public upon the Township. At all times such responsibility shall be
solely upon the property owner whose land abuts the curb or sidewalk.
§ 153-13. Planting of trees.
It shall hereafter be unlawful to plant and maintain any trees between the
curb and corresponding sidewalk. This shall not apply to any trees presently
so growing. All new trees shall be planted on the residence side of the
sidewalk at a distance which will not interfere with the sidewalk at any time
in the future.
§ 153-14. Open gutters; rain conductors.
No open gutters for conducting rainwater or drainage of any kind will be
permitted to run over the top of the sidewalk or curb. All underground
rain conductors shall be of pipe material, such as cast iron, wrought iron,
asbestos cement, clay or approved plastics, constructed under the sidewalk
and through the curb to the gutter.
§ 153-15. Permits required; exception.
A. No person or persons, firm or corporation shall construct or repair any
sidewalk, curb or gutter without first applying for and obtaining from
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Township of Limerick,
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, a permit for the same. The
application for such permit shall set forth:
(1) The full name and address of the owners of the land affected.
(2) The name and address of the contractor or the person to perform
the work.
(3) The precise location of the property upon which the work is to be
done.
(4) The length of the proposed project.
(5) Such other pertinent information as may be considered necessary.
B. No permit will be required for new curbing, gutters or sidewalks to be
constructed in an approved subdivision which is to be installed by the
developer.
§ 153-12 LIMERICK CODE § 153-16
122:342
§ 153-16. Fees.
The cost of obtaining a permit to repair existing curbs, gutters and
sidewalks and the cost of obtaining a survey permit to stake out the line and
grade of new curbs, gutters and sidewalks, other than that established in an
approved subdivision plan required to be surveyed by the developer, shall
be as set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 153-17. Specifications.
§ 153-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation constructing or repairing
sidewalks, curbs or gutters or planting trees in violation of any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial
District Judge, be subject to a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than
A. All curbs, gutters and sidewalks, as well as all driveways over
sidewalks, shall be constructed of monolithic concrete. Said concrete
shall develop a compressive strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch
(psi) in 28 days. Certification of the concrete mix shall be furnished if
required by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Limerick.
B. Curbs and gutters shall be made to the following specifications: The
curbs shall have a depth of not less than 18 inches and shall be eight
inches thick at the base and seven inches thick at the top. Curbs shall
be constructed with an eight-inch reveal and shall rest on a bed of
crushed stone four inches in depth.
C. Sidewalks shall not be less than four inches in thickness and shall rest
on a compact bed of crushed stone of a depth of four inches. For width
and location of sidewalks, see § 153-9.
D. Mortar shall be used only in case of patching honeycombed concrete
and then shall be one part cement and two parts of sand or its equal.
E. Sidewalks shall have clean-cut joints every four linear feet and curbs
every 10 feet. One-half-inch premolded expansion joints shall be placed
every 30 linear feet or less on curbs and sidewalks.
F. Driveways over sidewalks shall be at least six inches thick and shall rest
on four inches of stone and shall be of such width as approved by the
Township Engineer representing the Board of Supervisors of Limerick
Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
G. A depressed curb for driveway entrance is permitted rather than a
horizontal radius. The curb shall be depressed by rounding the edge
from the top of the curb to the gutter line. The bottom line of the curb
shall be maintained. The sloped portion of the driveway on all new
construction shall terminate at the closest edge of the sidewalk and at
the gutter line, and a lip at the gutter line two inches high shall be
constructed.
§ 153-16 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 153-18
122:343
$600 for each and every offense and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
30 days.
§ 153-18 LIMERICK CODE § 153-18
122:344
ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 1-16-2001 by Ord. No. 221]
§ 153-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OCCUPANT — The tenant or tenants with respect to one-, two- or
multifamily dwellings, the manager or person having care, custody or
control of the building or lot with respect to three-family or larger
dwellings, commercial business, industrial premises, vacant lots or
unoccupied buildings.
OWNER — The fee owner and/or contract purchaser of a building or lot as
listed on the property records, properly recorded in Montgomery County.
SIDEWALK — Any concrete, bituminous or other hard surface sidewalk,
path or other walkway intended for public use.
TOWNSHIP — Limerick Township or its designee.
§ 153-20. Removal from sidewalks.
A. The owner or occupant of any building or lot abutting a public sidewalk
is responsible for and shall remove any accumulation of snow, slush, ice
and/or freezing rain from said public sidewalk within 24 hours after the
snow, ice or freezing rain has ceased to fall, gather or accumulate.
B. The clearing of sidewalks may require continuous acts due to drifting,
melting and other situations that require snow and ice to be removed
more than once after a single storm.
C. All sidewalks shall be cleared to a minimum width of three feet. In the
event the snow and/or ice cannot be removed without damaging the
sidewalk, an application of sand, salt, cinders or other grit and deicing
agents will be an acceptable substitute for clearing.
D. Following the clearing of any public sidewalk and during freezing
conditions, applications of salt, sand, cinders or other deicing agents
shall be applied as necessary to ensure a safe, nonslip surface for
pedestrian traffic.
E. Clearing of sidewalks shall also include any portion(s) of a driveway
crossing a sidewalk area.
F. Any/all material removed from a sidewalk and driveway area may not be
disposed of in the street, curb gutter or storm inlet areas.
§ 153-19 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 153-21
122:345
§ 153-21. Parked and/or abandoned vehicles.
Following the effective date of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful to park,
abandon or allow to be parked or abandoned any motor vehicle or other
vehicle on or in part of a travel lane of any highway, street, road or rightof-
way which is part of the PennDOT, Montgomery County and/or Township
road system, after the start of a snowfall and until the snow has stopped
falling and the snow has been completely plowed for the full width of the
cartway.
§ 153-22. Enforcement.
Any member of the Limerick Township Police Department is hereby
authorized to have removed any vehicle abandoned or parked upon or in
part of any travel lane of a public highway, street, road or right-of-way in
violation of the terms and provisions of this ordinance, and to have said
vehicle towed to the nearest safe facility. The registered owner of any
such vehicle shall be notified of the fact of the removal and of the place
to which said vehicle has been towed, where he or she may obtain the
same upon payment of any and all towing and storage charges. Neither the
Township nor any of its officers or employees shall be held responsible for
any damage to any vehicle occurring as a result of towing and/or storage of
a vehicle parked in violation of this ordinance. The towing company shall be
an approved vendor pursuant to the Limerick Township Police Department
Standard Operating Procedures Manual.
§ 153-23. Disposal of snow and ice.
It shall be unlawful for owners, occupants or tenants of property to dump,
throw, shovel, pile or push any snow or ice removed from driveways,
walkways or other private property into any public highway, street, road or
public right-of-way.
§ 153-24. Violations and penalties.
Any owner or occupant violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall
be subject to the maximum fine or penalties outlined in Section 1601 of the
Second Class Township Code.126
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 66601.
§ 153-21 LIMERICK CODE § 153-24
122:346
Chapter 155
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 31.
Building construction — See Ch. 60.
Driveways — See Ch. 75.
Development in flood hazard areas — See Ch.
89.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 113.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 140.
Soil erosion and sediment control — See Ch.
147.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 153.
Wells and well drilling — See Ch. 181.
Zoning — See Ch. 184.
§ 153-24 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 153-24
122:347

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 155-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Limerick Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 155-2. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
A. To assist orderly, efficient, integrated and harmonious development of
the Township.
B. To assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation.
C. To coordinate proposed streets with existing streets or other proposed
streets, parks or other features of the Township Official Map Summary.
D. To provide adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air
and for proper distribution of the population.
E. To ensure conformance of subdivision and land development plans with
the public improvements of the Township and coordination of
intermunicipal, county and commonwealth improvement plans and
programs.
F. To secure equitable handling of all subdivision and land development
plans by providing uniform procedures and standards.
G. To regulate subdivisions and land developments within the jurisdiction
of the Township and concurrently to promote the highest quality
environment obtainable.
H. To ensure that the layout and arrangement of the subdivision or land
development plan is in conformance with the approved articles or
chapters of the Comprehensive Plan and with any regulations or maps
adopted in furtherance thereof.
I. To preserve natural amenities of the Township, including but not limited
to stream valleys, floodplains, woodlands, steep slopes, prime
agricultural soils and individual specimen trees. [Added 5-7-1991 by
Ord. No. 130]
J. To ensure that all new development protects existing vegetation to the
maximum extent possible in order to retard soil erosion, protect
significant natural areas and wildlife habitat, soften the visual impact of
new development, promote groundwater recharge and improve air
quality. [Added 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
K. To provide buffers between land uses and to act as sound barriers and
windbreaks, to visually soften the impacts of adjacent land uses and to
§ 155-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-2
122:349
§ 155-3. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
for the above-stated purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter impose
greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation,
the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than
those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation
shall prevail.
§ 155-4. Compliance required; control provisions; condominium
development.
integrate new development with its surroundings. [Added 5-7-1991
by Ord. No. 130]
A. Subdivision of a lot for construction, opening or dedication of a street.
No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be effected, and
no street, alley, sanitary sewer, storm drain, water main, gas, oil or
electric transmission line or other facilities in connection therewith
shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or
travel or for the common use of occupants of a building abutting
thereon, except in strict accordance with the subdivision and land
development regulations adopted hereunder.
B. Sale of lots, issuance of building permits or erection of buildings. No lot
in a subdivision or land development may be sold and no permit to
erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision or land
development may be granted unless and until a plat has been approved
and, where required, recorded and until the required improvements in
connection therewith from the lot or building to an existing improved
street have either been constructed or the Township has been assured,
by means of a proper completion guaranty in the form of a bond or the
deposit of funds or securities in escrow sufficient to cover the cost of
the required improvements as estimated by the Township Engineer,
that the improvements will subsequently be installed. The posting of
such improvement guaranty and the subsequent release thereof shall
comply with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10509, and § 155-7 hereof. Where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of this requirement would result in
unnecessary hardship, such reasonable exceptions thereto may be
made as will not be contrary to the public interest, and the sale of a lot,
issuance of a permit or erection of a building may be permitted, subject
to conditions necessary to assure adequate street and other
improvements. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
C. Condominium ownership plans. No section of this chapter shall be
construed to prohibit condominium ownership as permitted by the
Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq. [Amended
4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109127]
§ 155-2 LIMERICK CODE § 155-4.1
122:350
§ 155-4.1. (Reserved)128
127. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, which immediately followed this subsection, added
5-17-1994 by Ord. No. 163, was deleted 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 250.
128. Editor's Note: Former § 15-4.1, Mortgage subdivisions, added 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 250,
was repealed 6-3-2014 by Ord. No. 351.
§ 155-4.1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-4.1
122:351

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 155-5. Word usage.
Words used in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural
include the singular. The word "person" indicates a corporation, an
incorporated association and a partnership, as well as an individual. The
word "building" indicates "structure" and shall be construed as if followed
by the words "or part thereof." The word "street" indicates "road" and
"land," and "watercourse" includes "drain," "ditch" and "stream." The word
"may" is permissive; the words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, subject to
the provisions of § 155-6 below.
§ 155-6. Terms defined. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of these regulations, have the meanings indicated. All definitions
set forth in other sections of this chapter are hereby incorporated by
reference as if set forth herein.
ALLEY — A strip of land over which there is a right-of-way, municipally
or privately owned, on which no dwellings or stores front, serving as the
secondary means of access to two or more properties.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to the start of
construction or development, including but not limited to an application for
a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plot or plan or for the
approval of a development plan.
BLOCK — An area usually bounded by streets or streets and natural or manmade
features.
BUILDER — A person who is not necessarily the owner of the land or the
agent of the same, who by contract or other agreement is charged with
the responsibility of the construction of buildings or other structures or of
making any construction improvements on any parcel of land.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a lot, so designated on a
subdivision plan, between which line and the center line of the street on
which the lot abuts a building may not be erected.
CALIPER — Diameter of a tree's trunk measured 12 inches above the
ground.[Added 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or alley intended for vehicular use.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official public document of current
adoption, consisting of maps, charts and textual matter, that constitutes a
§ 155-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-6
122:353
policy guide to decisions about the physical and social development of the
Township.
CONDOMINIUM — An estate in real property consisting of an undivided
interest in a portion of a parcel, together with a separate interest in a space
within a structure. This form of ownership may be applied in residential,
professional office, limited industrial and commercial land uses.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian travel across a block
connecting two of the bounding streets.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with access at one end and terminated at the other
by a paved vehicular turnaround.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision or land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of a planned
residential development, including a plat of the subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRIVEWAY — A private street providing for vehicular and pedestrian access
between a public street and a parking area within a lot or property.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way or other right granted for the use of private
land for certain public or quasi-public purposes.
ENDORSEMENT — The review stamp of the Montgomery County Planning
Commission.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for a
municipality, planning agency or joint planning commission.
FLAG LOT — A lot which conforms in all respects to the dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, except that the
only road frontage and access is limited to an access strip. This definition
does not include the commonly used wedge-shaped lots located on a cul-desac
turnaround. A "flag lot" is also known as a "rear or interior lot."[Added
7-17-1990 by Ord. No. 117]
FLOODPLAIN — As defined in § 155-29H hereof.[Amended 4-4-1989 by
Ord. No. 109]
GRADE — A slope of a street or other public way, specified by percentage
and shown on plans as specified herein.
IMPROVEMENT — Those physical additions and installations required to
render land suitable for the use intended, including but not limited to
streets, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, street signs and lights, fire hydrants,
walkways, sewer and water facilities, parking areas, monuments and
§ 155-6 LIMERICK CODE § 155-6
122:354
markers, street trees, buffers, screens and other required landscaping,
grading and stormwater drainage facilities.[Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord.
No. 109; 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee having a remaining term of
not less than 40 years or other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LOT — A tract or parcel of land intended for separate use, building
development or transfer of ownership.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of the individual
parcels of land as shown on a subdivision plan, excluding any area within
any right-of-way but including the area of any easement.
MATURE TREE — Any tree of six inches or more in caliper, whether
standing alone, in tree masses or woodlands. A "mature tree" shall be a
healthy specimen and shall be a desirable species as determined by the
Township Landscape Architect.[Added 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
MINIMIZE — To reduce to the smallest amount possible. "Minimize" does
not mean to eliminate but rather that the most substantial efforts possible
under the circumstances have been taken to reduce the adverse effect
of the action (such as grading, clearing, construction, etc.) to be
"minimized."[Added 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
OFFICIAL MAP SUMMARY — The map of current adoption showing the
location of the lines of existing and proposed public streets, watercourses
and public grounds for the whole of the municipality of Limerick Township,
provided that the showing of proposed streets, watercourses or public
grounds shall not, in and of itself, constitute a taking or acceptance of any
land by the municipality of Limerick Township.
PLAN —
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or perspective occupants by means of or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, shopping centers, apartments or other features.
(2)
A.
A division of land (a subdivision of land) into lots for the purpose of
conveying such lots singly or in groups to any person, partnership or
corporation for the purpose of the erection of buildings by such person,
partnership or corporation.
B.
IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION PLAN — A plan prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor showing the construction details of
A.
§ 155-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-6
122:355
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, the development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk
or type of dwelling, density, lot coverage and required open space to the
regulations established in any one residential district created, from time to
time, under the provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance.129
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice given not more than 30 days and not less than
14 days in advance of any public hearing required by this chapter. Such
notice shall be published once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state
the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to
be considered at the hearing.
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of land separating a street from adjacent
properties.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — Ultimate right-of-way line as defined below.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The distance of unobstructed view along the center
line of a street from the driver's sight height of four feet to the farthest
visible point four inches above the street surface.
streets, drains, sewers, bridges, culverts and other improvements as
required by these regulations, showing the horizontal details, profile
and typical cross section to be constructed or installed.
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A preliminary or final plan, including
written and graphic material, showing the provision for development
of a subject tract when plans of subdivision would not be applicable.
[Amended 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 208]
B.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A plan prepared for discussion with the
Planning Commission and Supervisors by a registered engineer or
surveyor, showing the proposed street and lot layout, the deed
restrictions, easements, etc., of the entire land owned being subdivided.
C.
RECORD PLAN — A plan prepared for recording by a registered
engineer or surveyor, showing the ultimate width of streets, the lot
lines, easements and all other relevant information pertaining to the
subdivision.
D.
TENTATIVE PLAN — An optional rough draft showing proposed streets
and lots related to topography, to be used as the basis for informal
discussion between the representatives of the Planning Commission
and the subdivider, developer or builder. [Amended 3-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 208]
E.
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Zoning.
§ 155-6 LIMERICK CODE § 155-6
122:356
SOIL SURVEY — A report entitled "Soil Survey of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania," published April 1967 by the Soil Conservation Service,
United States Department of Agriculture, which is available in the Township
or through the Extension Service, Agricultural Agent, the Pennsylvania
State University in Norristown, or any subsequent modification or
publication of said soil survey.
STREET — A strip of land, including the entire ultimate right-of-way,
publicly or privately owned, serving primarily as a means of vehicular
and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to abutting properties, which may
also be used to provide space for sewers, public utilities, shade trees and
sidewalks.
STREET LINE — Ultimate right-of-way line as defined below.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of
land by any means in two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of leasing, transferring of ownership or building or lot
development; provided, however, that the division of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street
or easement of access, shall be exempt.
TREE MASS — A grouping of three or more trees each at least 1 1/2 feet in
diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above the ground, within a one-hundredsquare-
foot area.[Added 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The expected future right-of-way width
computed from the center line of an established right-of-way; as shown on
the Ultimate Right-of-Way Map of the Township, adopted by the governing
body as part of the Official Map Summary of Limerick, or as exists otherwise
of record in the Township.
RESIDENTIAL STREET — A street used primarily as the principal
means of access to adjacent residential properties.
A.
SECONDARY STREET — A street connecting local residential streets to
each other or to community facilities and to the major streets, serving
only neighborhood traffic.
B.
MAJOR STREET — A street connecting district centers of communities,
serving large volumes of fast-moving through traffic, preferably located
outside or bounding the residential neighborhood.
C.
HALF-STREET — A street of less than the required right-of-way and
cartway width.
D.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A street parallel and adjacent to a
major street, providing access to abutting properties by a cartway
separated from the major street by a reserve strip.
E.
§ 155-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-6
122:357
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The line parallel to the center line of
any public street which defines the boundary of the ultimate right-of-way as
defined above.
WOODLAND — A stand of predominantly native vegetation covering at least
one acre, consisting of at least 50% cover of mature trees of varying age or
size.[Added 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
§ 155-6 LIMERICK CODE § 155-6
122:358
ARTICLE III
Improvement Construction Requirements
§ 155-7. Required improvements. [Amended 9-6-1988 by Ord. No.
105; 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 250]
§ 155-8. Service connections or laterals.
All water, gas, electric and other pipes and conduits and all service
connections or laterals shall be laid to the full width of the ultimate right-ofway,
where the need therefor can be reasonably anticipated, before streets
are paved. The arrangements for said service connections or laterals shall
be the responsibility of the subdivider, developer or builder.
§ 155-9. Inspection of work and materials.
A. The applicant shall construct streets and other improvements from the
lot or lots to be developed, subject to the provisions of § 155-4B. The
work shall be performed in strict accordance with the approved plan
and Township standards and specifications or the applicable provisions
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. No plat shall be
recorded until the applicant has provided for deposit with the Township
of a security in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of any required
improvements. No improvements shall be approved and/or accepted
until the applicant has completed them in accordance with the
conditions of final approval.
B. Whenever a plan provides for the construction and installation of new
streets and other improvements, or, for the revision, reconstruction or
improvement of existing streets or other improvements, and a waiver
from such requirement is sought by the applicant pursuant to
§ 155-14A, applicant shall make such request in writing accompanied
by a complete breakdown of the quantities and estimated current costs
for the construction and installation of the improvements requested to
be waived. In considering whether or not to grant or reject the
requested waiver, the Board shall consider the cost to the Township of
installing such improvements at a future date and may require a
payment from the applicant to the Township in an amount deemed
sufficient to defray such costs. Such payments in lieu of construction
shall be used by the Township for the construction and installation of
similar improvements within the Township.
A. Notice. The Township Engineer or designated person shall be notified
48 hours in advance of the commencement of any construction
operation, in order that provision may be made for inspection by the
Township.
B. Samples of materials. Samples of the materials and/or delivery slips
shall be furnished by the contractor to the Township in the same
manner as required of contractors under the Highway and Sanitary
Drainage Specifications.
§ 155-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-9
122:359

ARTICLE IV
Plat Approval Procedures
§ 155-10. Responsibility for compliance.
The procedures set forth in this article shall be followed by all applicants.
§ 155-11. Required plans.
§ 155-11.1. Minor additions excepted. [Added 5-3-2005 by Ord. No.
250; amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 313; 4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 397]
A land development plan and approval shall not be required in any district
for an extension or addition to an existing structure or for placement
of separate freestanding structure when the proposed structure is less
than 20% of the existing gross floor area(s) and is less than 3,000 square
feet in gross floor area. To qualify for this exception, a drainage permit
shall be required to be obtained to allow for the Township Engineer to
review for compliance with all applicable Limerick Township's stormwater
management requirements and to ensure all appropriate standard
engineering practices are implemented including but not limited to
adequate site circulation. When the structure(s) exceed 3,000 square feet
A. (Reserved)130
B. A preliminary plan is required for all subdivisions and land
developments proposed within the Township and must contain
information sufficient to satisfy the standards of all Township
Ordinances as well as photographs of existing features. [Amended
11-15-2011 by Ord. No. 326]
C. A final plan is required for all subdivisions and land developments
proposed within the Township. A plan showing all information required
for a final plan, which has been submitted as a preliminary plan and for
which no changes have been required by the Township, may be
approved as a final plan. A final plan shall consist of two parts:
(1) An improvement construction plan.
(2) A record plan.
D. A land development plan shall be required whenever the application for
approval of a plat shall be construed to be a land development in
accordance with the definition of the same as provided in this chapter. A
land development plan may be required in conjunction with a
subdivision plan or in lieu of a subdivision plan when a review of a plan
on a lot-by-lot basis would not be applicable.
130. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, which dealt with a tentative sketch required for all
subdivisions and land developments proposed within the Township, was deleted 3-21-2000
by Ord. No. 208.
§ 155-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-11.1
122:361
in gross floor area or 20% of the existing gross floor area(s), a land
development plan shall be required.
§ 155-12. Plat processing procedure.
A. Unless determined otherwise, all plans for approval of a plat shall be
submitted in the following order: preliminary plan and final plan. A plan
and all required copies of each plan shall be filed one at a time, and no
subsequent plans for approval of a plat shall be filed until such time that
a decision has been reached concerning the preceding plan. When the
decision reached concerning an application for approval of a plat,
whether, preliminary or final, has rendered the application for approval
finally denied, then the applicant, when and if he should reapply
requesting approval of a plat, shall do so in accordance with the
procedure outlined above. [Amended 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 208]
B. Schedule of steps.
(1) Completion and submission of application form; determination of
completeness. [Amended 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 208; 5-3-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-250]
(a) All formal applications for approval of a subdivision and/or land
development plan shall be made to the Township Secretary by
completion of an application form, to be supplied by the
Township, together with the appropriate plans, filing fees set
for plan review by the Board of Supervisors and filing fees set
by the Montgomery County Planning Commission and the
Township Planning Commission.
(b) The Township shall have seven days from the date of
submission to check the plan to determine if, on its face, it is in
proper form and contains the information required by this
chapter. If defective, the Township shall return the application
with a statement of rejection within the seven-day period;
otherwise, the application shall be deemed accepted for filing
as of the date of submission. Acceptance for filing shall not,
however, constitute a waiver of any deficiencies or
irregularities. The applicant may appeal a decision made under
this section to the Board of Supervisors. The Board of
Supervisors shall not review plans until all required
information is submitted.
(2) The application shall be received by the Township Secretary, the
date stamped thereon, the filing fee accepted. [Amended
11-19-1996 by Ord. No. 182; 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 208;
5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 250]
(a) Notice of all applications for approval of a subdivision and/or
land development shall be given by conspicuously posting
written notice of the application on the affected tract of land at
§ 155-11.1 LIMERICK CODE § 155-12
122:362
least 48 hours prior to preliminary plan review by the Limerick
Planning Commission. The written notice shall state the
following: "This property is the subject of a subdivision and/or
land development application; Limerick Township No. _____."
The notice shall be printed on a thirty-six-inch by twenty-fourinch
sign of the type utilized for real estate sales. The expense
of the printing of such notice shall be borne by the applicant.
The notice must be posted by the applicant on the property
in such location(s) to be clearly visible from each adjacent
roadway(s) and must remain on the property throughout the
duration of the land development and/or subdivision process.
Proof of posting by way of a dated photograph of the erected
notice must be provided by the applicant to the Township
Secretary at least 24 hours prior to preliminary plan review.
(b) A civil fine in the amount of $25 per day may be imposed upon
an applicant for noncompliance with this subsection following
issuance by the Code Enforcement Officer to the applicant of
written notice of a violation and failure by the applicant to
correct the violation within three days of the date of said
written notice.
(3) The Township Secretary shall distribute copies of the plan to:
[Amended 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 208]
(a) The Township Board of Supervisors.
(b) The Township Planning Commission.
(c) The Montgomery County Planning Commission.
(d) The Township Municipal Authority.
(e) The Township Solicitor.
(f) The Township Engineer.
(g) The Fire Inspector. [Amended 9-14-2006 by Ord. No. 267]
(4) Written recommendations of the Limerick Township Planning
Commission, the Montgomery County Planning Commission and
others shall be submitted to the Township Supervisors.
(5) Action shall be taken by the Township Supervisors at a regularly
scheduled public meeting, and, if the plan is approved, the
Township Secretary shall advise the applicant to prepare and
submit final plat plans for signing. The final plans shall consist of
two complete sets of mylars and five complete sets of paper prints.
All plans should include signature plates which shall be located in
the lower right hand corner thereof. [Amended 3-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 208; 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 250]
§ 155-12 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-12
122:363
(6) Approval or disapproval of a plat, whether preliminary or final,
shall be communicated to the applicant by the Township Secretary,
in writing, 15 days after the decision is rendered but not later than
90 days after the date of formal application, as is required for such
response. Disapproval shall include notification, in writing, of the
defects in the application and shall describe the requirements
which have not been met and shall cite the provisions of state law
or Township ordinance relied upon. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord.
No. 109; 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 208]
(7) Upon approval of a final plat of subdivision or land development,
the applicant shall, within 90 days of such final approval, record
such plat in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania, advising the Township Secretary of the date,
book and page. The approved recorded final plat shall bear the
official stamp of review by the Montgomery County Planning
Commission. [Amended 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 208]
(8) Approval will be effective for five years only, unless extended by the
Supervisors. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary
approval, the five-year period shall be counted from the date of
preliminary approval, provided that, when an applicant shall
commence with any aspect of an approved plan, the terms of
development or subdivision shall be governed by any subsequent
changes to the Zoning Ordinance,131 subdivision regulations or
other governing ordinances or plans should effectuation of the
approved plat not be completed within the prescribed five-year
period. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
C. When deemed desirable, the applicant may be requested to agree, in
writing, to an extension of time to the ninety-day period normally
allotted, per the Municipalities Planning Code, to the Township in which
a decision concerning the status of the application for approval of a plat
is to be rendered. [Amended 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 208]
131. Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Zoning.
§ 155-12 LIMERICK CODE § 155-12
122:364
ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 155-13. General standards.
The following principles of subdivision and land development, general
requirements and minimum standards of design shall be observed by the
applicant in all instances:
A. All portions of a tract being subdivided shall be included in lots, streets,
public lands or other proposed areas of use so that remnants and
landlocked areas shall not be created.
B. When only a portion of a tract is being reviewed relative to subdivision
and land development, but where future subdivision or development is
imminent, the applicant shall demonstrate, subject to approval of his
plan, that the remainder of the tract or parcel may be subdivided or
developed in conformance with the existing zoning classification of land
use in a logical and satisfactory manner.
C. Whenever possible, applicants shall preserve trees, groves, waterways,
scenic points, historic spots and other community assets and
landmarks.
D. Subdivisions and land developments should be laid out so as to avoid
the necessity for excessive cut or fill unless specifically warranted by
terrain or location.
E. Low-lying land subject to period flooding or land located in the
identified floodplain area shall be developed or subdivided in
accordance with the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.132
[Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109; 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 365]
F. Where no public water supply is available for the proposed subdivision
or land development, the Supervisors shall require the subdivider,
developer or builder to obtain from the District Sanitarian of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection certificates of
approval of the quality and adequacy of the water supply proposed to be
utilized by the subdivider, developer or builder and approval of the type
and construction methods to be employed in the installation of the
individual water supply system.133
G. Where the subdivision or land development is inaccessible to sanitary
sewers, the Supervisors shall require the subdivider, developer or
builder to obtain from the District Sanitarian of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection certificates of approval of the
sewage disposal facilities to be provided by the subdivider, developer or
builder.134
132. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 89, Flood Damage Prevention.
133. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 181, Wells and Well Drilling.
134. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 140, Sewers and Sewage Disposal.
§ 155-13 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-13
122:365
§ 155-14. Application of standards; recommendations of Planning
Commission.
H. Applicants shall observe the ultimate rights-of-way for contiguous
existing streets as prescribed by the Official Map Summary for the
Township. Additional portions of the corridors for such streets shall be
offered to the state, county or Township agency having jurisdiction at
the time the subdivision or land development is consummated.
Applicable building setback lines, as defined by the Limerick Township
Zoning Ordinance of current adoption,135 shall be delineated as
measured from the center line of the street.
I. Proposed subdivision and land development shall be coordinated with
existing nearby neighborhoods so that the community as a whole may
develop harmoniously.
J. Improvement construction requirements will be completed in
accordance with specifications consistent with all other requirements
of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, the
Montgomery County Conservation District or other appropriate
agencies or the specifications included herein, whichever specifications
shall result in the more stringent requirements being applied to the
applicant.
K. Construction of facilities. The subdivider, developer or builder shall,
where specified by the governing body, construct and install, at no
expense to the Township, the streets, curbs, sidewalks, water mains,
sanitary and storm sewers, streetlights, fire hydrants, street signs,
shade trees, monuments and other facilities and utilities specified in
this article. Construction and installation of such facilities and utilities
shall be subject to inspection by appropriate Township officials during
the progress of the work, and the subdivider shall pay for inspection.
A. The standards of design in this article should be used to judge the
adequacy of subdivision proposals. Wherever, in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, the literal application of these standards in
certain cases would serve to create an undue hardship or be plainly
unreasonable to the applicant, the Township Planning Commission may
recommend to the Supervisors such reasonable exceptions as will not
be contrary to the public interest. The Supervisors may modify or adjust
the standards to permit reasonable utilization of property while
securing substantial conformance with the objectives of these
regulations.
B. The standards included in these regulations are minimum design
requirements; however, the Supervisors of Limerick Township reserve
the right in any case to request that development features exceed these
standards if conditions so warrant.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Zoning.
§ 155-13 LIMERICK CODE § 155-14
122:366
§ 155-15. Streets. [Amended 1-19-1988 by Ord. No. 67-4; 4-4-1989
by Ord. No. 109; 7-17-1990 by Ord. No. 117; 12-17-1991 by Ord. No.
141]
C. In reviewing subdivision plans, the Supervisors shall refer such plans to
the Planning Commission for recommendations concerning the
adequacy of existing and proposed community facilities to serve the
additional dwellings proposed by the subdivision.
D. Subdividers are required to provide adequate rights-of-way and paving
on existing streets, reserving areas and easements for facilities
normally required in residential sections, including churches, libraries,
schools and shopping and local business centers, as well as rights-ofway
and easements for storm and sanitary sewer facilities in those
areas that cannot immediately be joined to the existing and proposed
storm and sanitary sewer systems of Limerick Township.
E. Areas provided or served for such community facilities should be
adequate to provide for such building sites, landscaping and off-street
parking as are appropriate to the use proposed. The Supervisors
reserve the right to accept or refuse offers of dedication for public uses.
A. General principle.
(1) Proposed streets shall conform to the Township Comprehensive
Plan or to other adopted street plans.
(2) Proposed streets shall further conform to county and state street
and highway plans as prescribed by law.
(3) Streets shall be logically related to topography so as to produce
reasonable grades, satisfactory drainage and suitable building
sites.
(4) Residential streets shall discourage through traffic but shall
provide for continuation of existing streets and provide access to
nearby tracts.
(5) If a portion of a tract is not subdivided or if lots are large enough to
permit future subdivision, adequate street right-of-way shall be
provided.
(6) Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except when designed as
culs-de-sac or as stubs. Stub streets may be permitted only to
provide future street extension into adjoining tracts and shall not
exceed one lot in depth or width unless a temporary cul-de-sac is
provided.
(7) Streets that are extensions of or in alignment with existing streets
shall bear the street names of such streets. All street names and
address numbers shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 155-14 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-15
122:367
(8) Half streets are prohibited.
(9) Private streets shall be developed according to the same standards
as public streets, unless these requirements are waived by the
Board of Supervisors.
(10) Existing streets are classified on Table 3.136 New streets shall be
classified by the Planning Commission during sketch plan review
according to function, design and use. For example, a street within
a subdivision may be designated as a collector if it serves that
function.
(11) The minimum right-of-way width for development along existing
streets shall correspond to the ultimate right-of-way for these
streets, as defined herein.
(a) The area between an existing right-of-way line and the ultimate
right-of-way line shall be offered for dedication to the authority
having jurisdiction over the road when land is subdivided or
developed along an existing right-of-way.
(b) No new fences, trees, shrubbery, walls, plantings or other
obstructions shall be permitted within the right-of-way, except
in village areas where front yards may fall within the right-ofway
or in areas where future street widening is considered
unlikely and sight distance is not obstructed.
[1] The Township Supervisors may require removal of any
such right-of-way obstructions to improve sight distance or
as necessary for road improvements.
B. Street hierarchy and standards. The following standards are intended
as minimum standards and may be altered based on site or traffic
conditions. Cartway widths do not include additional turning lanes at
intersections or entrances. For a more detailed view of each type of
road, including shoulders, curbs, buffer area and turning lanes, refer to
Table 3 and the schematics in the appendix.137
(1) Limited access freeway. A limited access freeway is an expressway
with fully controlled access, intended to provide safe and efficient
movement of high volumes of traffic at relatively high speeds.
Through traffic is given preference, with access permitted only at
interchanges with selected public roads. The Pottstown
Expressway, Route 422, is the only highway in Limerick classified
as a limited access freeway. Standards are as specified by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
136. Editor's Note: Table 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
137. Editor's Note: Table 3 and the schematics, labeled Figure 1 and Figure 1a, are included at
the end of this chapter.
§ 155-15 LIMERICK CODE § 155-15
122:368
(2) Principal arterial. A principal arterial is a street designed to
provide a relatively high-speed, high-volume network for travel
between major points. Direct access from adjacent properties
should be kept to a minimum, and grade level intersections should
be spaced at large enough intervals to facilitate the safe and
convenient flow of traffic. The characteristics of principal arterials
will change depending on surrounding land uses and their
densities. [Amended 6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 189]
Specification Village Rural
Minimum right-of-way 72 feet 100 feet
Minimum cartway curb
required
40 feet 52 feet
Parking Not permitted Not permitted
Sidewalks 8 feet 4 feet
(3) A minor arterial interconnects with and augments principal
arterials. They accommodate trips of moderate length and
emphasize access to services. Minor arterials within the Township
are classified into Class One and Class Two, in order to deal with
different traffic volumes and land uses. [Amended 6-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 189]
(a) Minor arterial, Class One:
[1] Minimum right-of-way: 80 feet (right-of-way will widen
approaching intersections to provide turning lanes).
[2] Minimum cartway: 52 feet; curb required.
[3] Parking: not permitted.
[4] Sidewalks: four feet.
(b) Minor arterial, Class Two:
[1] Minimum right-of-way: 60 feet (right-of-way widens
approaching intersections to provide turning lanes).
[2] Minimum cartway: 32 feet; curb required.
[3] Parking: not permitted.
[4] Sidewalks: four feet.
(4) Major collector. A major collector collects traffic from local streets
and channels it to arterials. They carry moderate traffic volumes at
moderate speeds and connect roads to a higher classification.
Major collectors also connect Limerick and nearby communities,
such as the Boroughs of Schwenksville and Royersford. [Amended
6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 189]
§ 155-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-15
122:369
(a) Minimum right-of-way: 60 feet (right-of-way widens
approaching intersections to provide turning lanes).
(b) Minimum cartway: 32 feet; curb required.
(c) Parking: not permitted.
(d) Sidewalks: four feet.
(5) Minor collector. A minor collector connects major residential and
commercial developments within the Township. They are spaced at
regular intervals to collect traffic from local roads. [Amended
6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 189]
(a) Minimum right-of-way: 50 feet (right-of-way widens
approaching intersections to provide turning lanes).
(b) Minimum cartway: 30 feet; curb required.
(c) Parking: not permitted.
(d) Sidewalks: four feet.
(6) Local road. A local road carries predominantly local traffic and
provides access to most properties in the Township by linking
residential streets to the collector road network. [Amended
6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 189]
(a) Minimum right-of-way: 50 feet (right-of-way widens
approaching intersections to provide turning lanes as
required).
(b) Minimum cartway: 30 feet; curb required.
(c) Parking: not permitted.
(d) Sidewalks: four feet.
(7) Residential street. A residential street provides individual access to
lots in residential subdivisions and connects these with streets of
higher classifications. Street standards vary depending on whether
on-street parking is permitted. [Amended 6-17-1997 by Ord. No.
189]
§ 155-15 LIMERICK CODE § 155-15
122:370
Specification
No On-Street
Parking
Parking One
Side
Parking Both
Sides
Minimum
right-of-way
50 feet (right-ofway
widens
approaching
intersections to
provide turning
lanes as
required)
52 feet (rightof-
way widens
approaching
intersections to
provide turning
lanes as
required)
58 feet (right-ofway
widens
approaching
intersection to
provide turning
lanes as
required)
Minimum
cartway
30 feet 32 feet 38 feet
Parking Not permitted 1 side only Both sides
Sidewalks 4 feet 4 feet 4 feet
(8) Nonresidential street. Nonresidential streets provide individual
access to one or more lots in office or industrial parks or other
nonresidential subdivisions.
(a) Minimum right-of-way: 50 feet (right-of-way widens
approaching intersections to provide turning lanes as
required).
(b) Minimum cartway: 30 feet; curb required.
(c) Parking: not permitted.
(d) Sidewalks: four feet.
C. Curbs and shoulders. [Amended 6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 189]
(1) Curbing shall be required for the purposes of drainage, safety and
delineation and protection of pavement edge.
(2) A waiver may be requested to use shoulders when it can be shown
that:
(a) Shoulders are required by state regulations.
(b) Soils or topography make the use of shoulders and/or drainage
swales preferable.
(c) It is appropriate in this part of the Township to preserve rural
character by using shoulders and/or drainage swales instead of
curbs.
(3) Shoulder requirements shall vary according to road classification
as set forth in Table 3.138
(4) Curbing and shoulders shall be constructed according to
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or
138. Editor's Note: Table 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 155-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-15
122:371
the Township Improvements Construction Manual, whichever
governs.
D. Sidewalks. [Amended 6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 189]
(1) Sidewalks and/or graded areas shall be required along all roads, in
accordance with Table 3.139 Table 3 at the end of this chapter shall
serve as a general guide regarding where sidewalks should be
provided. However, the Board of Supervisors shall have the
authority to require sidewalks along any street where they are
deemed to be needed, regardless of the provisions of Table 3.
[Amended 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 197]
(a) Sidewalks shall be required, as deemed appropriate by the
Board of Supervisor, to connect commercial centers, schools
and parks towards residential areas, among other situations.
The Board of Supervisors may require the construction of a
pedestrian pathway into and through a commercial
development to provide connections with residential areas,
regardless of whether a street is involved.
(b) Where public pedestrian access is provided outside of the
public right-of-way, the Township may require the
establishment of a pedestrian easement.
(c) The Board of Supervisors may approve alternative materials
and placements of pedestrian pathways in place of traditional
concrete sidewalks within the street right-of-way. This may
include, but is not limited to, pathways of asphalt that also
allow use by bicycles. Surfaces that are not wheelchair
accessible shall only be approved in unusual circumstances,
such as where necessary to protect important natural areas.
(d) Where a paved path or sidewalk is not required, the Township
may require the improvement of a graded grass area along the
cartway that is suitable for and required to be kept clear for
pedestrian use.
(2) In conventional developments, sidewalks shall be placed in the
right-of-way, parallel to the street. Exceptions may be made to
preserve topographic or natural features or to provide visual
interest or if the applicant shows that an alternative pedestrian
system provides safe and convenient circulation.
(3) In planned developments, sidewalks may be located away from the
road system to link groups of dwelling units with other dwelling
units, the street, parking areas, recreation areas and other activity
centers. Sidewalks may also be required parallel to the street for
safety reasons.
139. Editor's Note: Table 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 155-15 LIMERICK CODE § 155-15
122:372
(4) Pedestrian easements 10 feet in width may be required through the
center of blocks more than 600 feet long to provide circulation or
access to schools, playgrounds, shopping or other community
facilities.
(5) Sidewalks shall be constructed according to the Township
Improvements Construction Manual.
(6) The sidewalk widths listed in this article shall be considered
minimums. The Board of Supervisors may require greater widths in
areas subject to heavy pedestrian traffic, i.e., close to schools and
parks.
E. Special purpose streets.
(1) Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets are streets that terminate in a
vehicular turnaround, either permanent or temporary. Temporary
culs-de-sac are those constructed to an abutting property line with
the intention that such road will be extended onto the adjoining
property at a future date as a logical step in the circulation network
of the area. Temporary culs-de-sac shall be required by the Board of
Supervisors when conditions so warrant. Permanent culs-de-sac
provide access only to abutting lots within the tract being
subdivided or developed. Both temporary and permanent culs-desac:
(a) Shall be constructed to the specifications for residential streets
herein.
(b) Shall have a turnaround with a minimum right-of-way radius of
60 feet (at which frontage requirements shall be measured)
and an outer paving radius of 40 feet. In the case of a
temporary cul-de-sac, the cul-de-sac area outside of the
required street right-of-way width shall be provided as an
easement to the Township and shall be returned to the abutting
property owners at such time as the street is extended.
Frontage requirements for lots fronting a temporary cul-de-sac
shall be based upon the frontage of the extended street.
(c) Will not be approved when a through street is practicable.
(d) Shall not exceed 1,200 feet in length or serve more than 12
units, unless special conditions warrant approval by the
Supervisors.
(2) Alleys. Alleys are public or private streets which provide secondary
rear access to lots with narrow widths (for example in village
districts) in order to avoid excessive numbers of curb cuts on
residential streets.
§ 155-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-15
122:373
(a) Frontage on an alley shall not be construed as satisfying the
requirements of this chapter or Chapter 184, Zoning,
regarding frontage on an approved street.
(b) No parking shall be provided for or permitted within the rightof-
way of the alley.
(c) Street systems of which alleys are a part shall be designed not
to encourage through traffic on alleyways.
(d) Alleys may only intersect minor collectors, local roads or
subdivision streets. All alleys must intersect with streets at
both ends unless the alley terminates in a common parking lot
or other service area properly designed for maneuvering
service vehicles.
(e) Alley length from intersection to intersection may not exceed
600 feet.
(f) Minimum right-of-way width: 16 feet.
(g) Minimum cartway width: 12 feet.
(h) All alleys shall be furnished with some type of rigid edge
stabilization, such as dish curbs, flush curbs and precast
pavers, to prevent pavement edge unraveling.
(i) Building setback. Garages or parking stalls shall be set back a
minimum of 15 feet from the center line of any alley.
F. Street intersections.
(1) Number of intersections. No more than two streets shall cross at
the same point. Four-way intersections are to be avoided when
three-way or T-intersection can be utilized. When existing streets
intersect at odd angles or have more than four approaches, the
subdivider, developer or builder shall be required to make
corrective changes.
(2) Minimum angle of intersections. Right-angle intersections shall be
used whenever practicable, especially when local streets empty
into arterial or collector streets. No intersection angle may be less
than 75°, measured at the center line.
(3) Center lines. Where center lines of local streets are located on
opposite sides of an arterial or collector street within 100 feet of
each other, they shall be made to coincide by curving one of the
local streets.
(4) Intersection spacing. Street intersections are to be spaced
minimum distances apart as specified below, whether on the same
or opposite sides of the street. The minimum distance between
§ 155-15 LIMERICK CODE § 155-15
122:374
intersections shall be measured along the higher classification
street between the center lines of the intersecting streets:
(a) Principal arterial: 1,200 feet.
(b) Minor arterial: 600 feet.
(c) Major collector: 600 feet.
(d) Minor collector: 400 feet.
(e) Local streets: 200 feet.
(5) Sight triangles.
(a) Proper sight lines as provided by current PennDOT regulations
shall be maintained at all street intersections. Clear-sight
triangles shall be maintained along all approaches to
intersections and shall be measured along street center lines
from their point of intersection, as listed below:
[1] Arterial streets: 125 feet.
[2] Collector streets: 100 feet.
[3] Local streets: 75 feet.
(b) Where streets of different classifications intersect, the
dimension for the higher classification street shall be used.
(6) Obstructions within sight triangles. Within the sight triangle area,
no building, tree, hedge or other obstruction to visibility shall be
permitted, from curb to height to a minimum height of 12 feet, with
the following exceptions:
(a) One private sign post, provided that the post does not exceed
one foot square or diameter and the sign itself is above the
minimum height limit.
(b) One shade tree, provided that as the tree grows, the lower
branches are kept pruned to the minimum height limit.
(c) Existing shade trees, provided that the lower branches are
kept pruned up to the minimum height limit and the
arrangement of trees does not impede adequate visibility.
(7) Radii of pavement and right-of-way at intersections. The
appropriate radii for intersecting streets will depend upon many
factors: traffic volume, traffic speeds, the angle of the intersection,
the width and the number of lanes on the intersecting streets and
the type of traffic to be accommodated. The following table
presents minimum standards for ninety-degree intersections. The
Board of Supervisors may require greater radii when warranted by
any of the above factors. See A Policy on Geometric Design of
§ 155-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-15
122:375
Highways and Streets by the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) for more detailed
specifications. Road intersections shall be rounded with tangential
arcs at pavement edges (curblines) and right-of-way lines as listed
below. Where two streets of different right-of-way widths intersect,
the radii of curvature for the widest street shall apply.
Type of Street
Minimum Radius of
Arc at Intersection
of Pavement Edge
or Curbline
(feet)
Minimum Radius of
Arc at Intersection
of Right-of-Way Line
(feet)
Principal Arterial 40 20
Minor Arterial 30 20
Collector 25 15
Local, Residential 25 15
Nonresidential * *
*NOTE: See AASHTO standards.
G. Street alignment. Sight distance, horizontal and vertical curvature and
maximum and minimum street grades shall be provided on all streets in
compliance with the standards contained in this section.
(1) Sight distance. Proper sight distance shall be provided with respect
to both horizontal and vertical alignments. Sight distances shall be
determined in accordance with PennDOT's Title 67, Transportation
Publication, Chapter 441, as appendixed in the Township
Improvements Construction Manual.
(2) Horizontal curvature. Horizontal curves shall be used at all
changes in direction in excess of 2° and shall consider distance,
change in grade and alignment. The following standards shall be
used:
(a) Minimum curve radius at center line:
[1] Arterial streets: 300 feet.
[2] Collector and local streets: 200 feet.
[3] Residential streets:* 150 feet.
*NOTE: This requirement may be waived for residential
streets in cases where small lot sizes or other constraints
make a rectilinear street layout preferable. In these
cases, sharper curves may be used if the street does not
exceed 200 feet in length. A stop sign may be required
in cases where the street turns at a right angle
[approximately 90°].
§ 155-15 LIMERICK CODE § 155-15
122:376
(b) Curves and tangents.
[1] Long radius curves shall be used rather than a series of
shorter radius curves connected by tangents.
[2] On all arterial and collector streets, reverse curves shall
be separated by a tangent of at least 100 feet in length.
[3] Curve-tangent relationships shall follow accepted
engineering guidelines for safety and efficiency.
(c) Super-elevation. Arterial and collector streets shall be superelevated
in compliance with accepted engineering standards
when a curve radius of less than 600 feet is used.
(d) Approaches to intersections. Approaches to intersections shall
follow a straight course for a minimum of 50 feet for local
streets. All other streets shall follow a straight course for a
minimum of 100 feet.
(3) Vertical curvature. Vertical curves shall be used at changes in
grade of more than 1%, in compliance with the following
requirements:
(a) Curve length shall approximate the following for each 1%
change:
[1] Arterial streets: 250 feet or as required by PennDOT.
[2] Collector streets: 50 feet.
[3] Local streets: 25 feet.
(b) The high point or low point on a vertical curve shall be clearly
identified on plans and profiles, as appropriate.
(c) Over summits or in sumps, vertical curves shall not produce
excessive flatness in grade.
(4) Street grades. All streets shall be graded as shown on the street
profile and cross-section plans submitted and approved with the
preliminary plan for the subdivision or land development. Street
grades shall comply with the following:
(a) Minimum grade for all streets shall be 1%.
(b) Maximum grades for streets shall be:
[1] Arterial and collector streets: 7% or as required by
PennDOT.
[2] Local streets: 10% for distances of not more than 500 feet.
(c) Street grades in excess of 5% shall be avoided wherever
possible.
§ 155-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-15
122:377
(d) Street grades shall be measured along the center line.
(e) Curve-grade combinations shall follow accepted engineering
guidelines for safety and efficiency. For example, minimum
radius horizontal curves will not be permitted in combination
with maximum grades.
(f) At all approaches to intersections, street grades shall not
exceed 3% for a minimum distance of 50 feet from intersecting
curb or shoulder lines.
H. Access management along major streets. [Added 11-4-1998 by Ord.
No. 197]
(1) This Subsection H applies to subdivisions and land developments
that will have motor vehicle access onto major streets. For the
purposes of this Subsection H, "major streets" shall be the
following:
(a) Ridge Pike.
(b) Swamp Pike.
(c) Lewis Road.
(d) Township Line Road. [Amended 5-1-2001 by Ord. No. 226]
(e) Linfield-Trappe Road/Main Street (in Linfield) south of Lewis
Road.
(f) Tenth Avenue. [Added 5-1-2001 by Ord. No. 226]
(g) Buckwalter Road. [Added 5-1-2001 by Ord. No. 226]
(h) Lightcap Road and any future extension of Lightcap Road.
[Added 5-1-2001 by Ord. No. 226]
(i) Evergreen Road. [Added 5-1-2001 by Ord. No. 226]
(2) This Subsection H is to be administered by the Board of
Supervisors, after considering any recommendations provided by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the Town
Engineer, the Planning Commission and any professional traffic
studies.
(3) This Subsection H shall not apply where a different access system
is specifically required along a state road, in writing, by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and there is evidence
that regulation on the matter by Limerick Township is specifically
preempted.
(4) The number of driveway access points entering and exiting existing
major roads shall be held to an absolute minimum, as determined
by the Board of Supervisors, on each lot and each tract of land. The
§ 155-15 LIMERICK CODE § 155-15
122:378
§ 155-16. Driveways and parking areas. [Amended 12-3-1985 by
Ord. No. 672; 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109; 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130;
12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 141]
distances between the center lines of the entrances of subdivisions
and land developments and any existing street intersections shall
be maximized.
(5) Each lot shall provide for fully coordinated traffic access with
adjacent lots zoned for compatible development, in a manner that
minimizes the number of access points onto major roads and
minimizes the need for customers to enter and exit arterial streets
when visiting more than one use. To the maximum extent feasible,
as determined by the Board of Supervisors, each commercial lot
shall include a driveway connection with adjacent commercial lots.
An access easement shall be provided for traffic from the adjacent
use to cross the lot to reach a driveway or intersection.
(a) Where the adjacent property owner will not cooperate to
permit the connection, provisions for the cross-connection may
still be required by the Board of Supervisors in case the
adjacent property is changed in use or expanded in the future.
(b) This requirement shall not apply where the lots already share a
coordinated interior access system or where the applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that such
connection is not feasible.
(6) All entrances and exits shall be designed and constructed by the
applicant in accordance with accepted traffic engineering
principles, including appropriate widening, turning lanes,
acceleration/deceleration areas and traffic control devices, in order
to minimize interference with other traffic on the street and
provide safe and efficient access to the site.
(7) The Board of Supervisors shall require one or more of the following
methods of layout and site design if the Board determines such
method will be reasonable, feasible and necessary to control
increased traffic congestion and improve traffic safety.
(a) The use of a frontage service road, a new street within the
interior of a subdivision or a street to the rear of lots to
minimize the number of or avoid driveways entering and
exiting onto a major street.
(b) The placement of traffic access onto a side street.
(c) The use of shared driveways among adjacent uses and lots.
(d) The restriction of vehicle access involving left-hand turns from
a use onto a major street.
§ 155-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-16
122:379
A. Driveways. The requirements for driveways shall be the standards of
PennDOT regarding access to and occupancy of highways by driveways
and local roads (Pennsylvania Code, Title 67, Chapter 441, as
amended). (Refer to Township Improvements Construction Manual.)
Driveway access to state highways shall be subject to the permit
process of that department. All driveways shall be subject to the
standards, requirements and processing of this section.
(1) Location.
(a) Driveways shall be located so as to provide reasonable sight
distance at intersections with streets.
(b) Driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in a
manner which will not cause interference to the traveling
public, a hazard to the free movement of normal highway
traffic or areas of traffic congestion.
(c) Distance from street intersection. Driveways shall be located
as far from street intersections as is reasonably possible but
not less than the following:
[1] Individual residential lots: 50 feet.
[2] Multifamily residential and nonresidential lots: 100 feet.
(d) Distance from property line. Driveways shall be located a
minimum of five feet from side or rear property lines.
(2) Number of driveways.
(a) All residential properties shall be limited to one curb cut. The
following standards shall apply to nonresidential properties:
[1] Properties with frontages of 100 feet or less shall be
limited to one curb cut.
[2] Not more than two curb cuts may be permitted for any
single property, tract or lot, for each street frontage. More
than two curb cuts per frontage may be permitted only
when anticipated traffic volumes warrant more than two
and when supported by a traffic study prepared by a
qualified traffic engineer.
(3) Access to arterial and collector streets.
(a) No more than five lots may have direct access to an arterial or
collector street. All the road frontage shall be considered a
part of this requirement for lands held in single ownership.
(b) Driveway access shall be at least 200 feet apart wherever
possible. Driveways shall be located to provide the greatest
possible sight distance in accordance with PennDOT
standards.
§ 155-16 LIMERICK CODE § 155-16
122:380
(4) Choice of streets. When streets of different classes are involved,
the driveway shall provide access to the street of lesser
classification.
B. Parking areas.
(1) Automobile parking facilities shall be provided off street in
accordance with requirements of Chapter 184, Zoning, of the Code
of the Township of Limerick and this chapter.
(2) At no time shall angle or perpendicular parking along the curbs of
local, public or private access roads or streets be permitted. All
parking lots and bays allowing any parking other than parallel shall
be physically separated from the cartway by a minimum of seven
feet and confined to barrier curbing.
(3) No less than 20 feet of open space shall be provided between the
curbline of any parking area and the outside wall of the dwelling
unit in residential areas.
(4) Parking may be permitted within side and/or rear yards when the
side and/or rear yards abut a district zoned industrial and/or
commercial; however, no parking shall be permitted within five feet
of a side or rear property line unless formal arrangements,
satisfactory to the Township, have been made for the establishment
of common parking facilities.
(5) In commercial and industrial districts, provisions for common
parking facilities are hereby encouraged in recognition of their
increased flexibility and efficiency. Subject to formal arrangements
between the proposed users of the common parking facilities,
satisfactory to the Township, the Zoning Hearing Board may reduce
the aggregate amount of required parking space upon
determination that greater efficiency is effected by joint use of the
common parking area. When common parking facilities are
approved, side and/or rear yard parking requirements may be
waived in order to establish unified and continuous parking areas.
In such cases, access drives and sidewalks shall be so aligned as to
maximize parking efficiency and minimize traffic congestion.
Entrances and exits must have clear site lines and good visibility so
that, both going in and coming out, drivers can see and cars can be
seen.
(6) Each parking stall shall include a rectangle with a width of 9.5 feet
and a length of 18 feet, unless a larger size is required by
Subsection B(9) below. [Amended 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 197]
(7) All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient
backup area for the end stalls.
(8) No less than a five-foot radius of curvature shall be permitted for all
curblines in all parking areas.
§ 155-16 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-16
122:381
(9) Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than those listed in the
following table: [Amended 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 197]
Parking Stall
(feet)
Aisle Width
(feet)
Angle of
Parking
(degrees) Depth Width One-Way Two-Way
90 18 9.5 25 25
60 21 10 18 20
45 19 10 15 18
(10) Pavement markings, curbing and landscaped parking islands shall
be placed within parking areas to force vehicles to use designated
routes. To the maximum extent feasible, the majority of traffic shall
be directed to an outer loop which then filters traffic to parking
aisles, as opposed to directing traffic to the front entrances of
businesses, in order to reduce traffic conflicts with major
pedestrian crossings. [Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 197]
C. Parking lot landscaping.
(1) Parking lots should be effectively landscaped with trees and shrubs
to reduce the visual impact of glare, headlights and parking lot
lights, to delineate driving lanes and to define rows of parking.
Furthermore, parking lots should be adequately shaded in order to
reduce the amount of reflected heat.
(2) All parking lots with 10 or more stalls shall be landscaped
according to the following regulations:
(a) One planting island shall be provided for every 10 parking
stalls. There shall be no more than 10 contiguous parking stalls
in a row without a planting island.
(b) The ends of all parking rows shall be divided from drives by
planting islands.
(c) In residential developments, large parking lots shall be divided
into smaller parking areas of no more than 40 stalls by planting
strips.
(d) In nonresidential developments, large parking lots shall be
divided into smaller parking areas of no more than 100 stalls
by planting strips.
(e) Planting islands shall be a minimum of nine by 18 feet in area,
underlain by soil, not base course material, mounded at no
more than a four-to-one slope nor less than a twelve-to-one
slope and shall be protected by curbing or bollards. Each
§ 155-16 LIMERICK CODE § 155-16
122:382
§ 155-17. Streetlighting. [Added 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 250143]
Sstreetlighting, where required by this section or otherwise required by the
Board of Supervisors or proposed by an applicant, shall have intensities and
uniformities in accordance with the current recommended practices of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) as contained
in the IESNA Lighting Handbook and applicable Recommended Practices,
except as may otherwise be required by the Board of Supervisors. When
streetlighting is to be installed by a Developer to be dedicated to the
Township, the Developer shall be responsible for all costs involved prior
to acceptance of the dedication of such improvements by the Board of
Supervisors.
planting island shall contain one shade tree plus shrubs and/or
ground cover to cover the entire area. (See Figure 1.140)
(f) All planting strips shall be a minimum of eight feet wide. Strips
shall run the length of the parking row (see Figure 1141),
underlain by soil, mounded at no more than a four-to-one slope
nor less than a twelve-to-one slope and shall be protected by
curbs, wheel stops or bollards. Planting strips shall contain
plantings of street-type shade trees at intervals of 30 to 40 feet,
plus shrubs and ground cover to cover the entire area.
(g) The placement of light standards shall be coordinated with the
landscape design to avoid a conflict with the operation of light
fixtures.
(h) Plant materials shall comply with the requirements of
§ 155-27.3 herein. The use of plantings selected from the List
of Recommended Plant Material142 is encouraged.
(3) All parking lots shall be screened from public roads and from
adjacent properties as required in § 155-27.1 herein.
A. Plan submission. All proposed development plans shall, at the time of
preliminary plan submission, include lighting plans indicating the
proposed placement of all lighting fixtures. Such plans shall include all
necessary information relating to the design, placement and
engineering details of the fixtures as shall be required by the
Supervisors.
B. Fixture location/placement in residential areas. In all residential
developments, streetlighting fixtures shall be required at the following
locations:
140. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
141. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
142. Editor's Note: The List of Recommended Plant Material is included at the end of this
chapter.
143. Editor's Note: Former § 155-17, Sidewalks and curbs, was repealed 12-17-1991 by Ord. No.
141. See Ch. 153, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. II.
§ 155-16 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-17
122:383
§ 155-17.1. Outdoor lighting other than streetlighting. [Added
5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 250]
(1) All entrance roads entering the proposed development and
intersecting any public road.
(2) All intersections involving proposed public roads within the
proposed development.
(3) All proposed public roads within the proposed development with
said road having a minimum three-hundred-foot horizontal curve.
In this case, the fixture shall be placed on the apex of the horizontal
curve or as required by the Township Engineer.
(4) In multifamily unit parking areas, one fixture for every 10
contiguous parking spaces.
(5) All cul-de-sac bulb radii.
(6) All terminal ends of center median islands having concrete
structure curbing, tree and/or other fixed objects not having a
breakaway design for speeds of 25 miles per hour or greater.
(7) All defined pedestrian crossings located within the development or
along existing roads abutting the development when said crossings
are located in an area other than a lighted intersection.
(8) All signalized intersections abutting the proposed development.
(9) Any new traffic signal installation required by the development.
C. Fixture location/placement in nonresidential areas. In all nonresidential
developments, streetlighting fixtures shall be required at the following
locations:
(1) All requirements listed in Subsection B above.
(2) All nonpublic roads which are designed as major thoroughfares
through the proposed development. Such roads shall be considered
a public road for the purpose of this section.
D. Prohibitions. No streetlight shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and
maintained in any way which creates a disabling glare hazard to
drivers, pedestrians or neighboring properties. No street light be
located so as to interfere with the function of any traffic control signal.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to require and set minimum
standards for outdoor lighting to:
(1) Provide for and control lighting in outdoor public places where
safety and security are concerns.
(2) Protect drivers and pedestrians from the glare of nonvehicular light
sources.
§ 155-17 LIMERICK CODE § 155-17.1
122:384
(3) Protect neighbors and the night sky from nuisance glare and light
trespass from improperly selected or poorly placed, aimed, applied,
maintained or shielded light sources.
(4) Promote energy-efficient lighting design and operation.
B. Applicability. Outdoor lighting shall be required for safety and personal
security in areas of public assembly and traverse, including but not
limited to single-family and multifamily dwelling unit developments,
commercial, industrial, recreational and institutional uses, as well as
sign, billboard, architectural and landscape lighting applications. The
Board of Supervisors may require lighting to be incorporated for other
uses or locations, as it deems necessary. The glare-control
requirements herein shall apply to lighting in all uses, applications and
locations.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FOOTCANDLE — Unit of light intensity stated in lumens per square
foot and measurable with an illuminance meter (light meter).
FULL CUTOFF — Attribute of a lighting fixture from which no light is
emitted at or above a horizontal plane drawn through the bottom of
the fixture and no more than 10% of the lamp's intensity is emitted at
or above an angle 10° below that horizontal plane, at all lateral angles
around the fixture.
GLARE — Excessive brightness in the field of view that causes loss
in visual performance or annoyance, to jeopardize health, safety or
welfare.
ILLUMINANCE — Quantity of light, measure in footcandles.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light emitted by a lighting fixture or installation,
which is cast beyond the boundaries of the property on which the
lighting installation is sited.
LUMEN — The light-output rating of a lamp (light bulb), as used in the
context of this section.
D. Illumination levels. When required by this section or otherwise by the
Board of Supervisors, lighting shall have intensities and uniformities in
accordance with the current recommended practices of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) as
contained in the IESNA lighting Handbook and with applicable
Recommended Practices, except as may otherwise be required by the
Board of Supervisors.
E. Fixture design.
(1) Fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the lighting
application and aesthetically acceptable.
§ 155-17.1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-17.1
122:385
§ 155-18. Blocks.
(2) For the lighting of predominantly horizontal surfaces such as
roadways, vehicular and pedestrian passage areas, merchandising
and storage areas, automotive fuel-dispensing facilities,
automotive sales areas, loading docks, recreation areas, building
entrances, sidewalks, parking areas, etc., fixtures shall be aimed
straight down and shall meet IESNA full-cutoff or cutoff criteria.
(3) For the lighting of nonhorizontal surfaces such as signs, billboards,
facades, landscaping, displays, flags, etc., the use of lighting
fixtures that are installed and aimed so as to project their output
into the windows of neighboring residences, adjacent uses, past the
object being illuminated, skyward or onto a public roadway shall
not be permitted.
(4) Fixtures with an aggregate wattage per-fixture that does not
exceed the output of a standard 60-watt incandescent lamp, i.e.,
1,000 lumens, are exempt from the requirements of this
subsection.
F. (Reserved)144
G. Installation.
(1) Outdoor lighting fixtures attached to a building may not exceed the
height of the building to which they are attached. Freestanding
lighting fixtures shall not exceed 10 feet in height for residential
uses or 20 feet in height for nonresidential uses.
(2) Electrical feeds for lighting poles shall be run underground and not
overhead.
(3) Lighting fixtures shall be maintained so as to always meet the
requirements of this section.
H. Plan submission. All proposed development plans shall, at the time of
preliminary plan submission, include lighting plans indicating the
proposed placement of all lighting fixtures. Such plans shall include all
necessary information relating to the design, placement and
engineering details of the fixtures as shall be required by the
Supervisors.
A. Length. In general, all blocks in a subdivision shall have a minimum
length of 500 feet and a maximum length of 1,200 feet unless special
conditions warrant a variance.
B. Width.
144. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, Control of nuisance and disabling glare, was repealed
11-15-2011 by Ord. No. 326. See now § 184-62D.
§ 155-17.1 LIMERICK CODE § 155-18
122:386
§ 155-19. Lots.
(1) Whenever practicable, blocks shall be of such width as to provide
two tiers of lots of the minimum size permitted under the
applicable zoning classification, except in the case of lots along a
major thoroughfare where the lots front on an interior street.
(2) Through lots. Double-frontage lots are to be avoided and generally
will not be permitted except where reversed frontage is desired
away from a major thoroughfare to a street of lesser traffic volume.
C. Crosswalks. Crosswalks not less than 10 feet wide and with concrete
paving not less than four feet wide may be required where necessary to
provide access to schools, churches, parks and commercial areas. They
shall be maintained by the abutting property owners in the same
manner as sidewalks on public streets.
D. Nonresidential blocks. Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may
vary from the elements of design contained in this section if the nature
of the use requires other treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for
employees and customers may be required, along with safe and
convenient limited access to the street system. Space for off-street
loading may also be required with similar access. Space for the
extension of streets, railroad access rights-of-way, and utilities shall be
provided. The amount of parking space shall be as required by the
Zoning Ordinance.145
A. Subdivisions or land developments with existing structures on land. No
subdivision of land will be approved with the property line extending
through any portion of any existing structure.
(1) If structure(s) is to remain.
(a) In residential zoning districts of the Township, the lot size and
the lot dimensions of the newly created lot containing the
structure(s) must be in scale with the height and bulk of the
existing structure, even if this requires a lot area and/or
dimensions exceeding the minimum zoning requirement for
that district. Structures proposed on the vacant portions of
lands being subdivided shall conform, to the extent possible, to
the height, bulk, building material and architectural character
of the existing structures in the immediate vicinity, and the
subdivision plan shall show building plans in suitable detail.
(b) In other zoning districts of the Township (especially
commercial and industrial districts), the subdivision of the land
must provide adequate service and parking facilities, etc., in
keeping with the minimum requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance for each lot and cumulatively for all lots in the
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Zoning.
§ 155-18 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-19
122:387
subdivision. No subdivision will be approved in such instances
if the servicing and/or parking facilities, etc., appurtenant to
the existing structure are deemed inadequate or would be
considered to become inadequate with the development of
the now-vacant lands. Any new structures contemplated on
the newly subdivided parcels shall be in conformity with the
existing structures in the immediate vicinity, to the extent
possible, in regard to height, bulk, building material and
architectural character, and the subdivision plans shall show
building plans in suitable detail.
(c) Alterations and replacements will be permitted within the
existing structure, but exterior extensions of the building must
conform to the requirements of the Limerick Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended.
(d) Conversions. In cases where the principal building use has not
been as a dwelling, its conversion to a dwelling shall comply
with all of the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and the
Building Code of Limerick Township.146
(2) If existing structure(s) is to be removed. Subdivision approval will
be issued, conditional to the expeditious removal of existing
structures in complete conformity to all other pertinent Township
procedural requirements. The subdivision plans shall furthermore
show in detail the proposed development of each parcel of ground,
and the proposed development shall not provide fewer service and
parking facilities, etc., than now exist. In commercial and industrial
areas, plots of land that have been cleared, as well as the existing
vacant portions of such lands, should be developed in conformity
with the long-range needs of the area to the extent possible, and all
developmental requirements embodied in this chapter and the
Zoning Ordinance shall be adhered to. If roadway realignments and
other similar requirements are deemed necessary in the immediate
vicinity of the plot being subdivided, they shall be corrected as part
of the subdivision design to the utmost of the subdivider's ability.
(3) If existing structure(s) is to be partly replaced or is to be added to.
Demolition plans and/or construction plans must be detailed as
part of the subdivision plan review, and subsequent subdivision
approval will be conditional upon compliance with said proposed
details. Additions to existing structures shall be in harmony with
existing structures in the immediate vicinity, especially in respect
to height, bulk, building materials and architectural
characteristics. In the case of partial demolition of an existing
structure, the remaining structure must be in keeping with the
existing buildings in the immediate vicinity in relation to type, bulk,
building material and architectural characteristics. Renovation
146. Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Zoning, and Ch. 60, Building Construction.
§ 155-19 LIMERICK CODE § 155-19
122:388
work on the remaining portion of a structure following partial
demolition must be completed promptly and expeditiously.
B. Lot grading for subdivisions and land developments.
(1) Blocks and lots. Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper
drainage away from buildings and to prevent the collection of
stormwater in pools. Two-percent-minimum slopes away from
structures shall be required.
(2) Design. All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to carry
surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain or
natural watercourse. Where drainage swales are used to deliver
surface waters away from buildings, they shall not be less than 1%
nor more than 4%. The swales shall be sodded or planted as
required and shall be of such shape and size as to conform with
specifications of the Township Engineer.
(3) Concentration. The concentration of storm drainage in a swale
along the rear or side lot lines is encouraged.
(4) Construction. The subdivider shall construct and/or install such
drainage structures and/or pipes which are necessary to prevent
erosion damage and to satisfactorily carry off such surface waters
to the nearest practical street, storm drain or natural watercourse.
(5) Excavation.147 No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper
in slope than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical (66.6%) except under
one or more of the following conditions:
(a) The excavation is located so that a line having a slope of 1 1/2
horizontal to one vertical and passing through any portion of
the cut face will be entirely inside of the property lines of the
property on which the excavation is made.
(b) The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently
stable to sustain a slope of steeper than 1 1/2 horizontal to one
vertical, and a written statement of a civil engineer, licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, to that effect is submitted to the Township Engineer
and approved by him. The statement shall state that the site
has been inspected and that the deviation from the slope
specified hereinbefore will not result in injury to persons or
damage to property.
(c) A concrete or stone masonry wall, constructed according to
present or future designs of the Township of Limerick, is
provided to support the face of the excavation.
147. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 147, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
§ 155-19 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-19
122:389
(6) Fill. No fill shall be made which creates any exposed surface
steeper in slope than 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical except under
one or more of the following conditions:
(a) The fill is located so that settlement, sliding or erosion will not
result in property damage or create a hazard to adjoining
property, streets, alleys or buildings.
(b) A written statement from a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, certifying that he has inspected the site and that the
proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not
endanger any property or result in property damage is
submitted to and approved by the Township Engineer.
(c) A concrete or stone masonry wall constructed according to
present or future designs of the Township of Limerick is
provided to support the face of the excavation.
(7) Slopes and fences. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a
minimum of three feet from abutting property or right-of-way lines
of streets or alleys in order to permit the normal rounding of the
edge without encroaching on the abutting property.
(8) Cleanup. All lots must be kept free of any debris or nuisances
whatsoever.
(9) Multifamily or nonresidential areas. Roof drainage shall be
conveyed by downspouts and other drainage facilities to a
stormwater detention and control structure to minimize the effects
of increased runoff.
(10) Site grading plan. The Township Engineer may require a grading
plan in conjunction with the plan of a subdivision or land
development in order to ensure compliance with the above
standards.
C. Lot siting, planting and beautification for subdivisions and land
developments. In order to promote the highest environmental quality
possible, the success to which the applicant of a subdivision or land
development plan has preserved existing salient natural features and
land forms intrinsic to the site shall be assessed. Terms of approval of a
plat may depend upon the manner in which the layout or design of the
plan has preserved existing natural features.
(1) Limit of contract. Where the applicant is offering for dedication or
is required by ordinance to establish a reservation of open space or
to preserve an area of scenic or historic importance, a limit of
contract, which will restrict excavation, earthmoving procedures
and other alterations of the landscape, may be required to ensure
preservation and prevent despoliation of the character of the area
or open space.
§ 155-19 LIMERICK CODE § 155-19
122:390
(2) Preservation of existing vegetation. Each mature tree, tree mass or
woodland on the site shall be designated "to remain" or "to be
removed," depending on the following criteria: [Amended
5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
(a) All subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out in such
a manner as to preserve the healthy trees and shrubs on the
site. Special consideration shall be given to major specimen
trees.
(b) A mature tree, tree mass or woodland shall be considered "to
remain" only if it meets all of the following criteria:
[1] The outermost branches of the tree(s) are at least five feet
from any proposed buildings, structures, paving, parking
or utilities (overhead or underground).
[2] The outermost branches of the tree(s) are at least five feet
from any proposed changes in grade or drainage, such as
excavations, mounding or impoundments.
[3] The tree(s) are clear of any proposed sight triangles and
do not, by their location or apparent health, pose any
undue threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
community.
(c) Mature trees, tree masses or woodlands which do not fit the
above criteria shall be designated "to be removed."
(d) It shall be incumbent on the applicant to prove that vegetation
loss is minimized by showing that no alternative layouts are
possible and that no alternative clearing or grading plan would
reduce the loss of mature trees, tree masses and woodlands.
(3) Topsoil preservation. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or
used as spoil. Topsoil must be removed from the areas of
construction and stored separately. Upon a completion of the
construction, the topsoil must be uniformly redistributed on the
site. All areas of the site shall be stabilized by seeding or planting
on the slopes of less than 7% and shall be stabilized by sodding on
slope of 7% or more and planted in ground cover on slopes of 20%,
provided that riprap shall be utilized for banks exceeding 25%.
(4) Protection of existing vegetation. Existing vegetation intended to
remain as part of the landscaping of a subdivision or land
development shall be identified in the field prior to any clearing and
physically protected throughout the construction process. A
temporary physical barrier, such as a snow fence, shall be erected a
minimum of one foot outside the drip line on all sides of individual
trees, tree masses or woodlands prior to major clearing or
construction. The barrier shall be placed to prevent disturbance to
or compaction of soil inside the barrier and shall remain until
§ 155-19 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-19
122:391
§ 155-19.1. Flag lots. [Added 7-17-1990 by Ord. No. 117]
Flag lots, as defined herein, may be permitted by the Board of Supervisors
in the R-1 and R-2 Districts, in accordance with the following standards and
criteria:
construction is complete. The barrier shall be shown on the
landscape plan. [Amended 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130148]
A. Purpose of flag lotting.
(1) To preserve farmland, woodland, scenic views, historic sites or
other environmental amenities by locating building lots away from
existing roads.
(2) To permit the reasonable subdivision of land which is physically
constrained by its irregular shape or limited road frontage.
(3) To provide an alternative to the construction of new streets, where
the number of lots and the volume of traffic generated are
insufficient to warrant a new street.
(4) To provide for future road construction at suitable locations, where
future subdivision of interior lots or tracts is possible.
B. Design standards.
(1) In a subdivision of five or more lots, flag lots may comprise no more
than 15% of the total number of lots, rounded to the nearest whole
number.
(2) A flag lot shall be connected to a public street by an access strip
held in fee simple ownership as part of the flag lot.
(3) The access strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet wide for its entire
length, shall not exceed a vertical grade of 10% and should contain
no horizontal turn greater than 45°, where practical.
(4) The body of the flag lot shall comply with all the minimum
dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located. The area of the access strip shall not be counted toward
the minimum lot area requirement.
(5) Flag lots shall not be used as a means of avoiding the construction
of public roads where warranted.
(6) No more than one tier of flag lots shall be permitted on a tract; in
other words, a flag lot may not be located behind another flag lot.
148. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C(5), Buffer planting
requirements, and C(6), Preserved landscaping, which immediately followed this
subsection.
§ 155-19 LIMERICK CODE § 155-19.1
122:392
§ 155-20. Dedication of land for park, recreation and open space
uses. [Amended 2-2-1993 by Ord. No. 151]
Residential subdivisions and land developments, as well as commercial and
industrial developments, shall set aside land suitable for park, recreation
and open space purposes as a condition precedent to final plan approval,
according to the objectives of the Limerick Township Comprehensive Park,
Recreation and Open Space Plan and the following requirements:
(7) Flag lots shall not be permitted to access the turnaround portion of
a cul-de-sac.
(8) Where the body of the flag lot is capable of being further
subdivided, the access strip shall be a minimum of 50 feet wide and
suitably located for future use as a road, unless further subdivision
of the tract is prohibited by deed restriction or other legal
instrument. The applicant shall submit a tentative sketch plan for
the entire tract, showing how the use of flag lots is a logical first
step in the subdivision of the tract.
(9) The length of the access strip shall be kept to a minimum.
(a) As a guide, the preferred length is approximately equal to the
depth of one lot which complies with the area requirements of
the zoning district where it is located.
(b) No access strip should exceed a length of three times the lot
depth described in Subsection B(9)(a) above, unless the
additional length is necessary to preserve farmland or other
environmental amenities.
(10) The access strip shall intersect the public street at a safe, visible
location.
(11)No more than two access strips may abut each other. Each pair of
abutting access strips must share a common access point and
driveway from the edge of the pavement to a distance of 50 feet
beyond the ultimate right-of-way line of the road.
(12) An access point for a flag lot should be located at least 100 feet
from an access point to a street frontage lot, unless traffic safety
considerations, topography or sensitive environmental features
require another location.
(13) Access points to flag lots, whether single or paired, shall be
separated by at least 300 feet, measured along the right-of-way of
the public road.
A. Amount of land to be dedicated; waiver of requirements.
(1) Amount of land to be dedicated.
§ 155-19.1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-20
122:393
(a) Land shall be dedicated according to the provisions contained
in Chapter 184, Zoning, of the Code of the Township of
Limerick regarding minimum open space requirements, of
which the following may be utilized for parks and/or
recreational purposes:
[1] Single-family detached: 4,000 square feet per unit.
[2] Two-family and single-family attached: 3,000 square feet
per unit.
[3] Multifamily units: 2,000 square feet per unit.
[4] Nonresidential: 1% of gross acreage.
(b) Should the amount of land required to be utilized for parks
and/or recreation purposes exceed the required land for
dedication regarding minimum open space requirements, the
lesser amount shall apply.
(2) Nothing herein shall be construed as limiting the ability of the
Board of Supervisors, based upon the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, to waive all or a portion of the open space
requirement for traditional lotting or lot averaging in the R-1, R-2
and R-3 Zoning Districts.
B. Location and criteria for dedicated land. Land to be dedicated shall:
(1) Comply with the criteria as set forth in § 184-82 of the Code of the
Township of Limerick.
(2) Upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission and at the
discretion of the Board of Supervisors, provide for open space uses
as defined in § 184-82B(1) through (6), or a combination thereof, in
accordance with furthering the objectives of the Limerick Township
Comprehensive Park, Recreation and Open Space Plan. [Amended
6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 188]
C. Acceptance and use of dedicated land.
(1) Any land dedicated to the Township shall be used only for the
purpose of providing park and recreation facilities and for the
preservation of open space and shall be available for use by all
residents of the Township.
(2) When land is dedicated, acceptance by the Township shall be by
means of a signed resolution to which a property description of the
dedicated area shall be attached. A fee simple warranty deed
conveying the property shall be delivered to the Township with title
free and clear of all liens, encumbrances and conditions, except
public utility easements.
§ 155-20 LIMERICK CODE § 155-20
122:394
D. Alternatives to dedication of park or recreational land. Upon the
agreement of both the Township Supervisors and the applicant, the
applicant may pursue the following alternatives:
(1) The applicant may pay a fee in lieu of dedication of park or
recreational land. The amount of the fee shall be established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors and modified from time to
time, based on the estimated market value of land meeting the
standards of Subsection B hereof with regard to suitability for
active recreation.
(2) Improvements to other recreational sites. The applicant may,
through an agreement with the Township, construct recreational
facilities on existing or proposed park land that is readily
accessible to residents of the proposed development, as defined in
Subsection E. The value of such improvements shall be comparable
to the fee in lieu of dedication that would otherwise be applied,
based on the applicant's estimates, as reviewed by the Township
Engineer.
(3) Private reservation of land. The applicant may reserve land in the
amount required under this section. Said land shall meet all the
standards of Subsection B above and shall be managed and
maintained according to the requirements of Subsection B of
§ 184-67, Private ownership and maintenance of common elements,
of Chapter 184, Zoning. [Amended 6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 188]
(4) A combination of land dedication and/or the alternative approaches
listed herein may be pursued, based upon an agreement between
the applicant and the Township Supervisors.
E. Use of Fees. [Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 250]
(1) Fees in lieu of payments shall be used to expand and improve
existing public parks or to acquire land and develop new
recreational facilities reasonably accessible to all residents of the
Township. If practical, fees received for a particular development
shall be expended on sites or facilities closest in proximity to the
residents of that development.
(2) A fee authorized by this section shall, upon its receipt by the
Township, be deposited in an interest-bearing account designated
as the "Limerick Township Parks and Recreation Fund." Interest
earned on such account shall become funds on that account shall
be expended only upon the design, construction or acquisition of
specific recreation facilities approved by the Board of Supervisors.
F. Witness posts. Witness posts shall be used to delineate the land set
aside for park, recreation and open space purposes. [Added
5-10-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
§ 155-20 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-20
122:395
§ 155-21. Reserve strips, rights-of-way and/or easements; deeds.
(1) The witness post shall be readily visible at a height of three feet
and shall be set at the intersection of all lines forming angles in the
boundary of the park, recreation or open space area and at each
corner and at each five-hundred-foot interval, whichever is less.
(2) The applicant shall use witness posts that blend with the
surroundings and pose no safety problems.
(3) Witness posts shall be placed by a registered professional land
surveyor.
(4) With the filing of a request for final approval, the applicant shall
provide as part of its financial security the cost to install the
witness posts.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person, individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity to remove a witness post which has
been set and established as herein required. Any person,
individual, partnership, corporation or other entity which shall
violate the prohibition set forth herein shall be subject to fines and
penalties as set forth in § 155-38B.
A. Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys, subdivisions or
adjacent areas are prohibited.
B. Rights-of-way and/or easements for sanitary utilities, road construction
or maintenance, drainage purposes or public utilities or for any specific
purpose shall be required by the Township Supervisors as needed, the
location and width in each case to be determined by the Supervisors.
(1) Building setback lines shall be measured from the center line of the
abutting street or easement to the proposed building.
(2) Nothing shall be placed, planted, set or put within the area of an
easement. The area shall be kept as a lawn.
(3) The owner of any lot, upon written request of the Township and at
the owner's sole expense, shall remove anything placed, planted,
set or put, with or without knowledge of this regulation, within the
area of any easement.
(4) To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to the
rear or side lot lines.
C. Deeds.
(1) No right-of-way or easement for any purpose whatsoever shall be
recited or described in any deed unless the same has been shown
on the approved plan.
§ 155-20 LIMERICK CODE § 155-21
122:396
§ 155-22. Survey monuments.
(2) Any error found in a deed shall be immediately corrected and
rerecorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery
County at Norristown, Pennsylvania, at the sole expense of the
subdivider.
D. Easements.
(1) Utility. Easements with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be
provided for common utilities and drainage when provided in
unwanted dedicated land. Nothing shall be placed, planted, set or
put within the area of an easement, but the area shall be
maintained as lawn.
(2) Identified floodplain areas. Where an identified floodplain area is
located on a site, there shall be provided an easement conforming
substantially to the lines of such floodplain and of such width as will
be adequate to preserve the identified floodplain area. [Amended
3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 365]
(3) Dedication. Where stormwater or surface water will be gathered
within the subdivision or land development and discharged or
drained in volume over lands within or beyond he boundaries of the
subdivision or land development, the subdivider, developer or
builder shall reserve or obtain easements over all lands affected.
The easements shall be adequate for such discharge of drainage
and for carrying off such water and for the maintenance, repair and
reconstruction of the same, including the right of passage over by
vehicles, machinery and other equipment for such purposes, and
shall be of sufficient width for such passage and work. The
subdivider, developer or builder shall convey, at no cost, the
easements to the Township upon demand.
A. Bench marks. The Township elevations are based on the Township
sanitary sewer system datum and/or United States Geodetic Survey
Map. Location and elevation is available to all engineers and surveyors
upon application to the Township Engineer's office. All contours and
elevations shown on plans must be based on this system.
B. Staking requirements. All lots shall be staked by the registered
engineer or surveyor for the subdivider when final grading has been
completed. This stakeout shall be visible and shall be completed before
an owner or occupant moves into the property. All lot corner markers
shall be permanently located and shall be metal pins at least 5/8 inch in
diameter and at least 24 inches in length, located in the ground to the
existing grade. Corner markers shall be set to a horizontal control of
not less than one part in 10,000.
C. Permanent reference monuments constructed of concrete or stone shall
be set at points determined by the Township Engineer or a designated
§ 155-21 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-22
122:397
§ 155-23. Storm and surface drainage.
All storm drains and drainage facilities, such as gutters, catch basins,
bridges and culverts, shall be installed and the land graded for adequate
drainage as shown on the improvement construction plan and approved
with the preliminary plan.
person, shall be not less than four inches square on top and 24 inches
in depth and shall be set in the ground at the existing grade.
A. When required. Storm drains and appurtenances shall be constructed
by the subdivider to take surface water from the bottom of vertical
grades, the grades of which slope on both sides toward the bottom. To
lead water away from springs and to avoid excessive use of cross
gutters at street intersections and elsewhere, all surface waters shall
be enclosed in a storm drain. Open watercourses will be permitted
where they exist naturally and where, in the opinion of the department
or agencies affected, they will not interfere with public convenience or
safety but in fact will provide comparable or superior drainage
capabilities to piped drainage. When submitting for approval a plan
involving the construction of storm drains, the designer's computations
shall be submitted in duplicate to facilitate the checking of the design.
The following tables and charts shall be used for all computations:
Rational Formula for Amount of Runoff
Q = C x i x A
In which:
Q = The runoff from the district in cubic feet per second.
C = The runoff coefficient.
i = The average intensity of rainfall, in inches per hour, for a period
of maximum rainfall of a given frequency of occurrence and having a
duration equal to the time required for runoff from the farthest point
in the drainage area to the point considered in the design.
A = The drainage area of the district in acres.
Ratio of Runoff to Rainfall for Various Surfaces
Surface Percentage
Roofs and all paved surfaces 90%
All other surfaces except permanent
wooded areas
35%
Permanent wooded areas 20%
§ 155-22 LIMERICK CODE § 155-23
122:398
Velocity
(feet per second)
Type of
Channel*
Manning's "n"
Valve Maximum Minimum
Earth 0.035 5 3.5
Rubble lines 0.020 10 3.5
Poured concrete 0.015 15 3.5
Reinforced
concrete pipe
0.013 15 3.5
Corrugated
metal pipe
0.025 10 3.5
* If other types or materials of construction are proposed to be used
and approved, the Township Engineer will furnish, on request,
appropriate "n" values to be used.
B. Location. Wherever practicable, storm drains shall be located behind
the curb and within the right-of-way of the street. They shall be
protected by a cover of at least 18 inches when necessary, as
determined by the Township Engineer or his designee.
C. Size and grade. Storm drains shall be adequate for the anticipated
runoff when the area is fully developed as permitted by zoning. They
shall have a minimum internal diameter of 12 inches and a minimum
grade of 1/2 of 1% unless otherwise approved by the Township
Engineer. The rainfall frequency shall be 25 years.
D. Change in direction. Special curved storm drain sections may be used
where abrupt changes are made in alignment in lieu of constructing
manholes if the circumstances so warrant.
E. Manholes. Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in horizontal or
vertical alignment and shall be spaced not more than 300 feet apart on
pipe of 24 inches internal diameter or less and not more than 500 feet
apart where pipes of greater size are installed. Inlets may be
substituted for manholes where they will serve a useful purpose.
F. Inlets. Inlet spacing shall be so arranged that 95% of the gutter flow will
be captured. No inlet smaller than the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation's Type 4 Foot Special inlet shall be used on streets with
grades of 4% or less. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's
Type 6 foot special inlets shall be used on streets with grades of more
than 4%. Inlets at street intersections shall be placed on the tangent
and not on the curved portions. The gutter adjacent to and immediately
upgrade from the inlet shall be so warped as to direct the water into the
inlet.
§ 155-23 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-23
122:399
§ 155-24. Bridges and culverts.
G. Castings. Manhole and inlet castings, together with their covers or
gratings, shall conform to such Township standards as may be in effect
at the time the design of the sewer is submitted.
H. Stormwater roof drains. Stormwater roof drains and pipes shall not
discharge water over a sidewalk but shall extend under the sidewalk to
the gutter. Where storm drains are accessible, the roof drain shall be
connected thereto.
I. Unnatural drainage. Wherever construction stops or concentrates the
natural flow of storm drainage in such a way as to affect adjoining
properties, approval of the owners shall be obtained in writing and a
copy filed with the Township Secretary. Approval of plans by the
Township does not authorize or sanction drainage affecting adjoining
properties.
J. Design submission.
(1) All plans showing the proposed storm sewer construction must be
accompanied by a complete design submitted by the registered
engineer or surveyor.
(2) When subdivisions or land developments are submitted to the
Township for approval in sections, a complete storm sewer design
for the proposed subdivision and land development shall be
submitted. The proposed design must include the entire tract and
not just a portion of it.
(3) If construction is contemplated for only a section of a subdivision or
land development, the engineer shall show how he proposes to
handle stormwater from this section in order to prevent damage to
adjacent properties. If temporary construction is required, the
engineer shall include the designs for such structures in the plan
submitted.
(4) In the event that such temporary measures cannot ensure
protection to adjacent properties, then the main outfall line of the
storm sewer shall be included as part of the construction for the
proposed section.
A. Bridges and culverts shall be designed to meet the current
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation standards to support
expected loads and to carry expected traffic flows. They shall be
constructed to the full width of the right-of-way.
B. Approval of the Water and Power Resources Board of the
commonwealth or its successor is required when the area drained
upstream of the point under consideration exceeds an area of 1/2
square mile.
§ 155-23 LIMERICK CODE § 155-25
122:400
§ 155-25. Sewers and sewage disposal.149
A. Sewers. Wherever practicable, sanitary sewers shall be installed and
connected to the Township sanitary sewer system. In areas not
presently served by public sanitary sewers, the Township may require,
according to Act No. 537 passed by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania (1965),150 in addition to installation of temporary
individual on-site sewage disposal facilities, the installation and
capping of sanitary sewer mains and house connections if studies by the
Township Supervisors indicate that extension of public sanitary sewer
trunks or laterals to serve the property subdivided appears probable or
necessary to protect the public health.
(1) When a feasibility analysis, conducted by the Township Engineer,
Local Enforcer and District Sanitarian, has ascertained that
sanitary sewers are practicable, then sanitary sewers, with
connection to each building in a subdivision or land development,
shall be installed at the expense of the applicant or subdivider and
connected to the Township sanitary sewer system.
(2) If outfall sewers are not available in the vicinity but are considered
reasonably necessary in the near future by the Township or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for the area
in question, a system of sewers, together with all necessary laterals
extending from mains to the street right-of-way line, shall be
installed at the expense of the subdivider or applicant. The sewer
lines shall be suitably capped at the limits of the subdivision or land
development, and the laterals shall be capped at the right-of-way
line. The sewer installation shall include the construction within
rights-of-way or easements to bring the sewer to the future
connection with the Township sanitary sewer system.
(3) If sanitary sewers are not to be installed at the time of subdivision
and development, subdividers shall grant, reserve and set aside
easements in the streets and roads for the installation and
maintenance of sewer lines at such time that the subdivision or
land development shall be a part of the Township sanitary sewer
system.
(4) A sewer shall be considered to be planned for extension to a given
area any time after preliminary engineering and related studies
have been completed and the construction of facilities adequate to
serve the area containing the subdivision has been programmed for
completion within a reasonable time.
(5) When capped sewers are provided, on-site disposal facilities shall
also be provided.
149. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 140, Sewers and Sewage Disposal.
150. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 155-25 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-25
122:401
(6) The size, grade, location of manholes and other details of sanitary
sewers shall meet Township Authority specifications.
(7) Laterals. Lateral connections to each lot shown on the final plan
shall be installed to the right-of-way line of the street prior to
paving. Each building shall have a separate connection to the
Township sanitary sewer system.
(8) Work shall be completed in conformance with the current edition of
the Standard Specifications of Limerick Township Municipal
Authority.151
(9) This section shall be applicable to all subdivisions and land
developments, whether utilizing public or private streets, and, in
the case of a subdivision or land development utilizing private
streets, the subdivider or the applicant shall execute a recordable
covenant with the Township and/or Township Authority that, for the
purposes of sewer connections, assessments and rentals, his rights
and liabilities and those of his grantees, heirs, successors and
assigns shall be the same as if his property abutted a public street.
B. On-lot disposal systems. If public sewage disposal is not available and
the sewage treatment is on a project or individual-lot basis, such private
facilities must be installed by the subdivider, developer or builder under
the direct supervision of the local sewage enforcement officer ("local
officer").
(1) Necessary tests and inspection. Such officer shall require
percolation tests and other data from the developer to determine
the size and extent of facilities needed. During installation of such
facilities and before final coverage, the local officer shall make
inspections and checks to assure that all requirements and
specifications have been met. He shall be granted free access to the
development area at all times during this period.
(2) Certificate of approval. After assuring that all requirements and
specifications have been met, the appropriate local officer will then
issue review comments regarding sewage disposal to the Secretary
of the Township as a prerequisite to final plan approval.
(a) The type of on-site sewage disposal system to be installed shall
be determined on the basis of location, topography, available
area, soil characteristics, permeability and groundwater
elevation. The disposal area to be provided shall be determined
by the results of percolation tests, soil classification, depth of
the water table and such other tests as may be deemed
necessary. Proof of the adequacy of such facilities shall be
furnished by the registered professional engineer or other
person whose qualifications are deemed satisfactory by the
Township Supervisors. The reports of such tests shall be
151. Editor's Note: The specifications are on file in the office of the Municipal Authority.
§ 155-25 LIMERICK CODE § 155-25
122:402
§ 155-26. Public utilities.
All water and gas mains and other underground facilities shall be installed
prior to street paving at locations approved by the Township for the full
width of the right-of-way.
required at each disposal area. one percolation tests per lot
shall be required when the subdivider is dividing ground into
lots and is not building immediately.
(b) All percolation tests shall conform to the standards of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(c) The usable area for sewage disposal shall be shown on the
preliminary plan for each lot. The usable area shall be situated
beyond the radius of the water supply well and shall conform to
all rules and regulations or future amendments thereto of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Township of Limerick.
(d) Proximity to wells. In no instance shall a septic tank, tile field
or other effluent disseminating system be located uphill from a
drilled well and shall not be closer to it than those distances
specified by the Sewage Facilities Act.152
A. Underground utilities. All gas and water mains shall be installed
underground. All electric, telephone and communication services, both
main and service lines, shall be provided by underground cables
installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of
the utility or other companies providing such services, except where it
is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township Supervisors that
underground installations herein required are not feasible because of
physical conditions of the land involved. All main underground cables
which are within the right-of-way of a street shall be located as
specified by the Township Supervisors or their designated agent.
B. In order to promote and facilitate the placement underground of utility
distribution lines, a letter of endorsement shall be required from the
suppliers of utility service (including but not limited to electrical,
telephone or cable television) of the developer's choice, wherein the
applicant acknowledges that underground utilities are feasible and
shall be consummated as part of the improvement plan. A statement
relative to the intent of the developer to provide underground utility
service shall be placed and marked on the final plan requisite to final
approval of such plan.
C. The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed as to limit or
interfere with the construction, installation, operation and maintenance
152. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 155-25 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-26
122:403
§ 155-27. Street trees and other landscaping. [Amended 5-7-1991
by Ord. No. 130]
of public utility structures or facilities which may hereafter be located
within public easements or rights-of-way designated for such purposes.
D. Light standards are to be placed as required by any such ordinance
which refers to or regulates said light standards. Power sources for
such standards shall be placed underground as required.
E. Along arterial roads and major highways, all new electrical service shall
be placed underground.
A. Street trees shall be required:
(1) Along all existing streets when they abut or lie within the proposed
subdivision or land development.
(2) Along all proposed streets.
(3) Along access driveways which serve five or more residential
dwelling units.
(4) Along access driveways which serve two or more nonresidential
properties.
(5) Along major walkways through parking lots and between
nonresidential buildings, as recommended by the Township
Planning Commission.
B. The street tree requirement may be waived by the Board of Supervisors
where existing vegetation is considered sufficient or to maintain scenic
views of open space, farmland or natural features.
C. Street trees shall be provided by the subdivider or developer between
the ultimate right-of-way line and the building setback line and shall
meet the following standards:
(1) Trees shall be planted a minimum distance of five feet and a
maximum distance of 15 feet from the ultimate right-of-way line.
However, in certain cases, as follows, the Board of Supervisors may
permit trees to be planted within the ultimate right-of-way:
(a) In areas such as existing villages, where front yards may be
located within the ultimate right-of-way.
(b) In cases where closely spaced rows of street trees may be
desirable and future street widening is considered unlikely.
(2) In nonresidential developments, trees shall be located within a
planting bed within the front yard setback, at least 10 feet in width,
planted in grass or ground cover. In areas where wider sidewalks
are desirable or space is limited, tree planting pits may be used.
§ 155-26 LIMERICK CODE § 155-27
122:404
§ 155-27.1. Buffers and screens. [Added 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
(3) Trees shall be located so as not to interfere with the installation
and maintenance of sidewalks and utilities. Trees shall be planted a
minimum distance of three feet from curbs and sidewalks, 15 feet
from overhead utilities and six feet from underground utilities.
(4) Trees shall be planted at a ratio of one tree per 50 linear feet of
frontage or fraction thereof. Trees shall be distributed along the
entire frontage of the property, although they need not be evenly
spaced.
(5) Trees shall comply with the requirements of § 155-27.3 herein. The
use of tree species selected from the List of Recommended Plant
Materials153 is encouraged.
D. In addition to landscaping required by other sections of Township
ordinances, within nonagricultural, nonresidential subdivisions and
land developments and multifamily developments, a minimum of one
additional tree shall be planted for each 10,000 square feet of added
impervious coverage. [Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 197]
(1) Such trees shall comply with § 155-27.3.
(2) Such trees may be clustered on the most visible portions of the lot.
(3) Such additional trees shall not be required if substantial areas of
existing healthy trees that will serve the same purposes, in the
determination of the Township, will be preserved and protected.
E. Vehicle entrances to new residential developments containing over 10
dwelling units shall provide a minimum ten-foot-wide by one-hundredfoot-
long planted median containing a combination of shade and
ornamental trees at 30 feet on center and hardy groundcover, turf and
perennials. [Added 6-3-2014 by Ord. No. 351]
A. All subdivisions and land developments shall be landscaped with the
following two components:
(1) Property line buffers which act to integrate new development with
its surroundings and to separate incompatible land uses.
(2) Site element screens which act to minimize or eliminate views to
certain site elements located within 100 feet of property lines or
road rights-of-way (either public or private).
B. The following requirements are minimum standards, and additional
plant material, berms or architectural elements may be included in the
plan at the applicant's discretion.
153. Editor's Note: The List of Recommended Plant Material is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 155-27 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-27.1
122:405
C. Property line buffer requirements.
(1) Property line buffers shall be required for the following types of
development and as otherwise specified in Chapter 184, Zoning:
(a) All nonresidential development.
(b) All multifamily and single-family attached development.
(c) All single-family detached cluster development.
(d) All manufactured home parks. [Amended 12-17-1996 by
Ord. No. 184]
(e) All developments in the R-4 District.
(2) All on-site investigation by the applicant shall determine the
adjacent land uses along each property boundary. In the case of
vacant land, the existing zoning district shall be used. These
existing or zoned uses shall be noted on the plan. In the case of
several permitted uses on a site, the most restrictive requirements
shall apply.
(3) The amount and type of plant material required shall be
determined by the intensity of the proposed land use and the
adjacent use or zoning district for vacant land, according to Table
1.154
(4) Buffer area location and dimensions.
(a) A buffer area of not less than 25 feet shall be established along
all property lines, unless otherwise specified in Chapter 184,
Zoning. [Amended 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 197]
(b) The buffer area may be included within the front, side or rear
yard setback.
(c) The buffer area shall be a continuous previous planting bed
consisting of trees and shrubs and grass or ground cover.
(d) Parking is not permitted in the buffer area.
(e) Site element screens are permitted within the buffer area.
(f) Stormwater basins are permitted within the buffer area.
(5) Plant material quantities and types. For every 100 linear feet of
property line to be buffered, the following minimum quantities and
types of plant material shall be required: [Amended 6-3-2014 by
Ord. No. 351]
(a) Low intensity: one canopy tree; two ornamental trees. (In the
low-intensity buffer, one evergreen tree may be substituted for
154. Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 155-27.1 LIMERICK CODE § 155-27.1
122:406
one of the required ornamental trees, at the applicant's
discretion).
(b) Medium intensity: one canopy tree; two ornamental trees; two
evergreen trees; and a combination of 15 shrubs or 500 square
feet of perennial plantings/ornamental grasses. One shrub may
be substituted for every 33 square feet of perennials/grasses
and vice versa.
(c) High intensity: an average of one evergreen tree shall be
placed for each eight feet of length of the area being buffered,
with the trees being staggered so that the center of each tree is
at least 12 feet diagonally away from each other tree to provide
room for future growth. In addition, two ornamental trees and
one canopy tree are required. Fifteen shrubs or 750 square
feet of perennial plantings/ornamental grasses shall be
provided for every 100 feet of property line length to be
buffered. One shrub may be substituted for every 50 square
feet of perennials/grasses and vice versa.
[1] Such landscaping shall be combined with an earth berm
with an average minimum height of five feet and maximum
side slopes of 2.5:1.
[2] The majority of landscaping shall be placed on the outside
slope of the berm. Landscaping may be placed on the top
of the berm if there will be proper moisture at the top of
the berm. Any other required landscaping shall be placed
between the berm and the adjacent street or lot line.
(d) For buffers containing 10 or more plants in a single category of
canopy tree, ornamental tree, evergreen tree, shrub and
perennial/ornamental grasses, no one species shall comprise
more than 40% of the species in that category.
(6) Design criteria.
(a) The required plant material shall be distributed over the entire
length and width of the buffer area.
(b) Buffer plant material may be arranged symmetrically (formal)
or asymmetrically (informal) and may be grouped to form plant
clusters. However, informal groupings which reflect the
natural character of the region are encouraged.
(c) Plants shall be spaced to provide optimum growing conditions.
(d) A variety of tree species is required according to the following:
§ 155-27.1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-27.1
122:407
Number of Trees
Minimum
Number of Tree
Species
Maximum
Percent of Any
One Species
0 to 5 1 100
6 to 15 2 50
16 to 30 3 40
31 to 50 4 30
51 plus 6 20
(e) All plant materials shall meet the requirements of § 155-27.3.
(7) Existing healthy trees, shrubs or woodlands may be substituted for
part or all of the required plant material at the discretion of the
Board of Supervisors. The minimum quantities and/or visual effect
of the existing vegetation shall be equal to or exceed that of the
required buffer.
(8) Existing topographic conditions such as embankments or berms
may be substituted for parts or all of the required property line
buffers at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors. The minimum
visual effect shall be equal to or exceed that of the required buffer
or screen.
(9) Where screening is required to be provided by more than one
section of the Township ordinances, and such provisions differ, then
the requirements that are the most extensive shall apply. [Added
11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 197]
D. Site element screens.
(1) Site element screens shall be required in all proposed land
developments around the site elements, when these are located
partially or fully within 100 feet of the property line or existing road
right-of-way.
(a) Parking lots.
(b) Dumpsters, trash disposal or recycling areas.
(c) Service or loading docks.
(d) Outdoor storage or sales yard.
(e) Vehicle storage or sales area.
(f) Single-family attached rear yards.
(g) Multifamily rear yards.
(h) Active recreation facilities.
(i) Detention basins.
§ 155-27.1 LIMERICK CODE § 155-27.1
122:408
(j) Sewage treatment plants and pump stations.
(2) An on-site investigation by the applicant shall determine the
adjacent land uses along each property boundary. In the case of
vacant land, the existing zoning district shall be used. These
existing or zoned uses shall be noted on the plan. In the case of
several permitted uses on a site, the most restrictive requirements
shall apply.
(3) The type of site element screen shall be determined by the site
element and the adjacent land use or zoning district for vacant
land, according to Table 2.155
(4) Site elements not included in the above list, but with similar visual
impact, shall be screened according to the requirements for the
most similar elements as determined by the Township.
(5) Screen location. The site element screen shall be placed between
the site element and the property line and shall be designed to
block views to the maximum extent possible. The screen shall be
located as close as possible to the site element and shall surround
the element without impeding function or encroaching on sight
triangles.
(6) Screen types and design criteria. The following types of screens
shall be used where specified in Table 2:156 [Amended 11-4-1998
by Ord. No. 197; 6-3-2014 by Ord. No. 351]
(a) Screen Type No. 1: Evergreen or deciduous shrubs. Shrubs
shall be placed three feet on center in a minimum five-footwide
bed surrounding the site element and arranged to provide
a continuous hedge-like screen up to a minimum height of 3 1/
2 feet at maturity. Shrubs may be clipped to form a hedge or
left in natural habit.
(b) Screen Type No. 2: An average of one evergreen tree shall be
placed for each eight feet of length of the area being buffered,
with the trees being staggered so that the center of each tree is
at least 12 feet diagonally away from each other tree to provide
room for future growth. In addition, two ornamental trees and
one canopy tree is required. Fifteen shrubs or 750 square feet
of perennial plantings/ornamental grasses shall be provided
for every 100 feet of property line length to be buffered. One
shrub may be substituted for every 50 square feet of
perennials/grasses and vice versa.
[1] Such landscaping shall be combined with an earth berm
with an average minimum height of five feet and maximum
side slopes of 2:5:1.
155. Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
156. Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 155-27.1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-27.1
122:409
[2] The majority of landscaping shall be placed on the outside
slope of the berm. Landscaping may be placed on the top
of the berm if there will be proper moisture at the top of
the berm. Any other required landscaping shall be placed
between the berm and the adjacent street or lot line.
(c) Screen Type No. 3: Opaque fence. A six-foot opaque fence
surrounding the site element on at least three sides shall be
provided.
(d) Screen Type No. 4: Opaque fence with ornamental trees and
shrubs. A six-foot opaque fence surrounding site element on at
least three sides with additional plantings at the minimum rate
of three shrubs and two ornamental trees or large shrubs for
each 10 linear feet of proposed fence, arranged formally or
informally next to fence, shall be provided.
(e) Screen Type No. 5: Architectural extension of the building. An
eight-foot minimum-height architectural extension of the
building (such as a wing wall), opaque fence or combination
thereof shall enclose the service or loading dock. The extension
and/or opaque fence shall be consistent in building materials
and style with main building.
(f) Screen Type No. 6: Berm with ornamental trees. A two- to
three-foot-height continuous curvilinear berm with ornamental
trees at the rate of one tree for every 20 feet clustered or
arranged informally shall be provided. The maximum slope is
three to one.
(g) Screen Type No. 7: A two- to three-foot-height continuous
curvilinear berm with grass alone shall be provided. The
maximum slope is three to one.
(h) Screen Type No. 8: Evergreen hedge. An evergreen hedge
(such as arborvitae, juniperus virginiana, etc.) with a minimum
height at planting of six feet, three feet on center maximum,
shall be provided.
(i) Screen Type No. 9: Low wall. A wall of brick or stone (not
cement blocks), at least 50% opaque, no less than three and no
more than four feet in height, shall be provided.
(j) Screen Type No. 10: One canopy tree; two ornamental trees for
every 100 feet of property line length being buffered. In Screen
Type No. 10, one evergreen tree may be substituted for one of
the required ornamental trees, at the applicant's discretion.
(k) Screen Type No. 11: One canopy tree; two ornamental trees;
two evergreen trees; 15 shrubs or 500 square feet of
perennials/ornamental grasses for every 100 feet of site
§ 155-27.1 LIMERICK CODE § 155-27.1
122:410
§ 155-27.2. Stormwater basins and associated facilities. [Added
5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
In order to minimize erosion and runoff problems, reduce maintenance and
reduce the visual impact of stormwater basins and associated facilities,
landscaping shall be required in and around all stormwater management
facilities with a minimum surface area of 1,000 square feet. The Township
may recommend that basins may be naturalized or maintained as described
below. The use of plantings selected from the List of Recommended Plant
Materials157 is encouraged.
element length being buffered. One shrub may be substituted
for every 33 square feet of perennials/grasses and vice versa.
(7) Existing healthy trees, shrubs or woodlands may be substituted for
part or all of the required plant material at the discretion of the
Board of Supervisors. The minimum quantities and/or visual effect
of the existing vegetation shall be equal to or exceed that of the
required buffer.
(8) Existing topographic conditions, such as embankments or berms,
may be substituted for part or all of the required property line
buffers at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors. The minimum
visual effect shall be equal to or exceed that of the required buffer
or screen.
(9) The applicant may propose the use of alternative screen types or
changes in plant materials or designs which fulfill the intent of this
chapter, with the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(10) Plant materials shall meet the specifications of § 155-27.3.
(11) For screens containing 10 or more plants in a single category of
canopy tree, ornamental tree, evergreen tree, shrub and perennial/
ornamental grasses, no one species shall comprise more than 40%
of the species in that category. This requirement does not apply to
Screen Type No. 8.
A. Naturalized basins.
(1) Basin floors. Basin floors shall be planted with wildflowers and
nonaggressive grasses, the intent being to create a mixed meadow
of such plantings, where appropriate. Selection of plantings should
be based on whether the area in question is usually well drained or
permanently wet. (See the List of Recommended Plant
Materials.158)
157. Editor's Note: The List of Recommended Plant Material is included at the end of this
chapter.
158. Editor's Note: The List of Recommended Plant Material is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 155-27.1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-27.2
122:411
§ 155-27.3. Plant materials specifications; maintenance; guaranty.
[Added 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
The following standards shall apply to all landscaping materials required
under this chapter:
(2) Wet edges. Wet edges which remain wet all or most of the year shall
be planted with wildflowers and grasses tolerant of wet conditions.
Plants to be located on rims or banks which remain dry most of the
year should be planted with species tolerant of dry soil conditions.
(3) Wooded areas.
(a) Where stormwater management facilities adjoin wooded areas,
trees and shrubs shall be selected and planted so as to blend
with existing surroundings.
(b) Plantings in such areas shall be of sufficient density to
eliminate the need for mowing.
(4) Slopes.
(a) Where slopes are 30% or less, a mixture of wildflowers and/or
grasses or ground covers shall be planted.
(b) No woody plant materials or trees shall be located on that
portion of a berm acting as the impoundment structure of a
detention/retention basin. Trees shall be located on the
downstream side of the berm a sufficient distance from the toe
of the slope to assure that the toe of the slope is outside the
drip line of the mature species planted.
B. Maintained basins.
(1) Basin floors and slopes. Basin floors and slopes shall be planted
with lawn grass and maintained as a lawn with a height of not more
than six inches.
(2) Wet areas. Low areas subject to prolonged wet conditions, such as
low flow channels or areas with poor drainage, shall be stabilized to
allow mowing and prevent erosion. Such stabilization may include
geotextile fabrics or other porous materials such as grass pavers or
PVC stabilizers.
(3) Drainage structures in residential districts. Embankments
surrounding drainage structures, such as head or end walls, are
encouraged to be planted with shrubs or ornamental trees along
the top of the structure.
A. General requirements.
(1) The location, dimensions and spacing of required plantings should
be adequate for their proper growth and maintenance, taking into
§ 155-27.2 LIMERICK CODE § 155-27.3
122:412
account the sizes of such plantings at maturity and their present
and future environmental requirements, such as wind, soil,
moisture and sunlight.
(2) Plantings should be selected and located where they will not
contribute to conditions hazardous to public safety. Such locations
include but are not limited to public street rights-of-way,
underground and aboveground utilities and sight triangle areas
required for unobstructed views at street intersections.
B. Plant specifications.
(1) All plants shall meet the minimum standards for health, form and
root condition as outlined in the American Association of
Nurserymen (AAN) standards.
(2) All plant material shall be hardy within the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Hardiness Zone 6, applicable to
Limerick Township.
(3) Canopy trees shall reach a minimum height and spread of 30 feet at
maturity as determined by the AAN standards and shall be
deciduous. New trees shall have a minimum caliper of 2 1/2 inches
at planting.
(4) Ornamental trees or large shrubs shall reach a typical minimum
height of 10 feet at maturity based on AAN standards. Trees and
shrubs may be deciduous or evergreen and shall have a distinctive
ornamental character such as showy flowers, fruit, habit, foliage or
bark. New ornamental trees shall have a minimum height of six feet
or a one-and-one-half-inch caliper. New large shrubs shall have a
minimum size of 2 1/2 to three feet at time of planting.
(5) Small shrubs may be evergreen or deciduous and shall have a
minimum height at maturity of four feet based on AAN standards
for that species. New shrubs shall have a minimum size of 18
inches at time of planting.
(6) Evergreen trees shall reach a typical minimum height of 20 feet at
maturity based on AAN standards for that species and shall remain
evergreen throughout the year. New evergreens shall have a
minimum height at planting of six feet.
(7) Plant species listed in the List of Recommended Plant Species at
the end of this chapter shall be permitted to be used to meet the
requirements of this chapter. [Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No.
197]
(a) Other plant species may be permitted by the Township to be
used to meet Township requirements if the applicant provides
written information that describes the suitability of such
species, considering local conditions. The applicant shall note
§ 155-27.3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-27.3
122:413
§ 155-27.4. Properties fronting on Lewis Road in Lewis Road
Conditional Use Overlay District. [Added 12-21-2010 by Ord. No.
319]
in writing which proposed species are not listed in the List of
Recommended Plant Species.
(b) This chapter does not regulate plant species for landscaping
that is not required by this chapter and which is not within the
public right-of-way.
C. Maintenance.
(1) Required plant material shall be maintained for the life of the
project to achieve the required visual effect of the buffer or screen.
It shall be the ultimate responsibility of successive property owners
to ensure that the required plantings are properly maintained.
Dead or diseased plant material shall be removed promptly by the
property owner and replaced at the next growing season.
(2) Safety. All sight triangles shall remain clear, and any plant which
could endanger safety such as material unstable limbs shall be
removed and the plant material replaced. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to ensure all plantings and
architectural elements are maintained to provide a safe
environment.
(3) Maintenance guidelines for the plantings are encouraged to be
published by the planting plan designer, to be used by grounds
maintenance personnel to ensure the design's visual buffering and
screening concepts are continued.
D. Landscape bond.
(1) Any tree or shrub which dies within 18 months of planting shall be
replaced. Any tree or shrub which, within 18 months of planting or
replanting, is deemed, in the opinion of the Township, not to have
survived or to have grown in a manner uncharacteristic of its type
shall be replaced. Substitutions for certain species of plants may be
made only when approved by the Township.
(2) The developer or landowner shall deposit with the Township a sum
of money equal to the amount necessary to cover the cost of
purchasing, planting, maintaining and replacing all vegetative
materials for a period of 18 months.
(3) This condition may be satisfied through a land development
agreement with sufficient and appropriate financial guaranties.
A. It is the intent of this section to provide that properties that are zoned
and developed under the R-3, O/LI, R-5 Zoning Districts and are within
the boundaries of the Lewis Road Conditional Use District and between
§ 155-27.3 LIMERICK CODE § 155-27.4
122:414
Linfield-Trappe Road and Country Club Road and front on Lewis Road
shall be subject to the following streetscape design standards as a part
of the land development process.
(1) Sidewalk requirements. The following design standards shall apply
to construction or modification of streetscape elements, including
curbs, plantings, sidewalks, paving, lighting; and similar aspects
and as further specified in §§ 153-7 through 153-18, Sidewalks and
Curbs;159 § 155-15, Streets, § 155-17, Streetlighting, and § 155-27,
Street trees and other landscaping, except where noted as
superseded.
(a) Location of sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be installed along both
sides of Lewis Road. Land development applicants shall only
install sidewalks within their property lines.
(b) Design of sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide
and constructed of concrete that shall have a compression
strength of 4,000 PSI and minimum four inches of thickness.
(c) Curbs. Curbs shall be required at the edges of the Lewis Road
cartway as specified in Table 3, Highway Functional
Classifications,160 and Standards of § 155-15, Streets. Further,
curbing and shoulders shall be constructed according to
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and the Township Improvements Construction
Manual.
(d) Pedestrian crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks shall be marked
with a textured paving treatment where sidewalks cross
driveways. Design, textures and colors as approved by the
Township.
(e) Planting strips. A planting area that is at least four feet wide
shall be required between the curb and the sidewalk along
Lewis Road. The area shall be planted with turf, or other hardy
plant material ground cover as approved by the Township.
(f) Street trees. Street trees shall be planted in accordance with
§ 155-27 using the list of shade or canopy trees suitable for
street trees or parking lots in 155 Attachment 3161 except that
trees shall be planted at a ratio of one tree per 40 linear feet of
frontage or fraction thereof. Trees shall be planted in the
planting strip as defined above or in other areas along the
street as approved by the Township. This requirement shall
supersede § 153-13162 prohibiting planting of trees between
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Art. II, Sidewalks and Curbs.
160. Editor's Note: Table 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
161. Editor's Note: The attachment is included at the end of this chapter.
162. Editor's Note: The text of § 153-13 is set forth in a note to this subsection as adopted by
Ord. No. 319, as follows: "It shall hereafter be unlawful to plant and maintain any trees
§ 155-27.4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-27.4
122:415
§ 155-27.5. Building and streetscape design standards for Ridge
Pike and Main Street District. [Added 6-3-2014 by Ord. No. 351]
the curb and sidewalk. Street trees may be planted at regular
intervals or clusters as approved by the Township.
(g) A detailed landscaping plan for the entire property, prepared in
accordance with § 155-34C and sealed by a registered
landscape architect, shall be submitted to the Township for
review and approval to determine compliance with Township
ordinances.
(2) Pedestrian level lighting. Pedestrian lighting shall be installed at
regular intervals along sidewalks and shall conform to the
following standards.
(a) Illumination Level. The average footcandle level of sidewalks
shall be 0.5.
(b) The maximum height of a light fixture shall be 14 feet zero
inches.
(c) The lighting fixture shall be "The Washington Steel Post and
Borough Luminaire" manufactured by Spring City Electrical
Manufacturing Co. or approved equal by the Township.
(3) Streetscape site amenities. Additional amenities and design
elements shall be added to the streetscape. These amenities shall
be located outside of the legal right-of-way. These include but are
not limited to the following:
(a) Benches (one per lot or one per 200 linear feet of lot frontage)
as per the approved Township standard as approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
(b) Low (thirty-six-inch height maximum) picket fences, natural
stone walls, and evergreen or deciduous hedges.
(c) Planted areas of flowering perennials that provide four seasons
of interest and color.
A. The purpose of this section is to:
(1) Support the intent of the MS Main Street (Ridge Pike) District as
contained in the Limerick Township Zoning Ordinance.163
(2) Promote high-quality development by utilizing appropriate building
materials to create highly articulated architecture with a fully
integrated streetscape.
between the curb and corresponding sidewalk. This shall not apply to any trees presently
so growing. All new trees shall be planted on the residence side of the sidewalk at a
distance which will not interfere with the sidewalk at any time in the future."
163. Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Zoning.
§ 155-27.4 LIMERICK CODE § 155-27.5
122:416
(3) Provide for safe convenient, direct pedestrian access to buildings
and to and from public sidewalks, bus stops, crosswalks,
pedestrian/bicycle paths and between various buildings in the
district.
(4) Promote the use of alternative modes of transportation such as
bicycle and pedestrian paths and bus transit and provide and
maintain high-quality bus stop waiting areas.
(5) Provide a pedestrian-friendly character and atmosphere
throughout the district with public gardens, courtyards, plazas,
pedestrian/bicycle paths, street trees, seating areas, coordinated
street furnishings, ornamental lighting and pedestrianscale
signage and wayfinding.
B. Applicability.
(1) The building and streetscape design standards shall apply to any
land development application for all lots located along Ridge Pike
except for lots located in the VC Village Commercial District. The
building and streetscape design standards shall also apply to any
lot located in the MS Main Street Zoning District.
(2) Chain architecture. If a proposed use has standard architectural
styles, materials and motifs, the proposed architecture shall be
subject to the architectural design standards.
C. Compliance.
(1) A design manual shall be submitted to demonstrate how the
development will comply with the design standards in conjunction
with any land development. The design manual shall include the
following items:
(a) Site plan, drawn to scale, showing the plan elements as
contained within this section;
(b) Photographs of existing buildings that illustrate the design
intent of the proposal; or building elevations drawn to scale; or
photorealistic illustrations depicting proposed scale,
proportions, design elements, materials and color;
(c) Colored rendering of the plan(s);
(d) Landscape plan;
(e) Current photographs of site.
(2) Once these preliminary styles are reviewed by the Board of
Supervisors, and the Township provides the applicant with verbal
and/or written comments, additional and more detailed
architectural renderings, prepared by a registered architect, shall
be submitted for all proposed buildings, together with a list and
§ 155-27.5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-27.5
122:417
samples of types of exterior building materials that will be visible
from any public street near or adjacent to the site. Similarly, a
rendered landscape plan, prepared by a registered landscape
architect shall also be submitted for review.
D. Site design standards.
(1) Overall site coordination. Each site shall be designed as a unified
development, with a coordinated site design and landscape plan
with coordinated signage, way finding, lighting, site amenities,
paving and other similar site features that create a high-quality
environment.
(2) Location of parking. Each site shall be designed to minimize the
negative impact and appearance of the parking lots. The amount of
parking shall be minimized between the building(s) and the street.
Parking shall be concentrated to the side and rear of the building(s)
and behind the front yard setback line whenever possible.
(3) Vehicle access. In order to facilitate efficient internal traffic
circulation and minimize road traffic for short trips, all parking
areas shall connect directly to parking areas on adjacent lots. If a
connection is not possible at the time of land development, site
design provisions shall be made for a future connection to adjacent
properties. Permanent cross-access easements between properties
should be enacted whenever possible. Shared or common
driveways shall be designed whenever feasible.
(a) If a lot is developed or redeveloped, any new vehicular access
point shall be located along a side lot line in order to create a
shared driveway with the adjacent lot, whenever feasible.
(4) Pedestrian circulation. A safe and direct pedestrian access shall be
provided from all sidewalks to the building entrances and exits.
E. Buildings and streetscape design standards. Treatment between any
building and the street edge shall utilize the following design
standards:
(1) Building orientation and access: Buildings shall be designed with
windows, public access points and signage facing streets,
sidewalks and pedestrian ways.
(2) Building orientation and access: Grade-level exterior doors that
swing onto a public walkway that is less than six feet wide shall be
set into the building to avoid conflicts with pedestrians. Doors
swinging out that project into a public walkway shall include a
barrier to prohibit doors from swinging into pedestrians.
F. Primary building entrance.
(1) A primary pedestrian building entrance shall be located on one or
more primary front facades facing the street and pedestrian way,
§ 155-27.5 LIMERICK CODE § 155-27.5
122:418
rather than the rear or sides of the building, and shall be well
articulated and visible from the street as described herein.
Secondary access points may be located along other facades.
(a) In multiuse buildings, each building use and street floor tenant
space shall have at least one functional entrance directly
visible and accessible from the street. Where tenant entrances
are via common lobbies, lobby entrances shall create
architectural emphasis through design features such as
changes in plane, step backs, fenestration patterns, balconies,
towers, bays, or similar features.
(2) If the primarily building entrance is not located along the primary
front facade then the applicant must demonstrate that the primary
building entrance may not feasibly be located along the primary
front facade, and the primary building entrance shall be located to
the side of the building in accordance with the following:
(a) Buildings with the primary building entrance on the side shall
be visually emphasized to make the entry visible from adjacent
and nearby public roadways. Architectural emphasis shall be
achieved through design features such as changes in plane,
step backs, fenestration patterns, balconies, towers, building
entries, bays, or similar features.
(b) Buildings with the main entry on the side shall be accessible by
a public walkway connecting the sidewalk along the site's
street frontage to the parking areas.
G. Building architectural design standards. The architectural design
standards are incorporated into the MS Main Street District to ensure
that the size, proportions and design of new or substantially improved
buildings create a pedestrian-friendly environment, that is highly
articulated as described herein. The visual mass of all buildings shall be
deemphasized through the use of architectural elements including
form, architectural features and materials, in order to reduce their
apparent bulk and volume, to enhance visual quality and contribute to
human scale development in accordance with the following:
(1) All structures proposed under the same application or development
application shall consist of a unified and coordinated architectural
theme.
(2) Exterior building materials. The predominant material of all
facades facing public streets shall be brick, stone native to the
region, highly textured masonry block, curtain wall, metal panel
systems with concealed fasteners, glazed panels, cement-board
siding or wood. Stucco or dryvit may be utilized, provided that it is
no more than 20% of non-window facades at the street floor level
and no more than 50% of the non-window facades above the street
floor level.
§ 155-27.5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-27.5
122:419
(a) All sides of a building shall be architecturally designed to be
consistent with regard to style, materials, colors and details.
The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be
continuous in its major features around all visibly exposed
sides of a building with the exception of parking structures or
that portion of a building containing a parking structure. Blank
wall or service area treatment of side and/or rear elevations
visible from public view shall be prohibited.
(b) If approved by the Board of Supervisors, simulated brick or
simulated stone may be used as the predominant material of all
facades facing public streets.
(3) Vertical articulation. Buildings are required to provide articulation
on the exterior of any wall surface in order to provide architectural
interest and variety to the massing of a building and to relieve the
effect of a single, long monotonous wall or roof. Blank facades,
without windows or architectural elements to create interest, are
prohibited.
(a) The massing of any one building wall shall not exceed 50 feet
(horizontal dimension) without a vertical articulation along its
entire height. Vertical articulation may include a vertical
change of facade plane or material. The depth of change in
facade plane for vertical wall articulations shall be a minimum
of two feet for every 50 feet of building facade length. Such
articulation may consist of building wall offsets, recesses and
projections such as bays, balconies, canopies, awnings,
pilasters, columns and other similar features.
(b) Building corners located at the intersections of public streets
shall incorporate the following:
[1] Building corners shall be chamfered at least 10 feet from
the corner setback or a minimum of five feet from both
street frontages. The chamfer shall extend from the
ground to the top of the building. If the chamfers cannot
extend above the ground floor to the top of the building,
then the portion of building corners above the street level
story shall be visually emphasized through design
features, such as step backs, fenestration patterns,
balconies, towers, bays or similar features.
(4) Horizontal articulation. Horizontal articulation of the building
facade, including changes to the horizontal building plane and/or
materials, shall be used to break up the scale of the building
facade. Such horizontal articulation may be provided by roof
terraces, setbacks or other devices. Horizontal articulation shall
emphasize the building base, body and roof/parapet edge.
(a) Buildings greater than 35 feet in height shall be designed
utilizing a definition of the base, body and roof or parapet edge
§ 155-27.5 LIMERICK CODE § 155-27.5
122:420
as the primary method of defining and relating buildings to one
another.
(b) The base shall generally be considered the first story of the
facade facing a public street, but can vary depending on the
overall building height and range from ground plane to the
floor line of the third floor in buildings of at least four stories in
height. The design of the base should be emphasized through
the design, quality and durability of its materials to create
visual interest. The transition from the base of a building to the
body may be expressed either horizontally, through a shift in
the horizontal plane and/or through a change in building
materials.
(c) The top of a building greater than 35 feet in height shall be
architecturally distinguished by providing a visual termination
to the facade and interest at the skyline by incorporation of a
projecting element such as a cornice, eave or roofline overhang
sufficient in depth to create a shadow line visible from street
level. On buildings taller than four stories in height, the top of
the building could encompass the last floor of a building.
(d) Any building measuring taller than 50 feet in height shall
provide an expression line on the wall plane, continuing around
all sides of a building above the first or second floor. The
expression line may consist of a projecting element, a
minimum four inches in depth, such as a belt course or cornice
as well as a terrace that sets back the walls of the building
above the expression line.
(5) Roofs.
(a) All buildings that are three stories or less in height shall have
pitched roofs and/or roofs that appear to be pitched when
viewed from the public right of way that meets the approval of
the Board of Supervisors.
(b) Rooflines shall be articulated vertically with a change in
roofline every 50 feet.
(c) Flat roofs may be permitted in buildings over three stories and
due to other instances where flat roofs cannot be avoided,
provided that they include appropriate architectural elements
to provide architectural interest. On buildings with flat roofs,
all visibly exposed walls shall have an articulated cornice that
projects a minimum of four inches horizontally form the
vertical building wall. The applicant is required to present
compelling functional and aesthetic reasons to the Board of
Supervisors to demonstrate why a flat roof cannot be avoided.
(d) Fixed or retractable awnings are permitted at street floor level
and on upper levels where appropriate, if they complement a
§ 155-27.5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-27.5
122:421
building's architectural features. Metal or internally lit
awnings are prohibited. In buildings with multiple storefronts,
or on adjacent buildings, compatible awnings should be used
as a means of unifying the structures.
(e) All rooftop mechanical equipment, including antennas, shall be
visually and acoustically screened from both the public rightof-
way and adjacent properties. Screening may be
accomplished by using parapets, walls or roof elements. Such
screening shall be integral to the architectural design of the
building.
(6) Proportions of walls to openings.
(a) A wall to clear window/door ratio of between two to one and
four to one is required. For street floor-level commercial and
retail uses, a wall to clear window ratio between one to one and
two to one is required.
(b) The maximum length of a blank wall between clear window/
door openings shall be 15 feet.
(c) Elements such as pent eaves, pediments, or sills and lintels
above and below windows and doors are required.
(7) Windows.
(a) Smoked, reflective, tinted or black glass in windows is
discouraged, especially at street level. Glazing shall have a
minimum visible transmittance of 0.75.
(b) Any street-level walls with less than 50% of clear windows shall
be articulated by two or more of the following:
[1] Articulation of facade plane, and/or changes in materials;
[2] If the building is occupied by a commercial use, recessed
or projecting display window cases or simulated windows.
(8) Parking structures. The following shall apply to parking structures
located within 300 feet of Ridge Pike and visible to public view:
(a) The facade shall contain active uses or be designed to screen
vehicles in the parking garage from view of the street.
Screening shall be compatible with the character of the
surrounding buildings and meet architectural design
guidelines of this section.
(b) If architectural screening cannot be provided, a minimum
twenty-five-foot wide Type 2 screen shall be provided in
accordance with § 155-27.1D(6)(b).
H. Requirements for sidewalks.
§ 155-27.5 LIMERICK CODE § 155-27.5
122:422
(1) Pedestrian crosswalks.
(a) Pedestrian crosswalks where approved by PennDOT shall be
marked with a textured and colored paving treatment. Design,
textures and colors shall be as approved by PennDOT and the
Township.
(b) Pedestrian crosswalks shall be installed where sidewalks
intersect driveways and roadways.
(2) Streetscape site amenities along Ridge Pike. Additional amenities
and design elements shall be added to the streetscape. These
include but are not limited to the following:
(a) Sidewalks as per § 155-15D, except that a minimum width of
five feet shall be provided.
(b) Fifteen-foot-wide planted areas of flowering perennials,
ornamental grasses, flowering and evergreen shrubs,
flowering bulbs that provide four seasons of interest and color
shall be provided along the length of site's frontage on Ridge
Pike exclusive of driveways or utility rights-of-way. Site
element screens required for roads adjacent to the front yard
of a proposed use may be used to partially meet this
requirement.
(c) Planting areas shall be located adjacent to the roadway. The
area between the curb and sidewalk shall be planted either
with turf grass and required street trees and site-required
element screens, or this area may be combined with the
required fifteen-foot planting area of perennials/ornamental
grasses as required under Subsection H(2)(b) above.
(d) Plantings shall be generally 24 to 30 inches or less in mature
height and shall not obstruct sight lines/sight triangles.
(e) Planting areas may be an integral component of bioswales
installed as a part of the site's stormwater management plan.
These planting beds/areas shall be no less than 15 feet in width
or the width of the bioswale, whichever is greater.
(f) Sidewalks may meander roughly parallel to Ridge Pike. In no
case shall the sidewalk be located less than five feet from the
Ridge Pike curbline/edge of pavement.
(g) The installation of site furniture, including benches, trash
receptacles and bike racks, is encouraged by individual
property owners. When installed, site furniture shall be located
on the property side of the sidewalk, parallel to the street/
sidewalk. Site furniture shall have a black finish and be of the
SteelsitesTM RB model series manufactured by Victor Stanley or
as otherwise approved by the Township.
§ 155-27.5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-27.5
122:423
§ 155-28. Minimum requirements for improvements.
The minimum requirements for improvements shall be those contained in
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Specifications (Form 408),
as most lately revised.
§ 155-29. Identified floodplain area and natural watercourses.
[Amended 3-3-1981 by Ord. No. 67-1; 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109;
12-17-1996 by Ord. No. 184; 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 365]
(h) Site furniture shall be permanently installed with footings/
concrete pad or other means acceptable to the Township.
(i) Bus passenger accommodations. Existing or proposed bus
passenger facilities within or abutting a proposed development
shall provide pedestrian connections between the bus
passenger facilities, existing sidewalks and the proposed
development. Adequate paving shall be provided to
accommodate curbside passenger facilities in accordance with
the latest version of the SEPTA Bus Stop Design Guidelines
with the following minimum requirements:
[1] Curbside passenger accommodations shall comply with
the minimum dimensional standards in accordance with
Table 4: Dimensional Specific Standards, Type 6: Stop with
Standard Shelter, except that an eight-foot-wide
multipurpose path shall be provided outside the passenger
waiting area.
[2] Developments with internal SEPTA bus circulation or
those which propose new or relocated bus stops shall
comply with the standards established in Table 5,
Development Review Checklist for Consideration of
SEPTA.
I. Signs. For any proposed use in the MS Main Street District, signs shall
be an integral part of the architectural design for the building(s). Sign
materials shall utilize the same, similar or complementary materials as
utilized for the buildings and are subject to the review and approval of
the Board of Supervisors. Sign dimensions and other standards shall be
regulated in accordance with use and with Article XII, Signs, of the
Limerick Township Zoning Ordinance164 except to the extent
specifically modified or limited by the following:
A. Those areas defined as identified floodplain areas in the Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance165 and as shown as the Floodplain Conservation
164. Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Zoning.
165. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 155-27.5 LIMERICK CODE § 155-29
122:424
District of the Township Zoning Ordinance166 shall be subject to the
requirements and restrictions contained therein.
(1) In addition, the following regulations shall apply:
(a) Compliance. No person, partnership, business or corporation
shall undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction,
development, or conduct any activity anywhere within the
identified floodplain area unless a permit has been obtained
from the Floodplain Administrator per the Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance.167
B. Any natural watercourses not governed by Subsection A above shall be
governed by the following:
(1) All continuously flowing watercourses (as indicated on the United
States Geological Survey 7.5 Minimum Quadrangles) shall be
maintained in their natural state, except that removal of debris and
correction of severe erosion shall be required.
(2) Intermittent watercourses.
(a) Intermittent watercourses shall be maintained essentially at
their existing alignments and gradients, except that they may
be improved by minor regarding and shall either be planted in
grass or provided with erosion-preventive improvements such
as riprap. Paving of such watercourses shall not be allowed,
nor shall piping, except under roads, driveways and walkways.
(b) Intermittent watercourses often are significant elements at the
headwaters of larger streams and are usually small in size.
Therefore, developers should be encouraged to design and
build around and with respect for these drainageways, and the
Supervisors may allow rechanneling of these drainageways
only when serious considerations so warrant or when the site
drainage will be improved by such proposed alignment
changes.
C. (Reserved)
D. (Reserved)
E. (Reserved)
F. (Reserved)
G. (Reserved)
H. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Zoning, XXVII, Floodplain Conservation District.
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 155-29 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-29
122:425
§ 155-30. Water supply. [Amended 2-17-1994 by Ord. No. 162]
(1) FEMA AND FIA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency
and the Federal Insurance Administration who have jurisdiction
over the National Flood Insurance Program and its related studies
and regulations. FEMA is the parent agency of the FIA.
(2) FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
(3) FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood
profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
(4) FLOODPLAIN — The identified floodplain area as determined by
the Floodplain Administrator.
(5) FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR — The appointed Limerick
Township Official designated to administer and enforce the
Limerick Township's Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
(6) FLOODPLAIN CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The identified
floodplain area as shown on the Limerick Township Zoning Map.
(7) IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — Any areas of the Township,
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) dated March 2, 2016, and issued by the FEMA, or
the most recent official version thereof adopted by FEMA,
including all digital data developed as part of the FIS and the
above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by the Township and
declared to be a part of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
A. In order to ensure adequate water supply without adverse impact on
water resources, applicants for all subdivisions and/or land
developments shall identify the source of water proposed to be used
and comply with the corresponding requirements for that source as
follows:
(1) Source is regulated by Public Utility Commission (PUC).
(a) If the source is regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission, then the applicant shall provide the Township
with written statements from that source as evidence of the
following:
[1] The source's commitment to provide sufficient water
supply for the applicant's proposal.
§ 155-29 LIMERICK CODE § 155-30
122:426
[2] That the source has sufficient capacity within its existing
system or will seek appropriate approvals to expand its
system to provide sufficient capacity for the applicant's
proposal.
[3] That any expansion of the source's system for the
applicant's proposal will be an interconnected extension of
its existing lines and service area and will not constitute a
satellite system.
(b) Evidence provided to satisfy Subsection A(1)(a) above shall be
subject to acceptance by the Board of Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Township Solicitor and Engineer.
(2) If the source is not regulated by the PUC, then the applicant shall
conduct a water resources impact study, as specified in § 155-30.1
herein, except in the following circumstances:
(a) Residential subdivisions with fewer than five dwelling units
proposed or a gross density lower than one dwelling unit per
two acres, excluding residual lands capable of further
subdivision.
(b) Nonresidential units, such as commercial, industrial,
recreational, institutional, etc., may be excluded from
providing a water resources impact study if the applicant can
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Township, that the
proposed water supply demand is no greater than the average
daily demand required by residential subdivisions excluded
under Subsection A(2)(a) above.
(c) When required to obtain a permit from the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or the
Delaware River Basin Commission (DRBC) in compliance with
DEP and DRBC requirements. Permits from DRBC are
currently required for all projects with an average withdrawal
of more than 10,000 gallons per day (gpd) from a well or group
of wells operated as a system.
[1] Copies of all submissions to DRBC and all related
submissions to the Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Township at the time of submission to DRBC and/or DEP.
[2] Copies of all correspondence received by the applicant
from DRBC and/or DEP shall be submitted by the applicant
to the Township at the time of receipt by the applicant.
B. For any subdivision or land development where public sewers and
individual wells are proposed, a water resources impact study, as
specified in § 155-30.1, shall be provided. The water resources impact
§ 155-30 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-30
122:427
§ 155-30.1. Phase I and Phase II water resources impact studies.
[Added 2-17-1994 by Ord. No. 162]
When a water resources impact study is required by this chapter, the
applicant shall submit the study to the Township and provide the study in
compliance with the following:
study may be waived by the Board of Supervisors based upon a
recommendation from the Planning Commission.
C. When individual wells are proposed, the location of the wells shall be
shown on the preliminary plan for each lot. Where there are existing
wells on the property or adjoining lots, they must also be shown when
practical.
D. A circular area with a radius conforming to the rules and regulations, or
future amendments thereto, of the State Department of Environmental
Protection, the County Health Department and the Township of
Limerick shall be shown around each well to denote clear space in
which no sewage system is to be located.
E. Where public water is furnished, the circular areas around the wells are
not necessary, with the exception of those wells lying immediately
adjacent to the subdivision; however, the usable area is limited by a
clear zone surrounding the water service line to each house as required
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, the
Montgomery County Health Department and the Township of Limerick.
F. Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be located at accessible points
throughout the subdivision when public water supply is available and
shall be located within 600 feet of all existing and proposed structures.
Location of all fire hydrants shall be reviewed and approved by the
Limerick Township Fire Inspector. [Amended 9-14-2006 by Ord. No.
267]
A. Water resources impact studies are intended to show if there is an
adequate supply of water for a proposed use and to estimate the impact
of additional water withdrawals on existing nearby wells, underlying
aquifers and streams.
B. The Township will not approve any subdivision or land development
where the water resources impact study shows that the proposed water
system:
(1) Does not provide an adequate supply of water for the proposed use,
considering both quality and quantity.
(2) Adversely affects nearby wells and streams.
(3) Does not provide for adequate groundwater recharge, considering
withdrawals.
§ 155-30 LIMERICK CODE § 155-30.1
122:428
C. The study shall be prepared by a registered or certified hydrologist/
geologist or a professional engineer deemed acceptable by the
Township, qualified to conduct groundwater investigations, and shall be
at the expense of the applicant.
D. A Phase I study shall be conducted for all projects required to do a
water resources impact study. The Phase I study shall be based upon
available literature and appropriate professional judgment and shall
include the following information:
(1) Calculations of the projected water needs using the criteria set
forth in the following references:
(a) Public Water Supply Manual, Bureau of Water Quality
Management Publication No. 15, by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania.
(b) Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow by the
Insurance Services Office (ISO), as modified.
(c) American Water Works Association, Standards and Manuals for
the American Water Works Association, Denver, Colorado.
(2) A geologic map of the area within a one-mile radius of the site
boundary.
(3) The location of all faults, lineaments and fracture traces within 1/4
mile of the site boundary.
(4) The locations of all existing and proposed wells within 1/4 mile of
the site boundary and all large withdrawal wells (10,000 plus
gallons per day) within one mile of the site.
(5) The location of all existing and proposed on-lot septic systems
within 1/4 mile of the site boundary.
(6) The location of all streams, perennial and intermittent, within 1/4
mile of the site boundary.
(7) A discussion of the aquifers underlying the site and their long-term
drought recharge capability based on accepted published data or
detailed site specific investigations for both the pre- and postdeveloped
condition.
(8) Based on the drought recharge capability of the underlying aquifer
and the calculated daily groundwater withdrawals of the project, a
hydrologic budget shall be calculated for the site property itself
and for the area within 1/4 mile of the site boundary, including the
total volume of water lost to this site as the result of the creation of
new impervious surfaces or modified land cover conditions of the
site. Pumping of groundwater and wastewater disposal methods
must also be evaluated within the hydrologic budget.
§ 155-30.1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-30.1
122:429
(9) Based on the results of the hydrologic budget, a determination
shall be made on whether or not the potential exists for adverse
effects on the hydrologic environment caused by the project.
(10)Water quality information for area groundwater based upon tests of
area wells and any special groundwater quality issues.
(11) Potential sources of water quality impact, such as wastewater
treatment systems, landfills, underground fuel tanks, surface water
infiltration, industrial sites, agricultural chemicals or solid waste
disposal facilities existing within 1/4 mile of the site boundary,
should be analyzed. All potential source impacts should include
pollutant loading analysis using an accepted methodology to
address metals/inorganics, hydrocarbons, suspended solids,
nutrients, biological/chemical oxygen demand, volatile organics
and fecal coliform.
(12) An estimation of the effects upon the base flow of the nearby
streams, with special attention given to critical low flow periods.
(13) Average rainfall and storm patterns.
(14) The study shall include a brief statement of the qualifications of the
person(s) preparing the study.
(15) The study shall consider data and conclusions within the following
studies:
(a) Special Groundwater Study of the Delaware River Basin —
Study Area II (Delaware River Basin Commission, 1982).
(b) Groundwater Resources of the Brunswick Formation in
Montgomery and Berks Counties, Pennsylvania, Bureau of
Topographic and Geologic Survey, 1965.
(c) Groundwater Resources of Montgomery County, Bureau of
Topographic and Geologic Survey, 1971.
(d) Previous reports prepared by other developers in the Township
which are determined to be relevant by the Township.
(16) A Phase I study shall be prepared and submitted to the Township by
the applicant, at the expense of the applicant, in compliance with
the following technical criteria:
(a) The text of studies shall contain pertinent data, analyses and
methods used to arrive at the studies' conclusions. Appendices
shall contain raw and summary data.
(b) All figures contained within studies shall contain complete
legends, titles and scales.
§ 155-30.1 LIMERICK CODE § 155-30.1
122:430
(c) All numerical parameters within the studies shall be presented
with appropriate units, and all data shall be referenced by
sources, date, location and time, where appropriate.
(17) The Phase I study should be certified by the registered/certified
hydrologist/geologist or sealed by the professional engineer,
whomever prepared the study.
E. A Phase II water resources impact study shall be conducted when the
results of the Phase I study identify potential quantity/quality water
supply problems or if the total amount of water to be withdrawn for the
proposed development is greater than 10,000 gallons per day and the
development is not required to obtain a permit from DRBC. The Phase II
study shall develop conclusions regarding groundwater impact based
upon site investigations. Specific requirements for a Phase II study
shall include:
(1) A pumping test which shall be performed in the following manner:
(a) A step drawdown test shall be conducted in accordance with
AWWA Standard A100 Section 10, latest revision. Upon
completion of the step drawdown test, a forty-eight-hour
continuous pump test shall be conducted in accordance with
DEP and AWWA A100 standards.
(b) The test shall be conducted during a period when no significant
recharge has occurred, unless the influence of recharge can be
factored out.
(c) During construction of the test well, the hydrologist/geologist
shall keep an accurate geologic log of the type and thickness of
rocks encountered, the depth and thickness of all waterbearing
zones encountered and the yield from each zone, as
well as any information required by DEP in the latest edition of
their Public Water Supply Manual.
(d) The test shall include one pumping well (roughly centered on
site) and at least two observation wells. The pumping and
observation wells shall be located on the same fracture based
upon a fracture trace analysis conducted at the site.
(e) Analyses shall include all pumping and recovery calculations of
hydraulic conductivity (directional) and specific yield, specific
capacity and long-term sustainable well yield (tabulated), as
well as all analyses and information required by DEP and
AWWA A100 Section 10 standards.
(f) The test shall be conducted with a pumping rate of 1 1/2 times
the anticipated yield of the well.
(g) one pumping test (done separately) shall be required for each
160 acres of the proposed subdivision or land development.
§ 155-30.1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-30.1
122:431
§ 155-31. Erosion and sediment control.168
(h) All residents of properties within 1/2 mile of the site boundary
should be canvassed to determine if there are any adverse
impacts on their wells caused by the pump test.
(2) Samples of water shall be drawn from all test wells on the site prior
to the termination of the pump test and shall be tested for all
parameters as required by DEP for new sources in their
publication, "Public Water Supply Manual, Part II, Chapter 3, Table
II-2," latest edition, in addition to odor, bacteria-total plate count,
total coliform per 100 milliliters and hardness.
(3) A Phase II study shall be prepared and submitted to the Township
by the applicant at the applicant's expense. In addition to the
information required for the Phase I study, the Phase II study shall
include the following information:
(a) Samples and records as required by DEP in Public Water
Supply Manual Part II, Chapter 3.
(b) The static water level immediately prior to yield testing.
(c) A hydrograph of the depth to water surface during test
pumping and recovery period at the test well or wells showing
corresponding pump and discharge rate in gallons per minute
and the time readings were taken.
(d) A log of depth to water surfaces of existing and monitoring
wells during the test pumping period showing the time
readings were taken.
(e) A map illustrating the drawdown effects upon off-site wells and
springs located within 1/2 mile distance from the site
boundary, indicating drawdowns of one foot or more, occurring
during a year with a natural recharge rate of a one-year-in-ten
frequency.
(f) An analysis and interpretation of the impact of a proposed
water supply and distribution system on the groundwater
supply and existing wells.
A. General.
(1) Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words
shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings herein
stated. Words in the singular number include the plural, and words
in the plural number include the singular. The present tense
includes the future. The word "building" shall be deemed to include
the word "structure."
168. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 147, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
§ 155-30.1 LIMERICK CODE § 155-31
122:432
CUT — An excavation; the difference between a point on the
original ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the
final grade; also, the material removed in excavation.
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of
natural elements.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is dug into, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed, including the conditions
resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved
to a new location above the natural surface of the ground or
on top of the stripped surface, and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom; the difference in elevation between a point on
the original ground and a designated point of higher elevation on
the final grade; the material used to make a fill.169
LAND DEVELOPMENT — As defined in § 155-6 hereof.[Amended
4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a
given watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the
soil but runs off the surface of the land.
RUNOFF FROM A FULLY DEVELOPED AREA UPSTREAM — The
surface water runoff that can be reasonably anticipated upon
maximum development of that area of the watershed located
upstream from the subject tract, as permitted by prevailing zoning
or the Township Comprehensive Plan.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic
matter is accumulated or deposited by the movement of wind or
water or by gravity. Once this matter is deposited or remains
suspended in water, it is usually referred to as "sediment."
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground
whose surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes
are usually expressed in percentages based upon the vertical
difference in feet per 100 feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment of a
mass of soil to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise
improve its engineering properties.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in § 155-6 hereof.[Amended
4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries
surface water runoff.
169. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “floodplain,” which immediately followed, was
repealed 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 365.
§ 155-31 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-31
122:433
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably
are fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in the organic
matter of humus debris. "Topsoil" is usually found in the uppermost
soil layer called the "A Horizon."
WATERCOURSE — A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river,
brook, creek, channel or ditch for water, whether natural or manmade.
(2) For all tracts proposed for subdivision, no changes shall be made in
the contour of the land; no grading, excavating, removal or
destruction of the topsoil, trees or other vegetative cover of the
land shall be commenced until such time that a plan for minimizing
erosion and sedimentation has been processed with and reviewed
by the Township Planning Commission or there has been a
determination by the Commission that such plans are not
necessary.
(3) No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless:
(a) There has been a plan approved by the Township Supervisors
that provides for minimizing erosion and sedimentation
consistent with this section, and an improvement bond or other
acceptable securities are deposited with the Township in the
form of an escrow guaranty which will ensure installation and
completion of the required improvements; or
(b) There has been a determination by the Township Supervisors
that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation is not
necessary.
(4) The Board of Township Supervisors, in its consideration of any
preliminary plan of subdivision and land development, shall
condition its approval upon the execution of measures designed to
prevent accelerated soil erosion and resulting sedimentation, as
required by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. All applicable regulations and permit requirements of
said Department, as stipulated in its soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Manual, shall be followed by all parties
engaged in earthmoving activities. The manual is available at the
office of the Montgomery County Conservation District,
Norristown, Pennsylvania. The Township Engineer shall assure
compliance with the appropriate specifications and requirements.
B. Performance principles. The following measures are effective in
minimizing erosion and sedimentation and shall be included where
applicable in the control plan:
(1) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way as will minimize erosion.
§ 155-31 LIMERICK CODE § 155-31
122:434
(2) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep
cut-fill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
(3) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
and supplemented.
(4) The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
(5) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(6) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
(7) The permanent (final) vegetation and structural erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed in the development as soon as
is practicable.
(8) Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development. Where necessary, the rate of surface water
runoff will be structurally retarded.
(9) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed
area is stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt
traps or similar measures.
C. Grading and drainage. In order to provide more suitable sites for
building and other uses, improve surface drainage and control erosion,
the following requirements shall be met:
(1) All lots, tracts or parcels shall be graded to provide proper
drainage away from buildings and to dispose of it without ponding,
and all land within a development shall be graded to drain and
dispose of surface water without ponding, except where approved
by the Township Supervisors.
(2) All drainage facilities shall be of such design as to adequately
control the surface runoff and to carry it to the nearest suitable
outlet, such as a curbed street, storm drain, natural watercourse or
properly designed swale. Where drainage swales are used to divert
surface waters away from buildings, they shall be sodded or
planted as required and shall be of such slope, shape and size as
may be required by the Township.
(3) Concentration of surface water runoff shall be permitted only in
properly designed and maintained swales, watercourses or
retention basins.
(4) Excavations and fills.
§ 155-31 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-31
122:435
(a) Cut and fill slopes shall not be steeper than 2:1 unless
stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, except as approved
by the Township Supervisors because of special conditions.
(b) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water
from damaging the cut face of excavation on the sloping
surface of fills.
(c) Cuts and fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
(d) Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of the soil.
(e) Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels.
(f) No increased surface runoff will be permitted to leave the
property being subdivided or developed, by way of natural
watercourses or storm drainage pipes, without first being
suitably restrained in such a way as to maintain runoff volume
as it existed on the site previous to subdivision or development.
(g) Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
(h) Grading will not be done in such a way as to divert water onto
the property of another landowner without the express consent
of the Township Supervisors.
(i) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust
control will be exercised.
(j) Grading equipment will not be allowed to cross live streams.
Provisions will be made for the installation of culverts or
bridges.
D. Responsibility.
(1) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation,
regrading or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the
person, corporation or other entity causing such sedimentation to
remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and
watercourses and to repair any damage at his expense as quickly as
possible.
(2) Maintenance of all drainage facilities and watercourses within any
subdivision or land development is the responsibility of the
developer until it is accepted by the Township or some other official
agency, after which it becomes the responsibility of the accepting
agency.
§ 155-31 LIMERICK CODE § 155-31
122:436
(3) It is the responsibility of any person, corporation or other entity
doing any act on or across a communal stream, watercourse or
swale or upon the floodplain or right-of-way thereof to maintain, as
nearly as possible, in its present state, the stream, watercourse,
swale, floodplain or right-of-way for the duration of the activity and
to return it to its original condition or the equivalent after such
activity is completed.
(4) Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and
terminating on private property is the responsibility of the owner,
up to the point of open discharge at the property line or at a
communal watercourse within the property.
(5) No person, corporation or other entity shall block, impede the flow
of, alter, construct any structure or deposit any material or thing in
or commit any act which will affect the normal or flood flow in any
communal stream or watercourse without having obtained prior
approval from the Township Engineer or Township’s designee,
Floodplain Administrator, or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, whichever is appropriate. [Amended
3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 365]
(6) (Reserved)170
(7) Each person, corporation or other entity which makes any surface
changes shall be required to:
(a) Collect on-site surface runoff and dispose of it at the point of
discharge into the common natural watercourse of the
drainage area;
(b) Handle existing and potential off-site runoff through the
development by designing it so as to adequately handle storm
runoff from a fully developed area upstream;
(c) Pay a proportionate share of the total cost of off-site
improvements to the common natural watercourse, based on a
fully developed drainage area; and
(d) Obtain and install, at his or its own expense, in accordance
with Township requirements, all drainage and erosion control
improvements (temporary and permanent) as required by the
Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook.
(8) It is the responsibility of the Township to keep all major streams not
under the jurisdiction of any other official agency open and freeflowing.
(9) The Township will assume the responsibility for maintaining an
open and free-flowing condition in all minor streams, watercourses
170. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(6), regarding a subdivision traversed by a
watercourse, was repealed 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 365.
§ 155-31 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-31
122:437
and drainage systems, constructed or improved in accordance with
Township design criteria, which are necessary for proper drainage
in the discretion of the Township if an adequate right-of-way exists
or can be acquired.
(10) The Township shall be required to:
(a) Assess and collect the cost of off-site improvements to the
common natural watercourses, except those required to
existing state roads. Collection may be delayed until the
assessed land is approved for development.
(b) Acquire easements for such common natural watercourse
improvements.
(c) Supervise such improvements to completion.
E. Compliance with regulations and procedures.
(1) The Township Supervisors, in their consideration of all preliminary
plans of subdivision and land development, shall condition their
approval upon the execution of erosion and sediment control
measures as contained in Subsections B, C and D of this section.
(2) Standards and criteria.
(a) The installation and design of the required erosion and
sediment control measures shall be in accordance with the
standards and specifications on file with the Township and
found in the Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook,
including:
[1] Temporary Cover on Critical Areas, pages 9-10.
[2] Permanent Grass and Legume Cover on Critical Areas on
Prepared Seedbed, pages 13-18.
[3] Permanent Grass and Legume Cover on Critical Areas on
Unprepared Seedbed, pages 19-22.
[4] Sodding, pages 23-25.
[5] Mulching, pages 26-36.
[6] Temporary Diversion, pages 37-41.
[7] Permanent Diversion, pages 42-51.
[8] Grassed Waterway or Outlet, pages 47-51.
[9] Grade Stabilization Structure, pages 52-55.
[10] Debris Basin, pages 56-70.
[11] Drain, pages 71-83.
§ 155-31 LIMERICK CODE § 155-31
122:438
[12] Drainage — Main or Lateral, pages 84-87.
(b) Stream channel construction on watersheds with drainage
areas in excess of 320 acres, or in those cases where
downstream hazards exist, will conform to criteria established
by the Power and Water Resource Board, Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Final plans for minimizing erosion and sedimentation, as approved,
will be incorporated into the agreement and bond requirements as
required under Subsection A(3) of this section.
(4) The approval plans and specifications for the control of erosion and
sedimentation shall be concurrent with the approval of the final
plats of subdivision or land development and shall become a part
thereof.
(5) At the time that a building permit is applied for, a review shall be
conducted by the Township Engineer to ensure conformance with
the plan as approved. During the construction, further consultative
technical assistance will be furnished, if necessary, by the Township
Engineer and the Montgomery County Conservation District.
During this development phase, the Township Engineer shall
inspect the development site and enforce compliance with the
approved plans.
(6) Permission for clearing and grading prior to the recording of plats
may be obtained under temporary easements or other conditions
satisfactory to the Township.
(7) In the event that the developer proceeds to clear and grade prior to
recording plats without satisfying the conditions specified under
Subsection E(6) above, the Supervisors may revoke the approval of
the preliminary plan.
§ 155-31 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-31
122:439

ARTICLE VI
Plan Requirements
§ 155-32. (Reserved)171
§ 155-33. Preliminary plan.
The plan shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The scale shall be no smaller than 100 feet to the inch.
(2) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals, and bearings shall be
expressed in degrees, minutes and seconds.
(3) The courses and distances of the boundary-line survey of the entire
land to be subdivided.
(4) The survey shall not have an error of closure greater than one part
in 2,500.
(5) The sheet or sheets shall be one of the following sizes; 15 by 18
inches, 18 by 30 inches or 24 by 36 inches. If more than one sheet
is necessary, each sheet shall be the same size and numbered to
show its relation to the total number of sheets in the plan, e.g.,
"Sheet No. 1 of 5 sheets."
(6) Where there are two or more sheets, a key map at a scale sufficient
to show their relationship shall be furnished.
B. Location and identification.
(1) A title consisting of the name an address of the subdivider,
developer or builder and the registered engineer or surveyor or
qualified site planner.
(2) The name of the municipality and subdivision.
(3) The date, graphic scale and North point
(4) The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances.
(5) A key map relating the subdivision to at least three existing
intersections of Township roads.
C. Existing features.
(1) Within 400 feet of any part of the land being subdivided: the
location, names, width, radii and surface conditions of existing
streets and alleys and those shown on the Township Official Map
Summary of streets and alleys and the location of watercourses,
171. Editor's Note: Former § 155-32, Tentative sketch, was deleted 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 208.
§ 155-32 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-33
122:441
floodplains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, utilities above or below
ground and other similar features.
(2) Within the land to be subdivided:
(a) The location, names, widths and other dimensions, including
center-line courses, distances and curve data; paving widths,
curblines, right-of-way and curbline radii at intersections and
street location tie-ins by courses and distances to the nearest
intersection of existing and planned streets and alleys; and the
location and size of existing sanitary sewers and storm drains,
watercourses and drainage flows, floodplains, the location and
size of utilities above or below the ground and recreational
areas; in addition, the location and dimensions of existing
public utility easements.
(b) Contours at vertical intervals of five feet or, in the case of
relatively level tracts, at such lesser intervals as may be
necessary for study as determined by the Planning Commission
or Township Engineer. Where reasonably practicable, datum
shall refer to known, established elevations or United States
Geological Survey datum. Steep slopes, over 15% shall be
plotted.
(c) The location and character of existing buildings, mature trees
standing alone, outer limits of tree masses and other existing
vegetation, the location of floodplains, wetlands and other
natural features which may affect the location of proposed
streets or buildings. [Amended 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
(d) The depth of the water table shall be noted on the plan or in a
separate report along with the location of the test borings.
When percolation tests are required, the location of the test
holes shall be indicated.
(e) Zoning requirements, if any, or requirements of any Township
ordinance or resolution on and adjacent to the land to be
subdivided.
D. Proposed improvements. [Amended 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
(1) The layout of streets, alleys and crosswalks, including the names
and widths of cartways and ultimate rights-of-way.
(2) The layout and dimensions of lots and net area.
(3) A reference to any land to be dedicated for public use.
(4) Tentative grades to an existing street or to a point 400 feet beyond
the boundaries of the subdivision.
(5) The location and size of sanitary sewers and storm drains.
§ 155-33 LIMERICK CODE § 155-33
122:442
§ 155-34. Final plan.
(6) All building setback lines, with distances from the center line.
(7) An indication of any lots in which a use other than residential is
intended.
(8) Where there are existing buildings located on the land being
subdivided, the buildings that are to be demolished shall be
indicated.
(9) A statement on the plan shall show the number of acres being
subdivided, the number of lots, the type of buildings, the character
of buildings, lineal feet of new streets and average lot size.
(10) Approximate location of all proposed landscaping required under
this chapter.
(11) Demarcation of existing vegetation "to remain" or "to be removed"
and the means of protecting existing vegetation during
construction.
E. Certificates. When approved, the preliminary plan must show:
(1) The signature of the subdivider, developer or builder, certifying his
adoption of the plan.
(2) The signature of the Township Secretary, certifying that the
Township Supervisors approved the plan on the date shown.
A. Improvement construction plan.
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required for an
improvement construction plan as for a preliminary plan, except
that the horizontal scale of the plan and profile shall be 40 feet to
the inch, and the vertical scale of the profile shall be two, four or 10
feet to the inch, whichever is most convenient.
(2) Information to be shown. The plan shall contain sufficient
information to provide working plans for the construction of the
proposed streets or any portion thereof, including all
appurtenances, sewers and utilities, shown on the approved
preliminary plan, from one existing or approved street to another
or, in the case of a cul-de-sac, to its turnaround, and shall include:
(a) Horizontal plan. The horizontal plan shall show details of the
horizontal layout as follows:
[1] Information shown on the preliminary plan pertaining to
the street to be constructed and any other utilities to be
constructed with said street.
[2] The beginning and end of the proposed immediate
construction.
§ 155-33 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-34
122:443
[3] Stations corresponding to those shown on the profile.
[4] The elevation of the curb at tangent points of horizontal
curves at street or alley intersections and at the projected
intersections of the curblines.
[5] The location and size of sanitary sewers, with distances
between manholes, of water, gas, electric and other utility
pipes or conduits and of storm drains, inlets and manholes.
[6] The location, type and size of curbs and the widths of
paving, including a cross section.
[7] The location and species of street shade trees and the
location and type of fire hydrants and streetlights.
(b) Profile. The profile shall be a vertical section of the street with
details of vertical alignment as follows:
[1] Profiles and elevations of the ground along the center line
and right-of-way lines of proposed streets.
[2] A profile of the sanitary sewer, with a profile over the
sewer of the present and finished ground surface, showing
manhole locations with stations beginning at the lowest
manhole.
[3] A profile of the storm drain, showing manhole locations.
(c) Cross section. The cross section shall comply with Township
standards and specifications as minimum requirements. It
shall show a typical cross section across the street or alley,
with details of grading and construction as follows:
[1] The ultimate right-of-way width and the location and width
of paving within the ultimate right-of-way.
[2] The type, depth and crown of paving.
[3] The type and size of curb.
[4] When sidewalks are required, grading of the sidewalk area
should be carried to the full width of the ultimate right-ofway
and slopes of cut or fill extended beyond the ultimate
right-of-way.
[5] The location, width, type and depth of sidewalks, when
required.
[6] The typical location, size and depth of sewers and utilities.
B. Record plan.
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required for a
record plan as for a preliminary plan, and, in addition, for recording
§ 155-34 LIMERICK CODE § 155-34
122:444
purposes, the plans shall be placed on sheet sizes of 24 by 36
inches, 18 by 30 inches or 15 by 18 inches. All lettering and lines
should be so drawn as to be legible if the plan should be reduced to
half size.
(2) Information to be shown. The plan, which may constitute a portion
only of an approved preliminary plan, shall show:
(a) A title, as required for a preliminary plan.
(b) Courses and distances sufficient for the legal description of all
the lines shown on the plan. The error of closure shall not be
greater than one part in 10,000.
(c) Names of abutting owners; names, locations, widths and other
dimensions of streets, including center line courses, distances
and curve data; descriptive data of ultimate right-of-way lines
parallel to or concentric with a center line; location tie-ins by
courses and distances to the nearest intersection of all
existing, planned and approved streets, alleys and easements;
and recreational areas and other public improvements, within
the land to be subdivided.
(d) All lots are to be deeded to the site of public ultimate rights-ofway
so that a single deed may be drawn to the governing body
for the dedication of streets by the subdivider, developer or
builder.
(e) Evidence that the plans are in conformity with zoning,
building, sanitation and other applicable Township ordinances
and regulations. In any instance where such plans do not
conform, evidence shall be presented that an exception has
been officially authorized.
(f) The location, material and size of monuments with reference to
them.
(g) Building setback lines with distances from the center line.
(h) Restrictions in the deed affecting the subdivision of the
property.
(3) Certificates. When approved, the record plan must show:
(a) The signature of the registered engineer or surveyor, certifying
that the plan represents a survey made by him, that the
monuments shown thereon exist as located and that all
dimensional and geodetic details are correct.
(b) The signature of the subdivider, developer or builder, certifying
his adoption of the plan.
§ 155-34 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-34
122:445
(c) The signature of the Township Supervisors and the date of
approval.
(d) The signature of the members of the Planning Commission of
Limerick Township and the date of approval.
C. Landscape plan. [Added 5-7-1991 by Ord. No. 130]
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required as for a
preliminary plan.
(2) Information to be shown:
(a) The plan scale, date, North arrow and location map with
zoning district designations for the site and adjacent
properties.
(b) The location of all existing and proposed buildings and
structures.
(c) The location of all existing and proposed roads, parking,
service areas and other paved areas.
(d) The location of all outside storage and trash receptacle areas.
(e) Sidewalks, berms, fences, walls, freestanding signs and site
lighting.
(f) Existing and proposed underground and aboveground utilities,
such as site lighting, transformers, hydrants, manholes, valve
boxes, etc. (Reference may be made to other submission
drawings.)
(g) All existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals; in
order to determine the relationship of planting and grading,
areas with slopes in excess of 3:1 shall be indicated on the
plan.
(h) Existing mature trees, woodland and tree masses to remain.
(i) Existing mature trees, woodland and tree masses to be
removed.
(j) The location of all proposed landscaping, including required
street trees, stormwater basin landscaping, parking lot
landscaping, perimeter buffer and site element screen
landscaping.
(k) A planting schedule listing proposed plant material, species,
size, quantity and root condition.
(l) A schedule showing all chapter requirements and plantings
proposed for each category.
§ 155-34 LIMERICK CODE § 155-34
122:446
§ 155-35. Land development plans.
(m) Planting details, including method of preparing existing
vegetation and planting methods.
(n) Information in the form of notes or specifications concerning
seeding, sodding, ground cover, mulching and the like.
(o) A detailed cost estimate shall be submitted with the public
improvement escrow, showing the value of all proposed
landscaping, including all labor, materials and guaranty.
(3) Certificates. When approved, the landscape plan must show:
(a) The signature and seal of the registered landscape architect
responsible for preparing the landscape plan and details.
(b) The signature of the subdivider, developer or builder.
(c) The signatures of the Township Supervisors, Engineer and
Planning Commission.
A. A preliminary and final plan of a plat of land development shall be
required and shall be presented in conformance with the drafting
standards, existing features of the land to be set forth and information
to be shown as enumerated in §§ 155-33 and 155-34 of this article as
they are applicable to land development plans. [Amended 3-21-2000
by Ord. No. 208]
B. In addition, a land development plan shall include the following:
(1) All covenants relating to use.
(2) Man-made structures and features for the use of two or more
prospective occupants.
(3) The lot, tract or parcel size.
(4) The zoning classification and applicable standards with which
compliance is necessary for granting final approval.
(5) The type of dwelling or commercial/industrial use.
(6) The density and/or intensity of use.
(7) Lot coverage.
(8) Use of the development.
(9) The location and placement of accessory structures and facilities.
(10) Streets, pedestrianways and parking facilities.
(11) Common open space.
§ 155-34 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-35
122:447
(12) Public facilities.
(13) A site-utilization scheme.
(14) Specifications for required improvements and changes to be
effected upon the existing terrain or existing structures thereon.
§ 155-35 LIMERICK CODE § 155-35
122:448
ARTICLE VII
Fees; Conditions of Acceptance; Penalties
§ 155-36. Fees and costs. [Amended 3-18-1986 by Ord. No. 67-3;
4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109; 2-20-1996 by Ord. No. 176]
The subdivider shall be required to furnish a bond and to pay the following
fees and costs:
A. (Reserved)172
B. Preliminary plan.
(1) For all subdivisions consisting of five or fewer parcels or tracts of
land, a fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors shall be submitted with the plans.
(2) For all subdivisions consisting of six or more but not exceeding 10
parcels or tracts of land, a fee in an amount set by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors shall be submitted with the plans.
(3) For all other subdivision plans, including but not limited to lots in
excess of 10 parcels or tracts of land, condominiums/townhouses
and/or apartments, and all other general land development plans, a
fee in an amount set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors shall
be submitted with the plans.
(4) The Township shall maintain a record of all costs, including but not
limited to engineering, legal, planning, administration and
advertising incurred for the processing of said subdivisions in
excess of five parcels or tracts of land and all other subdivisions for
condominiums/townhouses and general land development plans. A
condition for final approval of said plan shall be an accounting of
said costs expended by the Township. Should the accounting
establish a cost less than the fee paid the Township by the
applicant, the Township shall remit to the applicant the difference
between the amount of fee paid and the actual cost of processing
said application. Should the accounting establish a cost in excess of
the fee paid, the applicant, prior to final approval, shall pay to the
Township the difference between the actual cost expended by the
Township in processing the application and the amount of fee paid.
[Amended 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 208]
C. Final plan. No fee will be charged for filing an improvement
construction plan or a record plan, unless no preliminary plan has been
filed, in which case the fees established for the preliminary plan will be
charged. No final plan shall be approved unless all fees have been paid
in full, to guarantee the payment of the following: [Amended 4-4-1989
by Ord. No. 109; 5-10-2007 by Ord. No. 274]
172. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, dealing with sketch plans, was repealed 3-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 208.
§ 155-36 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-36
122:449
§ 155-37. Conditions of acceptance.
§ 155-38. Violations and penalties.
(1) Engineering services: the services of the Township Engineer or
designee, as provided in these rules and regulations, and, in
addition, all costs for other engineering and professional
certifications as are deemed necessary.
(2) Material and facilities tests: the actual cost of all drainage, water
and/or material tests.
(3) Inspection: two times the payroll plus expenses for each hour or
portion thereof that the Township Code Enforcement Officer is
engaged in the work.
(4) Dedication: legal fees, advertising and other costs involved in the
dedication of streets and public improvements to the Township.
(5) Street, sewer and utility construction.
A. Conditions. The Township shall have no obligation to take over and
make public any street or other improvement unless:
(1) The required improvements, utility mains and laterals and
monuments, shown on an approved plan or plans, have been
constructed to all requirements and specifications.
(2) It is established to the satisfaction of the Township Supervisors that
there is a need for the improvements to be taken over and made
public.
B. Acceptance. The Township shall have no responsibility with respect to
any street or other improvement notwithstanding the use of the same
by the public, unless the street or other improvement is accepted by
ordinance or resolution of the Township Supervisors.
C. Guaranty. The applicant shall guarantee, for a period of two years from
the date of the ordinance accepting dedication, to maintain the stability
of all materials and work and to promptly make good and replace all
poor or inferior materials and work and to remedy all defects in
materials or workmanship and all shrinkage, settlement or other faults
of any kind whatsoever arising therefrom, at his own expense and to the
satisfaction of the Township Engineer or designee, when notified in
writing to do so by the Township Engineer, and, in order to secure the
guaranty as herein required, the Township shall be assured by means of
a proper guaranty in the form of a bond, with surety satisfactory to the
Township, or the deposit of funds or securities in escrow in an amount
equal to 5% of the completion guaranty posted by the owner with the
Township.
§ 155-36 LIMERICK CODE § 155-38
122:450
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which, being the owner
or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land, shall lay out,
construct, open or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer,
water main or other improvement for public use, travel or other
purposes or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting
thereon or who sells, transfers or agrees or enters into an agreement to
sell any land in a subdivision or land development, whether by
reference to or by other use of a plat of such subdivision or land
development or otherwise, or who shall erect any building thereon,
unless and until a final plat has been prepared in full compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and of the regulations adopted hereunder
and has been recorded as provided herein, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, such person or the
members of such partnership or the officers of such corporation or the
agent of any of them responsible for such violation shall pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000 per lot or parcel or per dwelling within each lot or
parcel. All fines collected for such violations shall be paid over to the
Township. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of
transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring
shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.173
B. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of this subdivision and land development
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more
than $1,000 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the Township as a result thereof. Each day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. [Amended 5-10-2007
by Ord. No. 274]
173. Editor's Note: Original Article VIII, Condominiums, which followed this section, was
deleted 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109. For current provisions, see the Uniform Condominium
Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 155-38 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-38
122:451

ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ 155-39. Amendment procedure.
The Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township may, from time to time,
amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this chapter by proceeding in
the following manner. The Board of Supervisors, by resolution adopted at a
regular or special meeting, shall fix the time and place of a public hearing
on the proposed amendment and cause 30 days' notice thereof to be given
as follows:
§ 155-40. Referral to Planning Commission.
At least 30 days prior to the public hearing, all proposed amendments,
before adoption, shall be referred to the Township Planning Commission for
recommendation and report. Said recommendation and report shall not be
binding.
A. By publishing a notice thereof twice in one newspaper of general
circulation in the Township.
B. The notice shall state the general nature of the proposed amendment
and that full opportunity to be heard will be given to any citizen and all
parties in interest attending such hearing.
C. Whenever a proposed amendment affects a particular property, then
there shall be posted upon said property or premises, at such place or
places as the Board of Supervisors may direct, notice of said proposed
amendment.
§ 155-39 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-40
122:453

ARTICLE IX
New Residential Sale Notice/Disclosure
[Added 7-5-2000 by Ord. No. -215]
§ 155-41. Applicability.
This article shall apply to the record owner (the "seller") of a vacant
subdivided residential lot or a newly constructed home within the Township
("new residential property") who is selling such new residential property to
a member(s) of the general public (the "buyer"). This article is not intended
to duplicate any information required to be included in disclosures made
under the Pennsylvania Uniform Planned Community Act, the Pennsylvania
Uniform Condominium Act and/or the Pennsylvania Real Estate seller
Disclosure Act. To the extent there is any conflict between this article or
any provisions hereof and any of the foregoing Acts, or any other state or
any federal law, the foregoing Acts or any other state law or any federal law,
shall take precedence.
§ 155-42. Intent.
The requirements of this article are imposed with an intention to inform the
buyer of important information pertaining to the new residential property
that the buyer should consider obtaining and to inform the buyer as to
where to obtain such information, including but not limited to the general
nature of the subdivision and/or land development project in which the new
residential property is located (the "project") and limitations, easements
and restrictions relating to the new residential property. The notices and/
or disclosures required under this section are not intended to constitute an
exhaustive recitation of items which may be of importance in any particular
transaction involving new residential property, but instead are intended to
alert buyers as to potential issues of importance.
§ 155-43. Disclosure requirements.
A. Before signing a sales agreement for any new residential property, the
seller shall provide a notice/disclosure statement to the buyer which
conforms with the requirements of this article (the "disclosure
statement") and shall obtain from the buyer a signed disclosure
statement that verifies that the seller has provided the information that
is required by this article.
B. The seller of any new residential property shall display the final,
municipally approved record subdivision or land development plan for
the project (the "plan") in the location where property sales are
transacted by the seller or shall otherwise make the plan available for
review by the buyer(s). A copy of the plan must also be made available
for purchase by buyer(s) at no greater than the cost to seller to
duplicate the plan or, alternatively, may be provided by seller to the
buyer(s) at no cost to the buyer(s). The seller shall also make the full set
of the approved plans for the project available for review by the buyer.
§ 155-41 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-43
122:455
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, in the event an
agreement of sale is entered into before final approval for the project
has been received from the Township, the seller shall only be obligated
under this subsection to (1) make the latest version of the full set of
plans for the project available for review by the buyer prior to the
execution of the agreement of sale; (2) inform the buyer that the buyer
should review the final plans before completing settlement; and (3)
make the plan and the full set of final, approved plans available for the
buyer's review and make the plan available for the buyer's purchase
after the plans have been approved by the Township.
C. Seller shall provide the buyer with the condominium or homeowners'
association documents (including declaration, plats and plans and
bylaws) or, in the event the project is not subject to either the
Pennsylvania Uniform Planned Community Act or the Pennsylvania
Uniform Condominium Act, the declaration of restrictions or similar
document applicable to the project, if any. The foregoing documents
shall be provided to the buyer before an agreement of sale for new
residential property is fully executed.
D. The seller shall provide the buyer with a list of all utility easements and
other easements executed or to be executed by seller in connection
with the project which will ultimately be but have not yet been
recorded, if any. The foregoing list shall be provided to the buyer before
an agreement of sale for new residential property is fully executed.
E. The seller shall provide the buyer with a list of any permits and/or
approvals which are required to develop the project and the new
residential property as shown on the plan, and shall inform the buyer
that the buyer can contact the applicable permitting or approving
agencies to determine the status of such permits or approvals. The
foregoing list shall be provided to the buyer before an agreement of
sale for the new residential property is fully executed.
F. In addition to the above items, the seller shall provide the following
information to a buyer prior to the execution of an agreement of sale for
new residential property by both the buyer and the seller:
(1) The seller shall inform the buyer that the plan and/or the full set of
approved subdivision/land development plans for the project
should be reviewed by the buyer for purposes of identifying, among
other things:
(a) Common areas, such as park lands, streets, open space, bike
paths, walking trails (for pedestrians as well as for animals)
and recreational facilities which are part of the project and
which may be near or adjacent to the new residential property
that the buyer is purchasing (the "new residential property");
(b) The lot lines or other boundaries of the new residential
property the buyer is purchasing and of lots or units adjacent
thereto and any applicable dimensional requirements relating
§ 155-43 LIMERICK CODE § 155-43
122:456
to such lots or units, including setback requirements, and
building coverage, impervious coverage and height limitations;
(c) Stormwater management facilities and drainage areas,
including detention/retention basins and easements;
(d) Sanitary sewer facilities and easements;
(e) Utility easement areas;
(f) The zoning classification of the new residential property at the
time the subdivision/land development of which the new
residential property is a part was approved by the Township;
(g) The existence of any environmentally sensitive areas on the
new residential property being purchased or within the
project, including steep slopes, wetlands and floodplains, and
the fact that governmental laws, rules, regulations and
ordinances may limit the use and development of these areas;
(h) Restrictions on the project imposed by the Township; and
(i) The existence and location of on-site water and/or on-site
sanitary sewage facilities or systems.
(2) The seller shall inform the buyer that the buyer should review the
current Zoning Map and Zoning Ordinance of the Township174 to
determine the zoning classification of the property within the
project as well as of properties surrounding the project for the
purpose of determining permitted principal and accessory uses,
and any applicable dimensional requirements such as building size,
setback requirements, building and impervious coverage
limitations, and height limitations. The seller shall further inform
the buyer that the current Zoning, Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinances of the Township are available for review
and purchase at the Township office, and that such ordinances are
subject to change.
(3) The seller shall inform the buyer that the buyer should review
approved and proposed (filed) subdivision and land development
plans and the zoning classification of properties surrounding the
project for the purpose of identifying conditions and permitted
principal uses and permitted accessory uses on surrounding
properties which may impact the project generally or the new
residential property specifically. The seller shall further inform the
buyer that such approved plans are available for review at the
Township office and that the recorded portions of such plans are
available at the Montgomery County Recorder of Deeds Office. The
seller shall further inform the buyer that such zoning information is
available in the current Township Zoning Code and Zoning Map,
174. Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Zoning.
§ 155-43 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-43
122:457
§ 155-44. Residential disclosure statement.
The buyer shall review and sign the notice/disclosure statement prior to the
signing of an agreement of sale for new residential property. The seller will
be obligated to provide a copy of the signed disclosure statement to the
and that the current Zoning, Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinances and Zoning Map of the Township are available for
review and purchase at the Township office, and that such
ordinances are subject to change.
(4) The seller shall inform the buyer that the buyer should obtain a title
report for the new residential property from a reputable title
insurer and obtain copies of all plans, documents, easements and
restrictions listed therein to determine what easements,
restrictions or other limitations affect, may affect or may be
imposed on the new residential property.
(5) The seller shall inform the buyer that the buyer should review any
declarations, deed restrictions, homeowners' association
documents or other documents relating to the new residential
property for the purpose of determining, among other things, what
obligations the buyer shall have after purchasing the new
residential property with respect to maintenance, repair and
replacement of the new residential property, any common areas or
any other areas; a description of the real estate the buyer will be
purchasing; obligations or potential obligations of the buyer with
respect to any homeowners' association and common areas; the
ownership of common areas; what future development can take
place within the project; and restrictions on the use of the property
within the project.
(6) If applicable, the seller shall inform the buyer that local authorities
may require connection to public water and/or sewer systems in
the future and that tapping/connecting fees may be imposed.
(7) The seller shall inform the buyer of the existence, location and
record owner of any natural gas or petroleum transmission line
located within 100 yards of the new residential property being
purchased by the buyer.
(8) The seller shall inform the buyer that the buyer should consider
contacting the Township to determine the status of dedication of
any roads, common areas, sewer facilities or other areas in the
project.
(9) The seller shall inform the buyer that the buyer should consider
retaining the services of an attorney, real estate professional,
professional surveyor, professional engineer and/or other
professional to assist the buyer in obtaining and evaluating
information relevant to buyer's new residential property purchase.
§ 155-43 LIMERICK CODE § 155-44
122:458
Code Enforcement officer prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
or use and occupancy certificate for the new residential property, unless
the new residential property is first occupied by seller or a party to whom
seller leases the new residential property, in which event the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall not be conditioned upon receipt of a signed
disclosure statement. The disclosure statement required to be provided to
buyers hereunder shall be in substantially the following form.175
§ 155-45. Enforcement.
Should a seller be found guilty of violating this article in a summary
proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge in accordance with law, a
fine of not more than $1,000 for each offense may be levied against the
seller. Each new residential property transaction in which the provisions
hereof are violated shall be considered a separate offense. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, the Township may seek enforcement of this article by means
of a request for injunctive relief or such other equitable remedies in a court
of competent jurisdiction as may be provided by law.
175. Editor's Note: The Disclosure Statement is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 155-44 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 155-45
122:459
Chapter 157
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 157, Swamp Creek Watershed Stormwater Management,
adopted 6-28-2007 by Ord. No. 279, as amended, was repealed
12-16-2014 by Ord. No. 356. See now Ch. 151, Stormwater
Management.]
Chapter 160
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax collection — See Ch. 44.
§ 155-45 LIMERICK CODE § 155-45
122:460
ARTICLE I
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 12-27-1973 by Ord. No. 53]
§ 160-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, a limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity or profession or any other undertaking
of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit, whether by a person, partnership or association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home and
to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent. Actual
residence is not necessarily "domicile," for "domicile" is the fixed place of
abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. "Domicile" is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home until some event occurs to induce him to adopt
some other permanent home. In the case of businesses or associations, the
"domicile" is that place considered as the center of business affairs and the
place where its functions are discharged.[Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No.
109]
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent and whether in cash or in property; not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising
under workmen's compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation or payments commonly recognized as old age benefits,
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment or payments
commonly known as "public assistance" or unemployment compensation
payments by governmental agencies or payments to reimburse expenses
or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and salary
supplemental programs, including but not limited to programs covering
hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental unemployment
benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
§ 160-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-1
122:461
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER OR OFFICER — The person, public employee or
private agency designated by the governing body to collect and administer
the tax on earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs
and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash
or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such
business, profession or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based
on income.
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the Township of Limerick.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership or association or any other entity
domiciled in the Township of Limerick.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership or association or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 160-2. Imposition of tax; amount; installment payments; filing of
returns.
A. A tax of 1% is hereby imposed for general revenue purposes, in the case
of a taxpayer on a calendar-year basis, for the current year, beginning
January 28, 1974, and ending December 31, 1974, and for each year
thereafter, beginning January 1 of said year and ending December 31 of
said year, and, in the case of a taxpayer on a fiscal-year basis other than
a calendar year, for the current year, beginning January 28, 1974, and
ending at the end of the taxpayer's fiscal year, current on or beginning
on January 28, 1974, and for each taxpayer's fiscal year beginning after
January 28, 1974, beginning at the beginning of said taxpayer's fiscal
year and ending at the ending thereof, upon the following:
(1) Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned for
activities or services wherever performed or rendered by individual
residents of the Township of Limerick.
(2) Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned for
activities or services performed or rendered within the Township of
Limerick by individual nonresidents of the Township of Limerick.
§ 160-1 LIMERICK CODE § 160-2
122:462
§ 160-3. Declaration and payment of tax.
(3) Net profits earned from the operation of a business, profession or
other activity wherever carried on by residents of the Township of
Limerick.
(4) Net profits earned from the operation of a business, profession or
other activity carried on within the Township of Limerick by
nonresidents of the Township of Limerick.
B. The taxes levied under Subsection A(1) and (2) above shall relate to and
be imposed upon salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation
paid by an employer or on his behalf to a person who is employed by
him. The tax levied under Subsection A(3) and (4) above shall relate to
and be imposed upon the net profits of any business, profession or other
activity carried on by any person or persons.
C. Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of any
year beginning after December 31, 1974, shall pay to the Income Tax
Officer, in equal installments, the tax thereon as follows: the first
installment at the time of filing the declaration and the other
installments on or before the quarterly payment dates which remain for
said year after the filing of the declaration.
D. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15, 1975, make and file with the
Income Tax Officer, on a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a
final return showing the amount of net profits earned during the period
beginning January 28, 1974, and ending December 31, 1974, the total
amount of tax due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon. At
the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the Officer
the balance of tax due or shall make a demand for a refund or credit in
the case of overpayment. Every taxpayer, on or before April 15 of every
year after 1974, shall make and file with the Income Tax Officer, on a
form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a final return showing the
amount of net profits earned during the period beginning January 1 of
the immediately prior year and ending December 31 of said
immediately prior year, the total amount of tax due thereon and the
total amount of tax paid thereon. At the time of filing the final return,
the taxpayer shall make a demand for a refund or credit in the case of
overpayment.
E. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of paying the January quarterly installment of
his estimated tax for any year, elect to make and file with the Income
Tax Officer, on or before January 31 of the succeeding year, the final
return as hereinabove required.
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15,
1974, make and file with the Income Tax Officer, on a form
prescribed or approved by the Officer, a declaration of his
§ 160-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-3
122:463
estimated net profits during the period beginning January 28, 1974,
and ending December 31, 1974, and thereafter shall make and file
with said Officer, on or before April 15 of the then-current year,
on said form a declaration of his estimated net profits during the
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the thencurrent
year. Every taxpayer making net profits shall pay to the
Income Tax Officer the tax due on said estimated net profits for
1974 at the time of filing the declaration and the tax due for his
estimated net profits for each year after 1974 in four quarterly
installments as follows: the first installment at the time of filing
the declaration and the other installments on or before June 15 of
the then-current year, September 15 of the then-current year and
January 15 of the next succeeding year, respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
any year beginning after December 31, 1974, shall make and file on
said form a declaration of his estimated net profits during the
period beginning on the date he first anticipates any net profit and
ending December 31 of the then-current year, on or before June 15
of the then-current year or September 15 of the then-current year
or December 31 of the then-current year, whichever of these dates
next follows the date on which the taxpayer first anticipates such
net profit.
(3) The Income Tax Officer may provide for the making and filing of
adjusted declarations of estimated net profits and for the payments
of the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has filed the
declaration hereinabove required anticipates additional net profits
not previously declared or finds that he has overestimated his
anticipated net profits.
(4) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
any year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file his return as hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15, 1975, make and file with the Income Tax Officer, on
a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a final return showing
the amount of earned income received during the period beginning
January 28, 1974, and ending December 31, 1974, the total amount
of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of
tax thereon that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions
relating to collection at the source and the balance of tax due. At
the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance
of the tax due or shall make a demand for a refund or credit in the
case of overpayment. Every taxpayer, on or before April 15 of every
year after 1974, shall make and file with the Income Tax Officer, on
a form prescribed or approved by the Officer, a final return showing
the amount of earned income received during the period beginning
§ 160-3 LIMERICK CODE § 160-3
122:464
§ 160-4. Collection at source.
January 1 of the immediately prior year and ending December 31
of said immediately prior year, the total amount of tax due thereon,
the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax thereon that has
been withheld pursuant to the provisions relating to the collection
at the source and the balance of tax due. At the time of filing
of the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax
due or shall make a demand for a refund or credit in the case of
overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding.
(a) Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary, wage, commission
or other compensation and who received any earned income
not subject to the provisions relating to collection at the source
shall make and file with the Income Tax Officer, on a form
prescribed or approved the Officer, a quarterly return on or
before May 30, 1974, August 31, 1974, November 30, 1974,
and January 1, 1975, setting forth the aggregate amount of
earned income not subject to withholding by him during the
period beginning January 28, 1974, and ending April 28, 1974,
and during the period beginning April 28, 1974, and ending
July 28, 1974, and during the period beginning July 28, 1974,
and ending October 28, 1974, and during the period beginning
October 28, 1974, and ending December 31, 1974,
respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the Officer may require. Every taxpayer making
such return shall, at the time of the filing thereof, pay the
Officer the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
(b) After the calendar year 1974, every taxpayer who is employed
for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation who
received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at the source shall make and file with the
Income Tax Officer, on a form prepared, supplied and
prescribed by the Income Tax Officer, a quarterly return on or
before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the
succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned
income not subject to withholding by him during the threemonth
periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of
the current year, September 30 of the current year and
December 31 of the current year, respectively, and subject to
the tax, together with such other information as the Income
Tax Officer shall require. Every taxpayer who makes such a
return shall, at the time of the filing of the return with the
Income Tax Officer, pay to the Officer the amount of tax shown
as due thereon.
§ 160-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-4
122:465
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Township of Limerick who, on
January 28, 1974, employs one or more persons, other than domestic
servants, for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation shall,
on or before February 1, 1974, register with the Officer his name and
address and such other information as the Officer may require. Every
employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse or
other place of business within the Township of Limerick who, after
January 28, 1974, employs for the first time after that date one or more
persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission
or other compensation shall, within 15 days after becoming an
employer, register with the Officer his name and address and such
other information as the Officer may require.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Township of Limerick who employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation shall deduct, at the time of payment
thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employee or employees and shall, on or before May 30, 1974, August
31, 1974, November 30, 1974, and January 1, 1975, file a return and
pay to the Income Tax Officer the amount of taxes deducted during the
period beginning January 28, 1974, and ending April 28, 1974, and
during the period beginning April 28, 1974, and ending July 28, 1974,
and during the period beginning July 28, 1974, and ending October 28,
1974, and during the period beginning October 28, 1974, and ending
December 31, 1974, respectively. After the calendar year 1974, every
employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse or
other place of business within the Township of Limerick who employs
one or more persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation shall deduct, at the time of payment
thereof, the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his
employee or employees and shall, on or before April 30 of the current
year, July 31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and
January 31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Income
Tax Officer the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding threemonth
periods ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December
31 of the then-current year, respectively.
(1) Each such return filed, unless otherwise agreed upon between the
Income Tax Officer and the employer, shall show the name and
social security number of each such employee, the earned income
of such employee during the preceding three-month or other
period, the tax deducted therefrom, the political subdivision
imposing the tax upon such employee, the total earned income of
all such employees during such preceding three-month or other
period and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the
return.
§ 160-4 LIMERICK CODE § 160-4
122:466
(2) Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods,
has failed to deduct the proper tax or any part thereof or has failed
to pay over the proper amount of tax to the Income Tax Officer of
the Township of Limerick may be required by such Officer to file his
return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases, payments of tax shall
be made to the Officer on or before the last day of the month
succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
C. Returns.
(1) On or before February 28, 1975, every employer shall file with the
Officer:
(a) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income
paid, the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of
tax paid to the Officer for the period beginning January 28,
1974, and ending December 31, 1974.
(b) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 28, 1974,
and ending December 31, 1974, setting forth the employee's
name, address and social security number, the amount of
earned income paid to the employee during said period, the
amount of tax deducted, the political subdivision imposing the
tax upon such employee and the amount of tax paid to the
Officer. Every employer shall furnish two copies of the
individual return to the employee for whom it is filed.
(2) On or before February 28 of every year after 1975, every employer
shall file with the Officer.
(a) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income
paid, the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of
tax paid to the Officer for the period beginning January 1 of the
immediately prior year and ending December 31 of the
immediately prior year.
(b) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or part of the period beginning January 1 of the
immediately prior year and ending December 31 of the
immediately prior year, setting forth the employee's name,
address and social security number, the amount of earned
income paid to the employee during said period, the amount of
tax deducted, the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon
such employee and the amount of tax paid to the Officer. Every
employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to
the employee for whom it is filed.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of any
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
§ 160-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-4
122:467
§ 160-5. Powers and duties of Income Tax Officer.
E. Except as otherwise provided by Section of the Act of the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, approved the 31st day
of December, 1965, No. 511, known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act,"176
every employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
deductions required by this section shall be liable for payment of the
taxes which he was required to withhold, to the extent that such taxes
have not been recovered from the employee.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the Income Tax Officer to collect and receive the
taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his
duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each
person or business paying the tax and the date of such receipt. Upon
the filing of a final return for any year and its acceptance as true and
correct by the Income Tax Officer, said Officer shall promptly refund
any overpayment of tax demand therein to the taxpayer. The Income
Tax Officer shall pay all taxes, fines and penalties collected by him, less
refunds made to taxpayers for overpayment of tax and a reasonable
reserve for refunds which must be made therefrom, to the Treasurer of
the Township of Limerick within one month and 15 days after receipt of
the same.
B. The Income Tax Officer, before entering upon his official duties, shall
give and acknowledge a bond to the Township of Limerick in such
amount as may be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors, which amount shall be equal to the maximum amount of
taxes of which such Officer may be in possession at any given time. If
the Board of Supervisors shall, by resolution, designate any bond
previously given by the Income Tax Officer as adequate, such previously
given bond shall satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
(1) The bond of the Income Tax Officer shall be joint and several, with
one or more corporate sureties which shall be surety companies
authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and duly licensed by the Insurance Commissioner of said
commonwealth.
(2) Said bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by said
Officer and his clerks, assistants and appointees of all trusts
confided in him by virtue of his office, upon the faithful execution of
all duties required by him by virtue of his office, upon the just and
faithful accounting and paying over according to law of all moneys
and balances thereof to be paid to, received or held him by virtue of
176. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 160-4 LIMERICK CODE § 160-5
122:468
his office and upon the delivery to his successor or successors in
office of all books, papers, documents or other official things held
in right of his office.
(3) Said bond shall be taken in the name of the Township of Limerick
and shall be for the use of the Township of Limerick and for the use
of such other person or persons for whom money shall be collected
or received or as its or his interest shall otherwise appear in case of
a breach of any of the conditions of said bond by the acts or neglect
of the principal on the bond.
(4) The Township of Limerick or any person may sue upon said bond in
its or his own name for its or his own use.
(5) The bond shall contain the name or names of the surety companies
bound thereon.
(6) The Township of Limerick may, at any time upon cause shown and
due notice to the Officer and his surety or sureties, require or allow
the substitution or the addition of a surety company acceptable to
said Township for the purpose of making the bond sufficient in
amount, without releasing the surety or sureties first approved
from any accrued liability or previous action on said bond.
(7) The Secretary of the Township of Limerick shall be the custodian of
the bond required to be given by the Income Tax Officer, unless said
Township Secretary is appointed as the Income Tax Officer, in
which event the Township Treasurer shall be the custodian of said
bond. In the event that the Secretary is appointed as the Income
Tax Officer and that the Township Secretary and the Township
Treasurer are one and the same individual, then the Chairman of
the Board of Supervisors shall be the custodian of said bond.
C. The Income Tax Officer is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred and to make refunds in case of overpayment, for any period of
time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of this article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Limerick. A copy of all such rules and regulations from
time to time in force shall be available for public inspection at the office
of the Income Tax Officer.
D. The Income Tax Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof of the
taxpayer, earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and
necessary business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not
paid by the taxpayer's employer.
§ 160-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-5
122:469
§ 160-6. Compensation of Income Tax Officer.
The Income Tax Officer shall receive such compensation for his services and
expenses as determined from time to time by the Board of Supervisors of
the Township of Limerick.
§ 160-7. Suits for collection of tax.
E. The Income Tax Officer and the agents designated by him are hereby
authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any employer
or of any taxpayer or of any person whom the Income Tax Officer
reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the
accuracy of any declaration or return or, if no declaration or return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every employer and every taxpayer and
every person whom the Income Tax Officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the
Officer or to any agent designated by him the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examination and investigation, as are hereby
authorized.
F. Any information gained by the Income Tax Officer or his agent or by any
other official or agent of the Township of Limerick as a result of any
declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or verifications required
or authorized by this article shall be confidential, except for official
purposes and except in accordance with a proper judicial order or as
otherwise provided by law.
G. The Income Tax Officer is hereby authorized to establish different filing,
reporting and payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not
coincide with the calendar year.
A. The Income Tax Officer may sue in the name of the Township of
Limerick for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person, although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under the
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return in
the possession of the Officer reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes,
there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
§ 160-5 LIMERICK CODE § 160-7
122:470
§ 160-8. Interest and penalties.
§ 160-9. Violations and penalties.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amount so deducted to the Income
Tax Officer or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to
make the deductions required by this article, there shall be no
limitation.
(5) This action shall not be construed to limit the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Limerick from recovering delinquent taxes by
any other means provided by this article or by other appropriate
law.
C. The Income Tax Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund,
provided that such suit is begun within two years after making such
refund, except that the suit be brought within five years if it appears
that any part of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation
of material fact.
A. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of
1% of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof
during which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected.
B. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable
therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the cost of collection and the
interest and penalties herein imposed.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration, or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the Officer or any agent
designated by him to examine his books, records and papers and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return
or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the
amount of his net profits or earned income in order to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this article shall,
upon conviction thereof before any Magisterial District Judge or
Alderman or court of competent jurisdiction in Montgomery County, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense and costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall be imprisoned for
a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before any
Magisterial District Judge or Alderman or court of competent
jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each
§ 160-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-9
122:471
§ 160-10. Credits or deductions.
offense and costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall
be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declarations or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making any such declaration or return.
A. Payment of any tax imposed upon salaries, wages, commissions, other
compensations or net profits of businesses, professions or other
activities and any income tax imposed by any other political subdivision
pursuant to an ordinance or resolution passed or adopted prior to the
29th day of January 1974 shall be credited to and allowed as a
deduction from the liability of taxpayers for any tax imposed by this
article.
B. Payment of any tax imposed upon salaries, wages, commissions, other
compensations or net profits of businesses, professions or other
activities to a political subdivision, other than the school district of
which the Township of Limerick forms a part, by residents thereof
pursuant to an ordinance or resolution passed or adopted under the
authority of the Act of December 31, 1965, No. 511, known as the
"Local Tax Enabling Act,"177 shall be credited to and allowed as a
deduction from the liability of such persons for any tax imposed by this
article.
C. Payment of any tax on income to any political subdivision, other than
the school district of which the Township of Limerick forms a part, by
residents thereof pursuant to an ordinance or resolution passed or
adopted under the authority of the Act of December 31, 1965, No. 511,
known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act," shall, to the extent that such
income includes salaries, wages, commissions, other compensation or
net profits of businesses, professions or other activities, but in such
proportions as hereinafter set forth, be credited to and allowed as a
deduction from the liability of such persons for any other tax on
salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation or on net profits of
businesses, professions or other activities imposed by this article.
D. Payment of any tax on income to any state, other than the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or to any political subdivision of such
other state by residents thereof pursuant to any state or local law shall,
to the extent that such income includes salaries, wages, commissions or
other compensation or net profits of businesses, professions or other
activities, but in such proportions as hereinafter set forth, be credited
to and allowed as a deduction from the liability of such persons for any
177. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 160-9 LIMERICK CODE § 160-10
122:472
§ 160-11. Collection of delinquent taxes from employers.
The Income Tax Officer shall demand, receive and collect from all
corporations, political subdivisions, associations, companies, firms or
individuals employing persons owing delinquent earned income taxes or
whose wives owe delinquent earned income taxes, upon the presentation of
a written notice in demand under oath or affirmation, containing the name
of the taxable or the husband thereof and the amount of tax due. Upon the
presentation of such written notice and demand, it shall be the duty of any
corporation, political subdivision, association, company, firm or individual
to collect, from the wages, commissions or earnings of such individual
employees then owing or that shall, within 60 days thereafter, become due
or from any unpaid commissions or earnings of any such taxable in its
or his possession or that shall, within 60 days thereafter, come into its
or his possession, a sum sufficient to pay the respective amount of the
delinquent earned income taxes and costs shown upon the written notice
or demand and to pay the same to the Income Tax Officer of the Township
of Limerick within 60 days after such notice shall have been given. Such
corporation, political subdivision, association, firm or individual shall be
entitled to deduct from the moneys collected from each employee the costs
incurred from the extra bookkeeping necessary to record such transactions,
not exceeding 2% of the amount of money so collected and paid over to
the Income Tax Officer. Upon the failure of any such corporation, political
subdivision, association, company, firm or individual to deduct the amount
of such taxes or to pay the same over to the Income Tax Officer, less the cost
of bookkeeping involved in such transaction, as above provided, within the
time hereby required, such corporation, political subdivision, association,
company, firm or individual shall forfeit and pay the amount of such tax
for each such taxable whose taxes are not withheld and not paid over,
together with a penalty of 10% added thereto, to be recovered by an action
of assumpsit in a suit to be instituted by the Income Tax Officer or by the
proper authorities of the Township of Limerick, as debts of like amount are
now by law recoverable, except that such person shall not have the benefit
of any stay of execution or exemption law.
other tax on salaries, wages, commissions, other compensation or net
profits of businesses, professions or other activities imposed by this
article, if residents of the Township of Limerick receive credits and
deductions of a similar kind to a like degree from the tax on income
imposed by the other state or political subdivision.
E. Where a credit or a deduction is allowable under the provisions of this
section, it shall be allowed in proportion to the concurrent periods for
which taxes are imposed by the other state or respective political
subdivision but not in excess of the amount previously paid for a
concurrent period.
§ 160-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-12
122:473
§ 160-12. Collection of delinquent taxes from commonwealth.
Upon presentation of a written notice and demand under oath or affirmation
to the State Treasurer or any other fiscal officer of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or its boards, authorities, agencies or commissions, it shall be
the duty of the Treasurer or Officer to deduct from the wages then owing
or that shall, within 60 days thereafter, become due to any employee a sum
sufficient to pay the respective amount of the delinquent earned income
taxes and costs shown on the written notice. The same shall be paid to the
Income Tax Officer of the Township of Limerick within 60 days after such
notice shall have been given.
§ 160-13. Collection of taxes by suit.
The Township of Limerick, in accordance with the authority granted it by
Section 21 of the Act of December 31, 1965, No. 511, known as the "Local
Tax Enabling Act,"178 shall have the power to collect unpaid earned income
taxes from the persons owing such taxes by suit in assumpsit or other
appropriate remedy. Upon each such judgment, execution may be issued
without any stay or benefit of any exemption law.
178. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.705.
§ 160-12 LIMERICK CODE § 160-13
122:474
ARTICLE II
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-2-1975 by Ord. No. 66; amended in its entirety
12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 287179]
§ 160-14. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Services Tax
(LST)."
§ 160-15. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person appointed by the Township of Limerick to
collect the local services tax herein levied.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a selfemployed
person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Township of Limerick.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type,
kind or character, including services, domestic or otherwise, carried on
or performed within the corporate limits of the Township of Limerick, for
which compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salaries,
wages, commissions or fees for services rendered.
PRIVILEGE — The exercising or carrying on, by any means or manner, of
any occupation whatsoever as hereinabove defined.
TAX — Local services tax in the amount of $52, levied on each engagement
in any occupation, as heretofore defined, with the corporate limits of the
Township of Limerick.
TOWNSHIP OF LIMERICK — The area within the corporate limits of the
Township of Limerick.
§ 160-16. Imposition of tax.
Effective January 2, 1976, and continuing thereafter annually on a calendaryear
basis, the Township of Limerick hereby imposes on each individual
engaged in an occupation within the corporate limits of the Township of
179. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2008.
§ 160-14 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-16
122:475
Limerick, for the privilege of engaging in such occupation, an annual local
services tax in the manner and at the rate hereinafter set forth.
§ 160-17. Amount.
Beginning on the second day of January 1976, each engagement in an
occupation subject to this tax, as set forth in § 160-15 hereof, shall be
subject to the payment of a local services tax of $52, to be paid by each
individual exercising the privilege of engaging in such occupation, as
hereinbefore defined, within the corporate limits of the Township of
Limerick.
§ 160-18. Payment of tax; penalty.
§ 160-19. Duty of employers.
A. Said tax shall be paid to the Collector and shall be due and payable in
accordance with the following schedule:
Taxes Due and Withheld Reports Due and Payable
January 1 to March 31 April 30
April 1 to June 30 July 31
July 1 to September 30 October 31
October 1 to December 31 January 31
B. If said tax is not paid within 30 days after the due dates specified in
Subsection A, a penalty of 5% shall be added thereto.
A. Each employer within the Township of Limerick is hereby charged with
the duty of collecting and paying over to the Collector, from each
employee engaged in his services, said tax of $52 per year upon each
individual employed by said employer who performs services on behalf
of said employer within the geographical limits of the Township of
Limerick or who is engaged in an occupation, as hereinbefore defined,
for the benefit of said employer or in the service of the employer within
the geographical limits of the Township of Limerick.
B. Each employee subject to the tax shall be assessed a pro rata share of
the tax for each payroll period in which the employee is engaged in
Limerick Township. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on an
employee for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate
of the tax of $52 by the number of payroll periods established by the
employer for a calendar year. Each employer is hereby authorized to
deduct this tax from each employee who has not otherwise claimed an
exemption from paying the tax, whether said employee is paid by salary,
wages or commission.
C. Each employer shall make a return in payment of said tax and is
authorized to deduct said local services tax, at rates hereby imposed,
from each employee in his service, whether said employee is paid by
§ 160-16 LIMERICK CODE § 160-19
122:476
§ 160-20. Situs of tax; individuals in more than one occupation.
The situs of the local services tax shall be the place of employment, but in
the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation or an occupation
which requires the individual to work in more than one political subdivision
during the calendar year, the priority of claim to collect such local services
tax shall be in the following order: first, the political subdivision in which a
person maintains his principal office or is principally employed; second, the
political subdivision in which the person resides and works, if such a tax is
levied by that political subdivision; third, the political subdivision in which
a person is employed and which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the
person's home. The place of employment shall be determined as of the day
the taxpayer first becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In
the case of a dispute, the taxes imposed by this article shall apply unless the
individual produces a tax receipt of another taxing authority for the same
calendar year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment.
§ 160-21. Determination of liability for tax and collection.
Each employer in the Township of Limerick shall use his employment
records as of January 2, 1976, and January 1 of each calendar year
thereafter in determining the number of employees from whom said local
services tax shall be deducted and paid over to the Tax Collector. Each
employer who engages the services of an individual in an occupation to be
performed in the Township of Limerick on or after January 2, 1976, and
January 1 of each calendar year thereafter shall require said employee to
furnish him a certificate of payment from the Tax Collector showing that
the local services tax has theretofore been paid. In the event that such
employee has not previously paid his local services tax, the employer shall
withhold the local services tax on a payroll period basis for those payroll
periods in which the taxpayer is employed and remit the same to the Tax
Collector on or before the due dates listed in § 160-18A.
§ 160-22. Self-employed individuals and nonresident employers.
Each self-employed individual in the Township of Limerick who performs
any services of any kind or any type within the corporate limits of the
Township of Limerick, whether the same be regarded either as a
professional or as a business, shall be required to pay local services tax of
$52 for himself. This tax shall be prorated and paid on a quarterly basis, as
if his payroll period is a calendar year, and shall be paid 30 days after the
salary, wages or commission. Each employer within the Township of
Limerick shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on a form to be obtained by him from the Tax Collector. It is further
provided that if the employer fails to file said return and pay said tax
but makes collection thereof from the salaries, wages or commissions
paid by him to said employee, the employer shall be responsible for the
payment of the tax in full without any deductions or commissions, as
though the tax had originally been levied against him.
§ 160-19 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-22
122:477
end of the calendar quarter. He shall be further required to deduct and pay
over, in the manner hereinbefore set forth in § 160-19, a local services tax of
$52 for every individual in his employ who is engaged in the performance of
any occupation or profession for him within the Township of Limerick. Any
individual engaged in any occupation within the Township of Limerick who
is the employee of another and who is subject to this tax, as hereinbefore
defined, shall be liable for the payment of the local services tax of $52 for
himself and shall be treated and regarded as a self-employed individual
if the location of the business of his employer is beyond the corporate
limits of the Township of Limerick and shall be required to furnish to the
Collector a list of all individuals employed by him who exercise the privilege
of engaging in any occupation of any type or character within the corporate
limits of the Township of Limerick during the fiscal year.
§ 160-23. Domestic employees.
Where a person is engaged in domestic services for others and has more
than one employer in the performance of such services, the employer by
whom such domestic is employed on January 2, 1976, and January 1 for each
calendar year thereafter shall be responsible for the collection and payment
of the annual local services tax for such domestic to the Collector, and, in
the event that the domestic is not employed by any person on January 2,
1976, and January 1 for each calendar year thereafter, said responsibility
for deduction and payment over to the Township of Limerick of the local
services tax shall rest upon the employer of the domestic on the next
succeeding date following January 2, 1976, and January 1 for each calendar
year thereafter, and said employer shall furnish to said domestic employee
a certificate of payment of said local services tax, to be exhibited to all other
employers of said domestic, and the production of said certificate to such
other employers shall excuse them from the deduction of any further local
services tax from said domestic employee for the year.
§ 160-24. Scope.
The tax imposed by this article shall be in addition to all other taxes of any
kind or nature heretofore or hereafter levied by the Township of Limerick.
§ 160-25. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines
or penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to keep a
record showing the amount received by him from each self-employed
person paying the tax and the date of such receipt, and it further shall
be his duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from
any employer paying the tax on behalf of his employees by the
deduction made by such employer from the salaries, wages,
commissions or other forms of compensation.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article and is hereby empowered
§ 160-22 LIMERICK CODE § 160-25
122:478
§ 160-26. Employment in more than one political subdivision.
In the event that any person subject to the payment of this tax is employed
in more than one political subdivision during the year which levies an local
services tax, the priority of claim to collect such local services tax shall, in
accordance with Act No. 511,180 be in the following order:
§ 160-27. Suits for collection.
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this article, including a provision for the examination of the payroll
records of any employer within the Township of Limerick and further
for the reexamination and correction of any returns made in compliance
with this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as
to which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
as in other cases provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll of
any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return made by any
employer on behalf of his employees or, if no return was made, to
ascertain the local services tax due. Each employer in the Township of
Limerick is hereby directed and required to give to the Collector the
means, facilities and opportunities for such examinations and
investigations as are hereby authorized.
A. First, the political subdivision in which the person maintains his
principal office or is principally employed.
B. Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and works,
if such tax is levied by that political subdivision.
C. Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposed the tax nearest in miles to the person's home. The place of
employment shall be determined as of the date the taxpayer first
becomes subject to the tax during the calendar year.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due and unpaid for
60 days after the due dates set forth in § 160-18A, the Collector may sue
for the recovery of any such tax due and unpaid under this article,
together with interest and penalty.
B. If, for any reason, the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of
6% on the amount of said tax shall be calculated, beginning 30 days
after the due dates above set forth, together with the penalty set forth
in § 160-18B. Where suit is brought for the recovery of any local
services tax, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be
180. Editor's Note: See the Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 160-25 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-27
122:479
§ 160-28. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article or whoever refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts
in his custody or control in order to determine the number of employees
subject to the local services tax who are in his employment or whoever fails
and refuses to file any return required by this article shall, upon conviction
in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
plus costs of prosecution for each offense and, in default of payment of said
fine, to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days for each offense.
§ 160-29. Distress and sale of goods.
The Tax Collector shall have the power, in case of the neglect or refusal of
any person, copartnership, association or corporation to make payment of
the amount of the tax due by him, after 60 days from the date of the tax
notice, to levy the amount of said tax, any penalty due thereon and costs,
not exceeding costs and charges allowed constables for similar services, by
distress and sale of the goods and chattels of such delinquent, wherever
situate or found, upon giving at least 10 days' public notice of such sale
by posting 10 written or printed notices and by one advertisement in a
newspaper of general circulation published in the county. The Tax Collector
shall have all powers regarding the collection of delinquent local services
taxes as are set forth in the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 160-30. Limitations and validity.
§ 160-31. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Act of December 31, 1965,
effective January 1, 1966, being Act No. 511, known as the "Local Tax
Enabling Act of 1965."181
responsible and liable for the cost of collection and the interest and
penalties therein imposed.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Township of Limerick to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the Township of Limerick
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
181. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 160-27 LIMERICK CODE § 160-31
122:480
ARTICLE III
Exemption From Taxes; Use of Funds
[Adopted 10-6-1987 by Res. No. 87-4; amended in its entirety
12-13-2007 by Ord. No. 287]
§ 160-32. Exemption from tax.
§ 160-33. Application for exemption.
Employers are required to stop withholding the local services tax if an
employee provides an exemption certification. In order to receive an upfront
exemption, the employee must file an annual upfront exemption form with
the Township of Limerick and the employee's employer which will verify
that the employee reasonably expects to receive earned income and net
profits of less than $12,000 from all sources within the corporate limits of
the Township of Limerick for the calendar year for which the exemption
certificate is filed. The employee's statement shall be made on the form
prescribed by the DCED. Employers are required to restart withholding the
local services tax from an employee who files an exemption certificate in the
following circumstances:
§ 160-34. Recapture of unpaid taxes.
If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from the
tax becomes subject to the tax for that calendar year, the employer shall
withhold the tax for the remainder of the calendar year. The employer shall
withhold from the employee, for the first payroll period after receipt of
notification that the employee is subject to the tax, a lump sum equal to
the amount of tax that was not withheld from the employee due to the
exemption claimed, plus the per-payroll amount due for that first payroll
period. The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining
payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for
other employees. In the event employment of the employee is terminated
A. All persons whose total income from all sources is less than $12,000 per
annum shall be exempt from payment of the local services tax as well.
B. Members of a reserve component of the armed forces called to duty.
C. Honorably discharged veterans who served in any war or armed conflict
who are blind, paraplegic, or a double or quadruple amputee as a result
of military service or who are one-hundred-percent disabled from a
service-connected disability.
A. If instructed to do so by the Township of Limerick.
B. If notified by the employee that he or she is no longer eligible for the
exemption; or
C. If the employer pays the employee more than $12,000 for the calendar
year.
§ 160-32 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-34
122:481
during that calendar year, the former employee shall be liable for any
outstanding balance due on the tax.
§ 160-34.1. Receipt of payment.
The Tax Receiver shall provide a receipt of payment of the tax upon request
by a taxpayer.
§ 160-34.2. Use of tax funds.
At least 25% of the funds collected from the tax shall be used to fund
emergency services within Limerick Township.
§ 160-34 LIMERICK CODE § 160-34.2
122:482
ARTICLE IV
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 2-21-1989 by Ord. No. 108]
§ 160-35. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Township of Limerick."
§ 160-36. Statutory authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within Limerick
Township, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are
made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer
Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 160-37. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons,
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments or like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid, or any cancellation thereof, unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 160-36 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
§ 160-35 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-37
122:483
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which meets any
of the following:[Amended 6-3-2014 by Ord. No. 353]
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within Limerick Township,
including, without limitation: buildings; structures; fixtures; mines;
minerals; oil; gas; quarries; spaces, with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees and other improvements; immovables or interests
which, by custom, usage or law, pass with a conveyance of land; but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Is primarily engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real
estate, 90% or more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or
fewer persons and which:
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the
ownership or disposition of real estate; or
(1)
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of
the value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible
assets which are freely transferable and actively traded on an
established market.
(2)
A.
Ninety percent or more of the ownership interest in the corporation
or association is held by 35 or fewer persons, and the corporation
B.
§ 160-37 LIMERICK CODE § 160-37
122:484
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
or association owns, as 90% or more of the fair market value of its
assets, a direct or indirect interest in a real estate company. An indirect
ownership interest is an interest in a corporation or association, 90% or
more of the ownership interest of which is held by thirty-five or fewer
persons whose purpose is the ownership of a real estate company.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for actual
monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefore paid
or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon existing
before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not the
underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof, where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate; provided, however, that where such documents shall set forth a
nominal consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the
price set forth in, or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the "value"
of which is not determinable under Subsection A or B above, the actual
monetary worth of such interest.
C.
§ 160-37 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-37
122:485
§ 160-38. Imposition of tax; rate; payment.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer, and not removed thereby, or
between the grantor, the agent or principle of the grantor, of a related
corporation, association or partnership, and the grantee, existing
before or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for, and in respect to the transaction, or any part thereof,
a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording, or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder, whereon the
date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of
the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,182 so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer, then the tax levied by Limerick Township, under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and
such one-half rate shall become effective without any action on the part
of Limerick Township; provided, however, that Limerick Township, and
any other political subdivision which imposes such tax on the same
person or transfer, may agree that instead of limiting their respective
rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively
different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate
permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. Any realty transfer tax, or a portion thereof, imposed by the Township of
Limerick which is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest
at a rate as prescribed for interest imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9,
1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176), (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as "The
Fiscal Code" and shall accordingly be collected. [Amended
12-14-2006 by Ord. No. 270]
182. Editor's Note: Sections 6901 to 6909 were renumbered as § 6924.101 to 6924.312
7-2-2008 by P.L. 192, No. 32, §§ 2, 3.1 to 11, effective immediately.
§ 160-37 LIMERICK CODE § 160-39
122:486
§ 160-39. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 160-40. Excluded transactions.
A. The tax imposed by § 160-38 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation, or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which Limerick Township is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriffs sale or Tax
Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife, or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
§ 160-39 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-40
122:487
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where Limerick Township reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
§ 160-40 LIMERICK CODE § 160-40
122:488
§ 160-41. Certain documents taxable.
Except as otherwise provided in § 160-40, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations, and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof, are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has, as its primary
purposes, preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 160-40 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-42
122:489
§ 160-42. Acquired companies.
§ 160-43. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however affected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
§ 160-42 LIMERICK CODE § 160-43
122:490
§ 160-44. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 160-45. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or
other officer conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of
the first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the
sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser
shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 160-46. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983, P.L.
40, No. 21, the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Limerick
Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania realty transfer tax, without
compensation from Limerick Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed, unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
Limerick Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for
use of the county, together with a report containing the information as
is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission
shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 160-43 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-47
122:491
§ 160-47. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein, and as a part of such document, the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 160-48. Civil penalties.
§ 160-49. Unpaid tax a lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part, within the boundaries of Limerick Township, which lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or interest therein, are described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable and continue until
discharge by payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas
of Montgomery County in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 160-50. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month of fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 160-47 LIMERICK CODE § 160-51
122:492
§ 160-51. Regulations.
The Board of Supervisors of Limerick Township is charged with
enforcement and collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and
enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax.
The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
§ 160-51 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-51
122:493

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)183
§ 160-52. through § 160-57. (Reserved)
183. Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Per Capita Tax, adopted 12-21-1993 by Ord. No. 159, was
repealed 2-15-2005 by Ord. No. 248.
§ 160-52 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-52
122:495

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)184
§ 160-58. through § 160-62. (Reserved)
184. Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Assessment for Fire Hydrants, adopted 8-1-1995 by Ord. No.
173, was repealed 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 362.
§ 160-58 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-58
122:497

ARTICLE VII
Assessment for Streetlights
[Adopted 8-1-1995 by Ord. No. 173A]
§ 160-63. Assessment established.
An assessment is hereby levied and established for the maintenance of
electric streetlighting in Limerick Township, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, upon all property fronting on a street or highway or portion
thereof, illuminated by such streetlights pursuant to the terms of a contract
between the Township and PECO, and located within 500 feet of such
lighting, whether such property is vacant or improved.
§ 160-64. Assessment formula.
The amount of the assessment imposed hereby shall be based upon a
uniform annual assessment of each property benefited which is an equitable
means of assessment as determined by the Township Supervisors. The
amount of the assessment imposed hereby will be calculated based upon
the following formula: The amount of each assessment here imposed will
be based upon the amount due PECO for a twelve-month period, plus
administration and collection costs, divided by the total number of benefited
properties.
§ 160-65. Notice; payment; penalty.
The Township Tax Collector shall give written or printed notice to all
persons liable for payment of the assessment imposed hereby that the same
is due and payable and shall collect the assessment in the same manner as
the tax levied by the Township upon real property. Every person subject to
the assessment imposed hereby shall make payment of the whole amount
due within 30 days after receipt of the written or printed notice. Every
person subject to the assessment imposed who fails to make payment of the
whole amount thereof within 30 days after the date of the notice shall be
subject to a penalty of 10% of the amount of the assessment due and, in
addition, shall pay interest at a rate of 1.5% per month or fraction of part of
a month, computed upon the amount of the assessment due until the date
of payment thereof.
§ 160-66. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person or property to whom or which
it is beyond the legal power of the Township of Limerick to impose the
assessment herein provided.
§ 160-67. Additional rules and regulations.
The Township reserves a right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to the
administration of this article.
§ 160-63 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-67
122:499

ARTICLE VIII
Collection of Delinquent Real Estate Taxes
[Adopted 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 338]
§ 160-68. Authorization; filing of items.
In addition to the authorization for the collection of taxes and institution of
tax sales authorized by the Real Estate Tax Sales Law ("RETSL"), 72 P.S.
§ 5860.201 et seq., the Montgomery County Tax Claim Bureau is appointed
as alternative collector and is authorized and directed to file liens for
existing delinquent real estate taxes with the Prothonotary of Montgomery
County in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 160-69. Interest.
In accordance with the MCTLA and RETSL, interest shall be charged on
taxes so returned from and after but not before the first day of the month
following the return. Interest shall be charged at the rate of 9% per annum.
§ 160-70. Charges, expenses and fees.
Pursuant to Section 7106 of the MCTLA,185 it is hereby established that
the reasonable charges, expenses and fees incurred in the collection of
any delinquent account under the MCTLA are hereby fixed at 5% of the
total amount of the delinquent taxes (including interest and penalties),
and that additional reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in the collection
of any delinquent taxes shall be fixed at 1% of the total amount of the
delinquent taxes (including interest and penalties), and that said charges
for attorneys' fees and for all charges, expenses and fees set forth herein
shall be paid to the County of Montgomery through the Montgomery County
Tax Claim Bureau in lieu of payment of commission pursuant to Section 207
of RETSL.186
§ 160-71. Additional action.
The proper officials of Limerick Township are hereby authorized and
empowered to take such additional action as they may deem necessary or
appropriate to implement this article.
185. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106
186. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5860.207.
§ 160-68 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 160-71
122:501
Chapter 168
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles abandoned on streets — See Ch. 170.
Junkyards — See Ch. 186.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 132.
§ 168-1. Definitions.
§ 168-2. Motor vehicle nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or lessee to maintain a motor
vehicle nuisance upon the open private grounds of such person, owner or
lessee within the Township. A motor vehicle nuisance shall include any
motor vehicle which is unable to move under its own power and has any of
the following physical defects:
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
LESSEE — Owner, for the purpose of this chapter, when the lessor holds
the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any type of mechanical device propelled by a
motor, in which persons or property may be transported upon public
streets or highways, and including trailers or semitrailers pulled
thereby.
NUISANCE — Any condition, structure or improvement which shall
constitute a threat or potential threat to the health, safety or welfare of
the citizens of Limerick Township.
OWNER — The actual owner, agent or custodian of the property on
which motor vehicles are stored, whether individual or partnership,
association or corporation.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass with sharp edges.
B. One or more flat or open tires or tubes which could permit vermin
harborage.
C. Missing doors, windows, hood, trunk or other body parts which could
permit animal harborage.
§ 160-71 LIMERICK CODE § 168-2
168:502
§ 168-3. Storage of motor vehicle nuisances.
D. Any body parts with sharp edges, including holes resulting from rust.
E. Missing tires resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle.
F. Upholstery which is torn or open which could permit animal and/or
vermin harborage.
G. Broken headlamps or tail lamps with sharp edges.
H. Disassembled chassis parts apart from the motor vehicle stored in a
disorderly fashion or loose in or on the vehicle.
I. Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
J. Broken vehicle frame suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
K. Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause fire or
explosion.
L. Exposed battery containing acid.
M. Inoperable locking mechanism for doors or trunk.
N. Open or damaged floor boards, including trunk and fire wall.
O. Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of the vehicle.
P. Broken grill with protruding edges.
Q. Loose or damaged metal trim and clips.
R. Broken communication equipment antenna.
S. Suspended on unstable supports.
T. Such other defects which could threaten the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of Limerick Township.
A. Any person, owner or lessee who has two or more motor vehicle
nuisances, as defined in § 168-2 above, may store such vehicles in
Limerick Township only in strict compliance with the regulations
provided herein. Any person, owner or lessee who elects to store a
motor vehicle nuisance, as defined in § 168-2 above, must store the
same within a garage or other enclosed building or outside within an
opaque fence at least six feet high which is locked at all times when
unattended. Such motor vehicle nuisances may be stored in an area
enclosed by a chain link fence at least six feet high, screened by
shrubbery around the perimeter to the height of the fence, with an
unobstructed gate capable of admitting fire or emergency equipment.
Such gate shall remain locked at all times when unattended. In
addition, all gas and oil or other flammable liquids shall be removed
from the motor vehicle, and it shall be kept free of vermin infestation
§ 168-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 168-3
168:503
§ 168-4. Inspection; notice to comply.
§ 168-5. Authority to remedy noncompliance.
If the owner of grounds on which motor vehicles are stored does not comply
with the notice to abate the conditions within the time limit prescribed, the
Township shall have the authority to take measures to correct the conditions
and collect the cost of such corrections, plus 10% of all costs. The Township,
in such event and pursuant to its statutory or otherwise authorized police
while being stored. The total area of storage of motor vehicle nuisances
may not exceed 300 square feet without obtaining a proper permit
for storage of such nuisances from the Limerick Township Board of
Supervisors.
B. Any person, owner or lessee who has or desires to store motor vehicle
nuisances, as defined in § 168-2 above, in an exterior storage area
which exceeds 300 square feet must first apply for a permit for either
temporary or permanent storage and pay a fee to Limerick Township
such as may be provided from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.187 The motor vehicle nuisances must be stored within a
garage or other enclosed building or within an opaque fence at least six
feet high or a chain link fence at least six feet high, screened by
shrubbery around the perimeter to the height of the fence, which fence
shall be locked at all times when unattended. In addition, all gas and oil
or other flammable liquids shall be removed from the motor vehicles,
and they shall be kept free of vermin infestation while being stored.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the storage of motor
vehicle nuisances contrary to the provisions of the Limerick Township
Zoning Ordinance.188
A. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby empowered to inspect grounds
on which motor vehicles are stored to determine if there is compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. If noncompliance with the provisions
of this chapter constitutes a nuisance or if any condition, structure or
improvement poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the
public, he shall issue a written notice to be served by registered or
certified mail upon the owner of said premises or, if the owner's
whereabouts or identity are unknown, by posting the notice
conspicuously upon the offending premises.
B. Said notice shall specify the condition or structure or improvement
complained of and shall require the owner to commence to remove or
otherwise rectify the condition or structure or improvement as set forth
therein within 10 days of mailing or posting of said notice and
thereafter to fully comply with the requirements of the notice within a
reasonable time.
187. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
188. Editor's Note: See Ch. 184, Zoning.
§ 168-3 LIMERICK CODE § 168-5
168:504
powers, shall have the right and power to enter upon the offending premises
to accomplish the foregoing.
§ 168-6. Hearing.
§ 168-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/
or to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 168-8. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this chapter or any
remedy provided by law shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather,
they may be employed simultaneously or consecutively at the option of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 168-9. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this chapter would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence,
clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer
may request and shall then be granted a hearing before the Board of
Supervisors, provided that he files with the Board of Supervisors, within
10 days after notice of the Code Enforcement Officer's decision, a
written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief
statement of the grounds therefor, accompanied by payment of a fee
which shall be set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.189 The
hearing shall commence not later than 30 days after the date on which
the petition was filed, unless postponed for sufficient cause.
B. After such hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall sustain, modify or
overrule the action of the Code Enforcement Officer.
189. Editor's Note: The current fee resolution is on file in the office of the Township Secretary.
§ 168-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 168-9
168:505
Chapter 170
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic in mobile home parks — See Ch. 113.
Noise from vehicles — See Ch. 122.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 168.
Off-street parking requirements — See Ch.
184.
§ 168-9 LIMERICK CODE § 168-9
168:506
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 170-1. Title; definitions; interpretation.
§ 170-2. Manner of adopting traffic and parking regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
Limerick Township, except where the law specifically authorizes less formal
action.
§ 170-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Limerick
Township Traffic Ordinance of 1985."
B. Definitions.
(1) Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections
in articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of
June 17, 1976, P.L. 162, No. 81, as amended,190 except that, in this
chapter, the word "street" may be used interchangeably with the
word "highway" and shall have the same meaning as the word
"highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
(2) The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
(3) In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
C. The time, whenever specified in this chapter, shall be that time which is
generally observed by the business interests in the Township, whether
it be Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time.
A. The Township Manager or, if none, the Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in times of emergency:
(1) In case of a fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. These temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Township Manager or, if none, the Chairman of the Board of
190. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 170-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-3
168:507
§ 170-4. Experimental regulations.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, designate places upon
and along the streets in the Township where, for a period of not more
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate those locations
by proper signs and markings. Those regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in this
chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of
any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made
by authority of this section. Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty set out in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of that nature and, in the case of a
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere
in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 and costs and, in default
of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than five
days. The purpose of this section is to allow for tests and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes in the
ordinances of the Township relative to traffic and parking.
§ 170-5. Closing of streets for construction or special events.
Supervisors and the police of the Township in the same manner as
permanent regulations. Any person who drives or parks a vehicle in
violation of any such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign erected or posted to give notice of any such
regulation shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be
liable to the penalty set out in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for
a violation of that nature and, in the case of a violation for which no
specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to
a fine of not more than $50 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 10
days.
A. The Board shall have the authority to close any street or specific part of
a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion while construction or
maintenance work is underway or a special event is being conducted on
the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle
upon any closed portion.
B. The Board shall have the authority to establish a restricted traffic area
upon any street where construction or maintenance work is underway
and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing
that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other
manner, not to proceed.
§ 170-3 LIMERICK CODE § 170-5
168:508
§ 170-6. Parades, processions and assemblages.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A "procession" shall not include a funeral caravan
or military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Board, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in advance of
the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but, in any
case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used,
application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Board, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks in advance
of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but, in any case
where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application
shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The
permit shall specify the date on which the procession is to be held, the
route to be followed by the procession, the hour when and place where
participants may commence to assemble and form before the
procession is underway, the time when the procession may commence
to move along its route and the time by which the end of the procession
shall have reached the end of the route of the procession and the
procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any
person to hold or to participate in any procession unless the permit
shall have been granted or under any conditions as to time or route
other than those stated in the permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 170-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-7
168:509
§ 170-7. Authority to direct traffic.
The police officers of the Township shall have the authority to direct traffic
on the streets in the Township, at intersections in public and in other places
where the Vehicle Code or this chapter applies.
§ 170-7 LIMERICK CODE § 170-7
168:510
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 170-8. General speed restrictions.
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and
potential hazards then existing nor at a speed greater than will permit
the driver to bring his vehicle to a stop within the assured clear distance
ahead. Consistent with the foregoing, every person shall drive at a safe
and appropriate speed when approaching and crossing an intersection
or railroad grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve,
when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
roadway and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or
other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
§ 170-9. Speed limits on certain streets.
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Abbey Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 Entire length
Airport Road
[Amended 7-21-1988
by Ord. No. 87-9]
35 From Ridge Pike to Limerick
Center Road
Airport Road 25 From a point 4/10 of a mile
from Route 422 to a point 7/10
of a mile from Route 422
Annette Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Arbor Court [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Ashbrook Drive
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Ashford Way [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
§ 170-8 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-9
168:511
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Ashley Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Autumn Lane [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Bartlett Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Bayhill Circle [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 355]
25 Entire length
Bella Rosa Court
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Benner Road
[Amended 9-1-1987
by Ord. No. 87-5]
35 Entire length
Betty Lane 25 From Neiffer Road to Roberta
Lane
Blossom Lane [Added
12-4-1990 by Ord.
No. 125]
25 Entire length
Boraten Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Boraten Road [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Bowman Court [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Braemar Lane [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 355]
25 Entire length
Bragg Road 35 Steinmetz Road to Neiffer
Road
Broadleaf Circle
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
§ 170-9 LIMERICK CODE § 170-9
168:512
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Brownback Road 35 From Limerick Center Road to
Keen Road
Buckwalter Road 25 From Royersford Road to the
Upper Providence Township
line
Bunker Way [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 355]
25 Entire length
Cemetery Road
[Amended 12-4-1990
by Ord. No. 125]
25 From Township Line Road to
the Lower Frederick Township
line
Chapel Road 20 From Lewis Road to Oak
Street
Church Road 25 From Main Street to Longview
Road
Colin Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 Entire length
Collins Lane 25 From Limerick Road to its
terminus
Colorado Court 25 Entire length
Connor Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Country Club Road 35 From Lewis Road to Ridge
Pike
Deerfield Road 25 From Mine Run Road to its
terminus
Detwiller Drive [Added
5-5-1987 by Ord. No.
87-4]
25 From Kibblehouse Drive to the
cul-de-sac
Devonshire Circle
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Donegal Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 Entire length
Drake Run [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
§ 170-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-9
168:513
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Dublin Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 Entire length
Dunleavy Circle 25 From Collins Lane to its
terminus
Durham Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Dusseldorf Drive
[Added 6-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 275]
25 From St. Andrews Boulevard
to cul-de-sac
East Cherry Lane 35 From South Limerick Road to
Lewis Road
Eileen Lane [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Elliot Court [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Evansbrook Lane
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Ferndale Lane
[Amended 3-3-1987
by Ord. No. 87-2]
35 From Limerick Center Road to
Linfield-Trappe Road
Finley Circle 25 Entire length
Forrest Glenn Drive
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Fruitville Road 35 From West Ridge Pike to
Swamp Pike
Fynn Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 Entire length
Gerloff Road
[Amended 12-4-1990
by Ord. No. 125]
25 From Laver Road to the Lower
Frederick Township line
Gleneagles Road
[Added 6-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 275]
25 From St. Andrews Boulevard
to St. Andrews Boulevard
§ 170-9 LIMERICK CODE § 170-9
168:514
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Golden Vale Drive
[Added 12-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 401]
25 Entire length
Grandview Drive
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Graterford Road 25 From Sunset Road to North
Limerick Road
Graterford Road
[Amended 4-3-1990
by Ord. No. 170-A]
35 From Sunset Road to
Township Line Road
Grebe Road [Amended
9-1-1987 By Ord. No.
87-5]
25 Entire Length
Green Meadow Court
[Added 12-16-2014
by Ord. No. 355]
25 Entire length
Haines Drive [Added
5-5-1987 by Ord. No.
87-4]
25 From Saylor Road to the culde-
sac
Heffner Road
[Amended 9-1-1987
by Ord. No. 87-5]
35 Entire length
Henry Drive [Added
9-21-1993 by Ord.
No. 156]
25 Entire length
Highland Road
[Amended 6-21-1988
by Ord. No. 87-8]
25 From Neiffer Road to Ryanford
Road
Hockle Road
[Amended 9-1-1987
by Ord. No. 87-5]
25 Entire length
Houck Road
[Amended 9-1-1987
by Ord. No. 87-5]
35 Entire length
Industrial Drive cul-desac
[Added 12-4-1990
by Ord. No. 125]
25 Entire length
§ 170-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-9
168:515
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Inverness Circle
[Added 12-16-2014
by Ord. No. 355]
25 Entire length
Jessica Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Joac Circle [Added
9-21-1993 by Ord.
No. 156]
25 Entire length
Jonathans Way [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Keen Road 35 From Brownback Road to
Longview Road
Kendall Lane [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Kibblehouse Drive
[Added 5-5-1987 by
Ord. No. 87-4]
25 From Saylor Road to the culde-
sac
Kilarney Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 Entire length
King Road 35 From the Royersford Borough
line to Lewis Road
Knock Hill Drive
[Added 12-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 401]
25 Entire length
Koch Drive [Added
5-5-1987 by Ord. No.
87-4]
25 From Haines Drive to the culde-
sac
Kugler Road
[Amended 12-4-1990
by Ord. No. 125]
35 From Ridge Pike to Swamp
Pike
Kurtz Road 25 From the New Hanover
Township line to Swamp Pike
Laver Road [Amended
12-4-1990 by Ord.
No. 125]
25 From Neiffer Road to
Steinmetz Road
§ 170-9 LIMERICK CODE § 170-9
168:516
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Lee Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
15 Entire length
Lightcap Road 35 From Airport Road to Possum
Hollow Road
Lightcap Road [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 From entrance to the PPO to
Possum Hollow Road
Lightcap Road [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
35 From Evergreen to first
entrance of PPO
Longcross Road
[Added 6-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 275]
25 From St. Andrews Boulevard
to St. Andrews Boulevard
Longview Road 35 From Linfield Road to
Sanatoga Road
Lower South Limerick
Road
35 From Lewis Road to its north
terminus
Lozark Road 25 From Longview Road to
Sanatoga Road
Lynrose Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Major Road [Amended
9-1-1987 by Ord. No.
87-5]
25 Entire length
Maria Lane [Added
12-4-1990 by Ord.
No. 156]
25 Entire length
Masters Drive [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 355]
25 Entire length
Melissa Lane [Added
9-21-1993 by Ord.
No. 156]
25 Entire length
Metka Road 35 From Game Farm Road to
North Limerick Road
Miller Circle [Added
9-21-1993 by Ord.
No. 156]
25 Entire length
§ 170-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-9
168:517
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Mill Lane 25 From Trinley Road to its
terminus
Mill Road [Amended
12-4-1990 by Ord.
No. 125]
25 From Steinmetz Road to Grebe
Road
Mine Run Road [Added
4-4-1989 by Ord. No.
109]
25 From North Limerick Road to
Game Farm Road
Montella Circle [Added
1-16-2018 by Ord.
No. 383]
25 Entire length
Mountain View Lane
[Added 12-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 401]
25 Entire length
Nicholas Court [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Oak Creek Drive
[Added 12-16-2014
by Ord. No. 355]
25 Entire length
Oak Lane 25 From Reed Road to Lewis
Road
Oak Street 20 From Lewis Road to
Royersford Borough line
Old Mill Road 35 From Upper Providence
Township line to its terminus
Overlook Circle
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Paddington Trail
[Added 6-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 275]
25 From St. Andrews Boulevard
to cul-de-sac
Palmer Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 Entire length
Par Circle [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 355]
25 Entire length
§ 170-9 LIMERICK CODE § 170-9
168:518
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Patrick Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 Entire length
Penn Road 25 From Ridge Pike to Pruss Hill
Road
Pennstone Court
[Added 12-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 401]
25 Entire length
Phaeton Way [Added
1-16-2018 by Ord.
No. 383]
25 Entire length
Possum Hollow Road 25 From Lower Pottsgrove
Township line to its terminus
Prestwick Court
[Added 12-16-2014
by Ord. No. 355]
25 Entire length
Pruss Hill Road 35 From Fruitville Road to the
Lower Pottsgrove Township
line
Putter Lane [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 355]
25 Entire length
Railroad Street 25 From Main Street to its
terminus
Reed Road North 25 From Linfield Road to Cherry
Lane
Reformed Road 25 From Linfield Road to Church
Road
Reifsnyder Road 35 From Country Club Road to
Royersford Road to Royersford
Road
Roberta Lane 25 From Neiffer Road to its
terminus
Rosewood Trail
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Royersford Road 35 From Lewis Road to Linfield-
Trappe Road
§ 170-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-9
168:519
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Royersford Road
[Amended 4-10-2008
by Ord. No. 296]
35 From Linfield-Trappe Road to
Ridge Pike
Rumler Drive cul-desac
[Added 12-4-1990
by Ord. No. 125]
25 Entire length
Rutherford Court
[Added 12-16-2014
by Ord. No. 355]
25 Entire length
Ryanford Road 25 From Game Farm Road to the
Lower Frederick Township line
Sacco Road [Amended
9-1-1987 by Ord. No.
87-5]
10 Entire length
St. Andrews Boulevard
[Added 6-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 275]
25 From Limerick Center Road to
Sandtrap Drive
Sandtrap Drive [Added
6-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 275]
25 From Longcross Road to Lewis
Road
Sankey Road 35 From Swamp Pike to Neiffer
Road
Sara Lane [Added
8-26-1993 by Ord.
No. 154]
25 Entire length
Saylor Road 35 From Township Line Road to
North Limerick Road
School Road 25 From Grateford Road to North
Limerick Road
Shamrock Court
[Added 12-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 401]
25 Entire length
Smith Road 35 From Fruitville Road to
Swamp Pike
Sofia Court [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Souder Road 35 From Royersford Road to
Township Line Road
§ 170-9 LIMERICK CODE § 170-9
168:520
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
South Limerick Road
[Amended 9-1-1987
by Ord. No. 87-5]
25 From Linfield-Trappe Road to
the cul-de-sac
South Limerick Road
[Amended 9-1-1987
by Ord. No. 87-5]
35 From Ridge Pike to Linfield-
Trappe Road
Spring-Ford Road 35 From Country Road to South
Limerick Road
Spring Street 25 From Lewis Road to its north
terminus
Steinmetz Road 35 From Swamp Pike to Grebe
Road
Summerdale Lane
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Sunny Brook Road
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Sunset Road
[Amended 5-17-1988
by Ord. No. 87-7]
35 Entire length
Sunset Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 From North Limerick Road to
cul-de-sac
Sunset Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 From West Ridge Pike to
North Limerick Road
Sunvalley Drive
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Swamp Creek Road 25 From the Upper Frederick
Township line to the New
Hanover Township line
Tanglewood Drive
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Tee Court [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 355]
25 Entire length
§ 170-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-9
168:521
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Thomond Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 Entire length
Trinley Road 25 From Linfield Road to Railroad
Street
Tristen Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 Entire length
Turnberry Drive
[Added 12-16-2014
by Ord. No. 355]
25 Entire length
Walnel Drive 25 From King Road to Benner
Road
Walters Lane 25 From Walnel Drive to its
terminus
Wedge Court [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord.
No. 355]
25 Entire length
Wensel Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Wentworth Circle
[Added 12-16-2014
by Ord. No. 355]
25 Entire length
West Cherry Lane 35 From Lewis Road to Limerick
Center Road
Wexford Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
25 Entire length
William Penn Drive
[Added 8-26-1993 by
Ord. No. 154]
25 Entire length
Willowwood Drive
[Added 6-19-2012 by
Ord. No. 333]
25 Entire length
Woodmont Court
[Added 12-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 401]
25 Entire length
§ 170-9 LIMERICK CODE § 170-9
168:522
§ 170-10. Traffic signals.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Zara Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
25 Entire length
Ziegler Road 35 From Swamp Pike to Metka
Road
Zorro Court 25 Entire length
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals, as indicated below, shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal
(Reserved)
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
C. Specification for traffic signal equipment. In an effort to standardize
equipment and to provide compatibility with the existing closed-loop
traffic signal system, the following specifications must be followed for
the installation of new traffic signals or modification of existing traffic
signals in Limerick Township: [Added 7-26-2007 by Ord. No. 280]
(1) Only PEEK M3005E Masters, PEEK 3925E (TS-2, Type 2)
Controller Units and PEEK 8311A Double Diamond Conflict
Monitor Units, as manufactured by Quixote Traffic Corporation,
shall be provided.
(2) When installed in a closed-loop multi-arterial traffic system
(CLMATS), communications between the master controller and the
local controllers will be maintained via a fiber optic (single mode)
infrastructure. External modems shall be utilized at all locations
where communications is to be established and shall interface
through an auxiliary RS232C port on the master and/or local units.
Communications between each master and the central computer
will be established as directed (i.e., direct connect, fiber or dial-up).
Dial-up shall be provided utilizing PEEK LPM-33-E modems. Unless
§ 170-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-10
168:523
otherwise noted, communications throughout the system shall be
established at 19.2k baud.
(3) A GPS time source shall be provided at each master and at each
isolated (not interconnected via fiber) local to maintain clock
accuracy for time-of-day and coordination purposes. The time
source shall receive signals from the GPS satellite network and
interface to masters and isolated locals through the auxiliary "D"
module. The GPS time source shall provide a momentary closure,
programmable to any hour of the day, to the external clock reset
input of the units. The GPS time source shall automatically adjust
for DST changes.
(4) For intersections that are not to be incorporated into the closedloop
system, the external fiber optic modem shall not be provided,
and a standard NEMA Type 12 Conflict Monitor Unit may be
substituted for the PEEK 8311A Double Diamond Conflict Monitor
Unit.
(5) All controller assemblies shall be equipped with an eight-phase
load bay panel (either 12 or 16 position) capable of providing the
required sequence of operation. The cabinet enclosures shall be a
Dudlik (or equal) base-mounted (Type 1) NEMA 3R enclosures and
sized (55 inches by 44 inches by 26 inches with eighteen-inch riser
base and shelves) to adequately house the full complement of the
above equipment.
(6) Vehicle detection shall be provided through a sixteen-channel
detector rack with power supply capable of accommodating up to
eight two-channel Model 222 or equal rack mount detector cards.
(7) All pedestrian inputs shall be mechanically isolated through a
12VAC interface. As a minimum, two isolation circuits shall be
provided.
(8) Traffic signal supports shall be mastarms.
(9) A minimum of two luminaires per intersection shall be installed on
the mastarms and shall be 250 watt HPS. Wiring for the luminaries
shall be installed in a separate two-inch conduit system specifically
for that purpose and will be protected by circuit breakers that are
also separate from the traffic signal system.
(10) Optical preemption shall be provided for each approach identified
at the intersection. Detectors will be positioned to achieve the
proper distance for activation and control of the intersection.
Optical preemption shall be Opticom as formerly manufactured by
3M Corporation.
(11) Uninterruptible power supply shall be included to provide for
emergency power when the utility power is outside the equipment
operating range as described by NEMA. The UPS shall provide six
§ 170-10 LIMERICK CODE § 170-10
168:524
hours of operation for a computed load of 250 watts at 72° F. (four
hours at 30° F.). A parallel battery configuration shall be utilized
so that a failure of any one battery does not render the system
inoperable. The UPS battery backup unit shall be a signal sense
traffic UPS as manufactured by Sense Products LLC.
(12) All vehicular and pedestrian signal heads shall be LED (lightemitting
diode) as manufactured by GE Lumination (formerly
GELcore) and shall meet all current ITE specifications and
requirements.
(13) All overhead street name signs shall be LED internally illuminated
as manufactured by GE Lumination (formerly GELcore) and shall
be equipped with a photocell.
(14) Conduit runs will be sized for future use. All conduit street crossing
will be a minimum of one-inch to three-inch conduit. Controllers
should be located at the intersection of conduit runs and not at the
end of a conduit loop. Each controller foundation, or pole
foundation if the controller is pole mounted, will have the
equivalent of two-inch to three-inch conduits entering it from an
adjacent junction box. All loops will terminate in junction boxes,
and there will be at least one junction box on each corner.
(15) All equipment shall conform to PennDOT Specifications,
Publication 408, and installation shall conform to PennDot Traffic
Standards-Signals, TC-7800 Series and Standards for Roadway
Construction, RC-Series.
(16) Traffic signal permit plans for new construction or modifications
must be submitted to the Limerick Township Traffic Engineer for
review and approval.
(17) Traffic signal construction plans for new construction or
modifications must be submitted to the Limerick Township Traffic
Engineer for review and approval.
(18) All review letters from the Limerick Township Traffic Engineer
shall be submitted to PennDOT for consideration in its review of the
traffic signal permit plan.
(19) Shop drawings and catalog cuts shall be submitted to the Limerick
Township Traffic Engineer for review and approval prior to
construction.
(20) The Limerick Township Traffic Engineer shall be notified no less
than 30 days prior to the start of traffic signal construction and/or
modifications.
(21) After the review and approval of traffic signal permit and
construction plans, the Limerick Township Traffic Engineer shall
perform inspection duties for the construction of the traffic signal.
§ 170-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-11
168:525
§ 170-11. Prohibited right turns at red signals.
§ 170-12. Prohibited turns at intersections.
§ 170-13. No-passing zones.
§ 170-14. Stop intersections.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) at a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling On Facing
(Reserved)
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle of the type indicated
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections in the direction or directions indicated in each case to
make a left turn and/or right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn
At
Intersection
of Hours
Type of
Vehicle
Masters
Drive
[Added
12-16-2014
by Ord.
No. 355]
South Left Ridge
Pike
All All
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Street
Direction of
Travel Between
Church Road East and west Main Street and Longview
Road
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 170-11 LIMERICK CODE § 170-14
168:526
A. The following intersections are established as stop intersections, and
official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected)
in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street (the intersecting or through street) on the first-named street (the
stop street) in the direction or directions indicated for that intersection.
Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the firstnamed
or stop street in the direction indicated in each case shall stop
the vehicle as required by Section 3323(b) of the Vehicle Code191 and
shall not proceed into or across the second-named or intersecting or
through street until he has followed all applicable requirements of that
section of the law.
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Abbey Drive (south) [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Abbey Drive (north)
Abbey Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
North Lewis Road
Abbey Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Patrick Way
Airport Road Limerick Center Road
Airport Road West Ridge Pike
Annette Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Eileen Lane (300 feet from Graterford
Road)
Annette Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Eileen Lane (760 feet from Graterford
Road)
Apache Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Aronimink Drive
Arbor Court [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Autumn Lane
Aronimink Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Linfield Road
Ashbrook Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Linfield Trappe Road
191. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 3323(b).
§ 170-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-14
168:527
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Ashford Way [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Jessica Circle (north)
Ashford Way [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Jessica Circle (south)
Ashley Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Bradford Drive (150 feet from cul-desac)
Ashley Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Bradford Drive (800 feet from
Tanglewood Drive)
Autumn Lane [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333; 12-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 401]
Ferndale Lane
Azalea Circle [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Laurel Drive (north)
Azalea Circle [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Laurel Drive (south)
Bartlett Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Bartlett Drive
Bartlett Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Township Line Road
Bayberry Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Buttonwood Drive (east)
Bayberry Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Buttonwood Drive (west)
Bayberry Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Hickory Grove Drive
Bayberry Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Mulberry Drive
§ 170-14 LIMERICK CODE § 170-14
168:528
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Bayhill Circle [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Turnberry Drive
Bella Rosa Court [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
West Cherry Lane
Benner Road King Road
Benner Road Lewis Road
Betty Lane Neiffer Road
Blossom Lane [Added
12-4-1990 by Ord. No.
125]
Cemetery Road
Boraten Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Boraten Road
Boraten Road [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Church Road
Boraten Road Limerick Center Road
Bowman Court [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Connor Drive
Bradford Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Ashley Drive
Bradford Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Devonshire Circle
Bradford Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Tanglewood Drive
Braemar Lane [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Turnberry Drive
Bragg Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Neiffer Road
Bragg Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Steinmetz Road
§ 170-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-14
168:529
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Broadleaf Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Royersford Road
Brownback Road Limerick Center Road
Buckley Circle [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Long Meadow Road
Buckwalter Road Royersford Road
Buckwalter Road Township Line Road
Bunker Way [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Masters Drive
Bunker Way [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Putter Lane
Buttonwood Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Limerick Center Road
Cart paths (that cross)
[Added 6-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 275]
St. Andrews Boulevard
Cart path (that crosses)
[Added 6-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 275]
Sandtrap Drive
Castle Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Crowne Point Drive
Cemetery Road North Limerick Road
Cemetery Road Township Line Road
Chapel Road Lewis Road
Chapel Road Oak Street
Cherokee Circle [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Aronimink Drive
Church Road Longview Road
Church Road Main Street
Colin Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Abbey Drive
§ 170-14 LIMERICK CODE § 170-14
168:530
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Collins Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
North Limerick Road
Colorado Court [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Mill Road
Connor Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Connor Drive
Connor Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Royersford Road
Connor Road [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Elliot Court
County Club Road Lewis Road
Country Club Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Linfield Trappe Road (north)
Country Club Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Linfield Trappe Road (south)
Country Club Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Spring Ford Road
County Club Road West Ridge Pike
Creek View Circle [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Long Meadow Road
Crown Pointe Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
North Lewis Road
Crown Pointe Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
South Limerick Road
Deerfield Road Mine Run Road
Detwiler Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Kibblehouse Drive
§ 170-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-14
168:531
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Devonshire Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Bradford Drive
Diesinger Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Gerloff Road
Donegal Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Patrick Way
Drake Run [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Limerick Center Road
Drake Run [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Sunvalley Drive
Dublin Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Abbey Drive
Dunleavy Circle [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Collins Lane
Durham Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Jessica Circle
Dusseldorf Drive [Added
6-14-2007 by Ord. No.
275]
St. Andrews Boulevard
East Cherry Lane Lewis Road
East Cherry Lane South Limerick Road
Edmunds Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Llewellyn Lane
Eileen Lane [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Annette Drive
Eileen Lane [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Graterford Road
Elio Circle [Added
9-21-1993 by Ord. No.
156]
Elio Circle
§ 170-14 LIMERICK CODE § 170-14
168:532
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Elio Circle [Added
9-21-1993 by Ord. No.
156]
North Limerick Road
Evansbrook Lane [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Sanatoga Road
Evansbrook Lane [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Limerick Center Road
Faust Road [Added
8-16-2007 by Ord. No.
281]
Mill Road/Grebe Road
Ferndale Lane Limerick Center Road
Ferndale Lane Main Street
Fieldstone Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Ferndale Lane
Fieldstone Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Gristmill Lane/Homestead Lane
Finley Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Evansbrook Lane
Forrest Glenn Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Swamp Pike
Fox Trail [Added 12-3-2019
by Ord. No. 401]
Laura Lane
Fox Trail [Added 12-3-2019
by Ord. No. 401]
Lorraine Drive
Fruitville Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Pruss Hill Road (north)
Fruitville Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Pruss Hill Road (south)
Fruitville Road Swamp Pike
Fruitville Road West Ridge Pike
Fynn Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Abbey Drive
§ 170-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-14
168:533
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Fynn Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
King Road
Galie Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
King Road
Galie Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Seventh Avenue
Gerloff Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Laver Road
Gerloff Road Neiffer Road (south side)
Gleneagles Road [Added
6-14-2007 by Ord. No.
275]
St. Andrews Boulevard
Gleneagles Road [Added
6-14-2007 by Ord. No.
275]
St. Andrews Boulevard (loop road, one
at each end)
Golden Vale Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Ziegler Road
Grandview Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Kendall Lane
Grandview Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Major Road
Graterford Road North Limerick Road
Graterford Road Township Line Road
Grebe Road [Added
8-16-2007 by Ord. No.
281]
Faust Road/Mill Road
Green Meadow Court
[Added 12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
Oak Creek Drive
Gristmill Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Fieldstone Lane
§ 170-14 LIMERICK CODE § 170-14
168:534
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Haines Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Saylor Road
Harnett Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Heffner Road
Harnett Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Llewellyn Lane
Heather Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Buttonwood Drive
Heather Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Mulberry Drive
Heffner Road Sunset Road
Heffner Road Township Line Road
Hemlock Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Buttonwood Drive
Henry Drive [Added
9-21-1993 by Ord. No.
156]
Heffner Road
Hickory Grove Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Bayberry Drive
Hickory Grove Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Limerick Center Road
Highland Road Neiffer Road
Highland Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Ryanford Road
Hockle Road Game Farm Road
Hockle Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Mine Run Road
Homestead Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Fieldstone Lane
§ 170-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-14
168:535
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Houck Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Mill Road
Houck Road Swamp Pike
Industrial Drive [Added
12-4-1990 by Ord. No.
125]
Penn Road
Inverness Circle [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Springford Road
Jessica Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Sunset Road
Joac Circle [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Country Club Road
Jonathans Way [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Benner Road
Keen Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Brownback Road
Keen Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Longview Road
Kendall Lane [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Malsby Road
Kendall Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Grandview Road (north)
Kendall Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Grandview Road (south)
Kendall Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Malsby Road
Kibblehouse Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Saylor Road
§ 170-14 LIMERICK CODE § 170-14
168:536
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Kilarney Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Patrick Way (north)
Kilarney Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Patrick Way (south)
King Road Lewis Road
King Road Walnel Drive
King Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Crown Pointe Drive
Knight Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Crown Pointe Drive
Knight Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
North Lewis Road
Knock Hill Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Ziegler Road
Koch Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Haines Drive
Kugler Road Swamp Pike
Kugler Road West Ridge Pike
Kurtz Road Swamp Pike
Lakeside Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
West Ridge Pike
Landis Creek Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Heffner Road
Larchwood Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Bayberry Drive (north)
Larchwood Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Bayberry Drive (south)
Laura Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Benner Road
§ 170-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-14
168:537
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Laurel Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Azalea Circle
Laurel Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Limerick Center Road
Laver Road Neiffer Road
Laver Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Steinmetz Road
Lee Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Benner Road
Lightcap Road Airport Road
Lightcap Road [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Possum Hollow Road (east)
Lightcap Road [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Possum Hollow Road (west)
Limerick Road Lewis Road
Limerick Road Linfield-Trappe Road
Limerick Road South West Ridge Pike
Llewellyn Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Edmunds Drive
Llewellyn Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Sunset Road
Longcross Road [Added
6-14-2007 by Ord. No.
275]
St. Andrews Boulevard
Longcross Road [Added
6-14-2007 by Ord. No.
275]
St. Andrews Boulevard
Long Meadow Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Royersford Road
Long Meadow Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
South Township Line Road
§ 170-14 LIMERICK CODE § 170-14
168:538
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Longview Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Church Road
Longview Road Main Street
Longview Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Sanatoga Road
Lorraine Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Benner Road
Lorraine Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Laura Lane
Lozark Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Longview Road
Lozark Road Sanatoga Road
Lynrose Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Jessica Circle
Major Hollow Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Benner Road
Major Road Benner Road
Major Road Trinley Road
Malsby Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Major Road (east)
Malsby Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Major Road (west)
Maria Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Highland Road
Masters Drive [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Pruss Hill Road
Masters Drive [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Ridge Pike
§ 170-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-14
168:539
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Medal Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Crown Pointe Drive
Medal Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
King Way
Melissa Lane [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Keen Road
Meng Road Game Farm Road
Merion Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Limerick Center Road
Merion Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Merion Drive
Metka Road Game Farm Road
Metka Road Limerick Road
Metka Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Ziegler Road (north)
Metka Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Ziegler Road (south)
Miller Circle [Added
9-21-1993 by Ord. No.
156]
Henry Drive
Mill Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Railroad Street
Mill Road [Added
8-16-2007 by Ord. No.
281]
Faust Road/Grebe Road
Mill Road Steinmetz Road
Mine Run Road Game Farm Road
Mine Run Road North Limerick Road
Montella Circle [Added
1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
383]
Fruitville Road (north)
§ 170-14 LIMERICK CODE § 170-14
168:540
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Montella Circle [Added
1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
383]
Fruitville Road (south)
Moses Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Graterford Road
Mountain View Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Sunset Road (north)
Mountain View Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Sunset Road (south)
Muirfield Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
King Road
Muirfield Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Tavistock Drive
Mulberry Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Bayberry Drive
Mulberry Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Heather Drive
Navajo Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Aronimink Drive
Nicholas Court [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Sofia Court
Oak Creek Drive [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Neiffer Road (1,400 feet from Ridge
Pike)
Oak Creek Drive [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Neiffer Road (2,260 feet from Ridge
Pike)
Oak Lane Lewis Road
Oak Lane Reed Road
Oak Street Lewis Road
Old Mill Road Township Line Road
§ 170-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-14
168:541
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Overlook Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Grandview Drive
Paddington Trail [Added
6-14-2007 by Ord. No.
275]
St. Andrews Boulevard
Palmer Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Brownback Road
Par Circle [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Masters Drive
Parnell Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Pery Court
Parnell Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Reed Road
Patrick Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Abbey Drive (north)
Patrick Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Abbey Drive (south)
Pennhurst Road Main Street
Penn Road [Added
7-26-2007 by Ord. No.
280]
Industrial Boulevard
Penn Road West Ridge Pike
Pennstone Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Sunset Road
Pery Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Reed Road
Phaeton Way [Added
1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
383]
Metka Road
Phaeton Way [Added
1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
383]
Phaeton Way
§ 170-14 LIMERICK CODE § 170-14
168:542
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Pine Tree Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
North Lewis Road
Pine Tree Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Pine Tree Drive
Possum Hollow Road Sanatoga Road
Prestwick Court [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Springford Road
Pruss Hill Road Fruitville Road
Putter Lane [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Masters Drive
Queen Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Crown Pointe Drive
Queen Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Victory Way
Railroad Street Main Street (both intersections)
Reed Road Main Street
Reed Road West Cherry Lane
Reformed Road Church Road
Reformed Road Main Street
Reifsnyder Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Country Club Road
Reifsnyder Road Royersford Road
Roberta Lane Neiffer Road
Rose Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Crown Pointe Drive (east)
Rose Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Crown Pointe Drive (west)
Rosewood Trail [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Main Street Linfield
Royersford Road Lewis Road
§ 170-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-14
168:543
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Royersford Road Linfield-Trappe Road (north and south)
Royersford Road [Added
5-25-2006 by Ord. No.
260; amended 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
Tenth Avenue (north)
Royersford Road [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Tenth Avenue (south)
Royersford Road West Ridge Pike
Rumler Drive [Added
12-4-1990 by Ord. No.
125]
Limerick Center Road
Rutherford Court [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Oak Creek Drive
Ryanford Road Game Farm Road
Sacco Road Main Street
St. Andrews Boulevard
[Added 6-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 275]
Limerick Center
St. Andrews Boulevard
[Added 6-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 275]
Sandtrap Drive
Sandtrap Drive [Added
6-14-2007 by Ord. No.
275]
Lewis Road
Sandtrap Drive [Added
6-14-2007 by Ord. No.
275]
Longcross Road
Sankey Road Neiffer Road
Sankey Road Swamp Pike
Sara Lane [Added
9-21-1993 by Ord. No.
156]
Limerick Center Road
Saucon Circle [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Merion Drive
Saylor Road [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
North Limerick Road
§ 170-14 LIMERICK CODE § 170-14
168:544
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Sawchuck Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Sheridan Lane
Saylor Road Township Line Road
School Road Graterford Road
School Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
North Limerick Road
Seventh Avenue [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
King Road
Shamrock Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Abbey Drive
Shannon Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Galie Drive
Shannon Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Seventh Avenue
Sheridan Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Ridge Pike
Smith Road Fruitville Road
Smith Road Swamp Pike
Sofia Court [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
North Limerick Road
Somerset Circle [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Long Meadow Road
Souder Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Royersford Road
Souder Road Township Line Road
Spring-Ford Road Country Club Road
Spring-Ford Road South Limerick Road
Spring Haven Circle [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Muirfield Drive
§ 170-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-14
168:545
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Spring Lake Road Township Line Road
Spring Street Lewis Road
Sprucewood Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Buttonwood Drive
Sprucewood Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Hickory Grove Drive
Steinmetz Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Grebe Road
Steinmetz Road Swamp Pike
Summerdale Lane [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Main Street Linfield
Summerdale Lane [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Rosewood Trail
Summit Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Country Club Road
Sunny Brook Road [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Township Line Road
Sunny Brook Road [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
West Ridge Pike
Sunset Road Graterford Road (north and south)
Sunset Road [Added
9-10-2009 by Ord. No.
309]
Heffner Road
Sunset Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
North Limerick Road
Sunset Road West Ridge Pike
Sunvalley Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Ferndale Lane
Swamp Creek Road Neiffer Road
§ 170-14 LIMERICK CODE § 170-14
168:546
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Sycamore Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Bayberry Drive
Sycamore Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Hickory Grove Drive
Tanglewood Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Bradford Drive
Tanglewood Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Township Line Road
Tavistock Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Benner Road
Tavistock Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Tavistock Drive
Tee Court [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Masters Drive
Tenth Avenue [Added
5-25-2006 by Ord. No.
260]
Royersford Road
Thomond Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Golden Vale Drive
Thomond Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Knock Hill Drive
Thornberry Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Heather Drive
Trinley Road Main Street
Tristen Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Laver Road
Turnberry Drive [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Country Club Road
§ 170-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-14
168:547
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
Turnberry Drive [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Linfield-Trappe Road
Turret Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Crown Pointe Drive
Victory Way [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Crown Pointe Drive
Walnel Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Benner Road
Walnel Drive King Road
Walters Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Walnel Drive
Weaver Lane [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Linfield Trappe Road
Wedge Court [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Putter Lane
Wensel Circle [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Sunset Road
Wentworth Circle [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Turnberry Drive (225 feet from
Country Club Road)
Wentworth Circle [Added
12-16-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
Turnberry Drive (495 feet from
Country Club Road)
West Cherry Lane Lewis Road
West Cherry Lane Limerick Center Road
Wexford Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Kilarney Way
William Penn Drive [Added
9-21-1993 by Ord. No.
156]
Neiffer Road
§ 170-14 LIMERICK CODE § 170-14
168:548
§ 170-15. Yield intersections.
Stop Street Intersecting or Through Street
William Penn Drive [Added
9-21-1993 by Ord. No.
156]
Swamp Pike
Willowwood Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Royersford Road
Windsor Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Crown Pointe Drive
Wisteria Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Bayberry Drive
Wisteria Drive [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Hickory Grove Drive
Woodcrest Circle [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Merion Drive
Woodly Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Major Road (east)
Woodly Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Major Road (west)
Woodmont Court [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Sunset Road
Zara Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Possum Hollow Road
Ziegler Road [Added
12-3-2019 by Ord. No.
401]
Metka Road
Ziegler Road Swamp Pike
Zorro Court [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord. No.
333]
Mill Road
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 170-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-15
168:549
§ 170-16. Snowmobile roads designated.
§ 170-16.1. One-way streets. [Added 9-4-1990]
The following streets are hereby established as one-way streets:
A. The following intersections are established as yield intersections, and
official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected)
in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street (the through street) on the first-named street (the yield street) in
the direction or directions indicated for that intersection. Every driver
of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the first-named or yield
street in the direction indicated in each case shall slow down or stop the
vehicle as required by Section 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code192 and then
yield the right-of-way as required by that subsection of the Vehicle
Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following roads and streets within the Township are designated as
special snowmobile roads:
Street or
Road Between
Used by
Snowmobiles
Only When
Closed to
Vehicular
Traffic?
Shared With
Vehicular
Traffic?
(Reserved)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any
highway, street or road in the Township other than as provided above,
provided that nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from
operating a snowmobile on any other street in the Township as
authorized by Section 7721 of the Vehicle Code193 for emergency and
bridge crossings and for direct crossing of streets or two-lane highways
or for special snowmobile events where authorized in advance and
where the street is blocked off as provided in Section 7723 of the
Vehicle Code.194 Any person who violates any provision of this section
shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in Section 7752(a) of the
Vehicle Code.195
192. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 3323(c).
193. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 7721.
194. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 7723.
195. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 7752(a).
§ 170-15 LIMERICK CODE § 170-16.1
168:550
Name of Street Direction of
Travel
Location
Buckwalter Road East From Royersford Road to
Township Line Road
Railroad Street [Added
1-16-2018 by Ord.
No. 383]
East From Main Street to a point
250 feet east at intersection
with Railroad Street
§ 170-16.2. Engine brake retarder restrictions. [Added 12-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 401]
No gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicle shall be operated
using, as part of the operation, an engine brake retarder without exhaust
mufflers or with defective or modified exhaust mufflers upon any street or
portion thereof where such operation is restricted or prohibited upon any
street or portion thereof designated below:
Engine Brake
Retarder
Restriction Direction Hours/Days Location
East Arcadia
Drive
Both All Ridge Pike to
Swamp Pike
Swamp Pike Both All Ridge Pike to
Neiffer Road
§ 170-16.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-16.2
168:551

ARTICLE III
Weight Size and Weight Limits
§ 170-17. Vehicle weight limits on streets and bridges.
§ 170-18. Vehicle size restrictions for streets and bridges.
§ 170-19. Vehicle weight and size restrictions.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code,196 it shall be unlawful
for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a
gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge
or street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum Gross
Weight
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle
Code197 and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150
plus $150 for each 500 pounds or part thereof in excess of 3,000 pounds
over the maximum allowable weight and costs.
A. On the following bridges or streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code,198 it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the
size restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of
street:
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle
Code199 and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75
and costs.
A. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by Section 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code,200 it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation
of the restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of
street:
196. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 4902(a).
197. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 4902(a) and (g)(1).
198. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 4902(a).
199. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 4902(a) and (g)(1).
200. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 4902(b).
§ 170-17 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-19
168:553
§ 170-20. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(b) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle
Code201 and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $25 and not more than $100 and costs.
A. For the purposes of this section, "truck" is defined as any and all threeaxle
trucks, any and all four-axle trucks and any and all tractor-trailer
combinations.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a truck on any of the
following streets or parts of streets when official signs have been
posted at the entrances to those streets:
Name of Street Limits
Benner Road [Added 3-17-1987
by Ord. No. 87-3]
From Lewis Road to King Road
Buckwalter Road [Amended
1-19-1988 by Ord. No. 87-6]
From Old Mill Road to Royersford
Road
Country Club Road From Linfield-Trappe Road to
Lewis Road
East Cherry Lane From Lewis Road to South
Limerick Road
Fruitville Road [Added 2-4-1986
by Ord. No. 87-1]
From Swamp Pike to West Ridge
Pike
Gerloff Road [Added 1-16-2018
by Ord. No. 383]
From Neiffer Road to the Township
boundary
Graterford Road [Added
2-4-1986 by Ord. No. 87-1]
From Fruitville Road to Swamp
Pike
Kugler Road From West Ridge Pike to Swamp
Pike
Oak Lane From Reed Road to Lewis Road
Royersford Road From West Ridge Pike to Lewis
Road
Sand Trap Drive [Added
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 399]
From North Lewis Road to St.
Andrews Boulevard
St. Andrews Boulevard [Added
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 399]
From Sand Trap Drive to Limerick
Center Road
201. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(b) and (g)(1).
§ 170-19 LIMERICK CODE § 170-20
168:554
Name of Street Limits
Smith Road [Added 2-4-1986 by
Ord. No. 87-1]
From Fruitville Road to Swamp
Pike
South Limerick Road From West Ridge Pike to Lewis
Road
Walnel Drive [Added 3-17-1987
by Ord. No. 87-3]
From Benner Road to King Road
Walters Lane [Added 3-17-1987
by Ord. No. 87-3]
From Walnel Drive to the cul-desac
West Cherry Lane From Lewis Road to Limerick
Center Road
C. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving an
emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets or from
driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or other
commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises
located along that street or part of a street.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 170-20 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-20
168:555

ARTICLE IV
Parking
§ 170-21. Parking prohibitions and restrictions.
Parking shall be prohibited at certain times at certain locations as follows:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Ashbrook Drive
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
East All From Linfield Trappe
Road to the cul-de-sac
Banner Road
[Added 12-4-1990
by Ord. No. 125]
South All Between Major Road and
a point approximately
430 feet west of the
intersection with Benner
Road and Laura Lane
Bayhill Circle
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
Both All From Turnberry Drive to
cul-de-sac
Bella Rosa Court
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
Both All From West Cherry Lane
to the cul-de-sac
Braemar Lane
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
Both All From Turnberry Drive to
cul-de-sac
Bunker Way
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
South All From Masters Drive to
Putter Lane
Colorado Court
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
North All From Mill Road to the
cul-de-sac
Dusseldorf Drive
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
West All From St. Andrews
Boulevard to cul-de-sac
Eileen Lane
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
Both All From Graterford Road to
about 100 feet into
Eileen Lane
Evansbrook Lane
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
West All From Sanatoga Road to
Limerick Center Road
§ 170-21 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-21
168:557
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Finley Circle
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
North All From Evansbrook Lane
to the cul-de-sac
Forrest Glenn Drive
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
South All From about 50 feet
above the cul-de-sac to
Swamp Pike
Gleneagles Road
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
North All From St. Andrews
Boulevard to St.
Andrews Boulevard
Golden Vale Drive
[Added 12-3-2019
by Ord. No. 401]
Both All Entire length
Green Meadow
Court [Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
Both All From Oak Creek Drive to
cul-de-sac
Hickory Grove
Drive in the
subdivision of
Heather Glenn
[Added 4-3-2001
by Ord. No. 224]
Both All The area of street
between Limerick Center
Road and Bayberry Drive
Highland Road
[Added 12-3-2019
by Ord. No. 401]
Both All Entire length
Industrial Parkway
[Added 8-16-2007
by Ord. No. 281]
Both All From Penn Road East to
the cul-de-sac
Inverness Circle
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
Both All From Springford Road to
cul-de-sac
Knock Hill Drive
[Added 12-3-2019
by Ord. No. 401]
Both All Entire length
Lee Drive [Added
6-19-2012 by Ord.
No. 333]
Both All From Benner Road to the
cul-de-sac
Lightcap Road
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
Both All From Evergreen Road to
Airport Road
§ 170-21 LIMERICK CODE § 170-21
168:558
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Longcross Road
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
South All From St. Andrews
Boulevard to St.
Andrews Boulevard
Masters Drive
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
North All From Pruss Hill Road to
Ridge Pike
Montella Circle
[Added 1-16-2018
by Ord. No. 383]
Inside All Entire length
Oak Creek Drive
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
Both All From Neiffer Road to
Neiffer Road
Oak Street North All From Lewis Road to
Chapel Road (9 noparking
zones, as shown
on a print prepared by
Frank Rumler, April 1,
1972, marked "Exhibit A"
and made a part hereof;
said no-parking zones to
be delineated by
appropriate painting on
said street)
Paddington Terrace
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
East All From St. Andrews
Boulevard to cul-de-sac
Palmer Court
[Added 12-3-2019
by Ord. No. 401]
Both All Entire length
Par Circle [Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
North All From cul-de-sac to
Masters Drive
Phaeton Way
[Added 1-16-2018
by Ord. No. 383]
East/
inside of
loop
All Entire length
Prestwick Court
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
Both All From Springford Road to
cul-de-sac
§ 170-21 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-21
168:559
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Putter Lane
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
West All From Lower Pottsgrove
Township to Masters
Drive
Ridge Pike [Added
4-23-2019 by Ord.
No. 398]
North All From North Limerick
Road to 150 feet east
Rosewood Trail
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
West All From Main Street to the
cul-de-sac
Rutherford Court
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
Both All From Oak Creek Drive to
cul-de-sac
Sand Trap Drive
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
East 11:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
From Bridge (over
Landis Creek) to
Longcross Road
Sand Trap Drive
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
West All From Longcross Road to
Bridge (over Landis
Creek)
St. Andrews
Boulevard [Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
North All From Sand Trap Drive to
Limerick Center Road
St. Andrews
Boulevard [Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
South 11:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Limerick Center Road to
Sand Trap Drive
South Reed Road
[Added 5-28-2019
by Ord. No. 399]
Both All Entire length
Summerdale Lane
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
North All From Main Street to
Rosewood Trail
§ 170-21 LIMERICK CODE § 170-21
168:560
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Sunny Brooke Road
[Added 6-14-2007
by Ord. No. 275]
Both All At a point 1,650 feet east
from Ridge Pike and
traffic calming circle
one, then at a point
3,180 feet from Ridge
Pike to traffic calming
circle two, and at a point
from 5,380 feet from
Ridge Pike to traffic
calming circle three
Sunny Brook Road
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
Both All From West Ridge Pike to
Township Line Road
Sunset Road
[Added 12-3-2019
by Ord. No. 401]
Both All Entire length
Tee Court [Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
North All From cul-de-sac to
Masters Drive
Thomond Way
[Added 12-3-2019
by Ord. No. 401]
Both All Entire length
Turnberry Drive
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
Both All From Country Club Road
to Linfield Trappe Road
Wedge Court
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
North All From cul-de-sac to
Putter Lane
Wentworth Circle
[Added
12-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 355]
Both All From Turnberry Drive to
Turnberry Drive
West Ridge Pike
[Added 12-3-2019
by Ord. No. 401]
North All From McLaughlin Lane
to a point 450 feet east
of Moscariello Lane
West Ridge Pike North All From Swamp Pike to a
point 260 feet east
thereof
Willow Wood Drive
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
North All From Royersford Road to
the cul-de-sac
§ 170-21 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-21
168:561
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Ziegler Road
[Added 12-3-2019
by Ord. No. 401]
Both All Entire length
Zorro Court
[Added 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 333]
North All From Mill Road to the
cul-de-sac
§ 170-22. Special-purpose parking zones.
The following are established as special-purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Name of Street Side
Authorized
Purpose or
Vehicle Location
Green Street
[Added
9-29-1992 by
Ord. No. 147]
Northwest Emergency
vehicle only
Between Sixth Avenue
and Spring Ford High
School
§ 170-23. General parking prohibitions. [Added 7-21-1988 by Ord.
No. 104]
Except when necessary to avoid conflicts with other traffic or to protect
the safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with the law or the
directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle:
A. In front of a public or private driveway.
B. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
C. Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
D. Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield
sign or traffic control signal located at the site of a roadway.
E. At any place where the official signs prohibit such. [Amended
4-13-2006 by Ord. No. 258]
F. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or, when
properly sign posted, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to
any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance.
G. On a limited-access highway, unless authorized by official traffic control
devices.
H. Beyond 12 inches of the curb. [Added 4-13-2006 by Ord. No. 258]
§ 170-21 LIMERICK CODE § 170-23
168:562
§ 170-23.1. Stopping and standing prohibitions and restrictions.
[Added 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 383]
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Ridge Pike Both All From a point 250
feet west of
Royersford Road to
a point 700 feet
east of Royersford
Road
Station Avenue
[Added 12-3-2019
by Ord. No. 401]
Both All Entire length
§ 170-23.2. Do not block driveway. [Added 1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
383]
Name of Street Direction Hours/Days Location
Ridge Pike Westbound All Fire Company
driveway
§ 170-24. Unattended vehicle on private property. [Added 7-21-1988
by Ord. No. 104]
No person shall park or leave unattended a vehicle on private property
without the consent of the owner or other person in control or possession of
the property, except in the case of emergency or disablement of the vehicle,
in which case the operator shall arrange for the removal of the vehicle as
soon as possible.
§ 170-25. Parking spaces reserved for the handicapped. [Added
7-21-1988 by Ord. No. 104]
In all such spaces on public and private property which have been reserved
for a handicapped person or severely disabled veteran and have been
properly marked, it shall be unlawful for any person, except for persons
parking vehicles lawfully bearing a handicapped or severely disabled
veteran registration plate or displaying a handicapped or severely disabled
veteran parking placard when such vehicles are being operated by or for
the transportation of a handicapped person or a severely disabled veteran,
to use such spaces or zones.
§ 170-26. Issuance of parking tickets. [Added 7-21-1988 by Ord. No.
104]
I. Against the flow of traffic. [Added 4-13-2006 by Ord. No. 258]
J. On a sidewalk. [Added 4-13-2006 by Ord. No. 258]
§ 170-23 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-26
168:563
§ 170-27. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-21-1988 by Ord. No.
104; amended 4-13-2006 by Ord. No. 258]
For any person violating any of the provisions of the article who has failed
to pay the fine as described in § 170-26 above, the Limerick Township
Police Department shall file a summary traffic citation at District Court No.
38-01-19 for each and every such violation, and, upon conviction of said
violation or violations, the violator shall pay a fine of not less than $35
not more than $50, plus additional costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than
10 days.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Township, acting in
accordance with the instructions of the Chief of Police, to report:
(1) That the vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of this
article;
(2) The date and hour of such violation;
(3) The state and license number of such vehicle; and
(4) Any other facts, the knowledge of which shall be necessary for a
thorough understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation.
B. Each such police officer shall place upon such vehicle a notice to the
owner or operator thereof that such vehicle was parked in violation of
the provisions of this article and instructing such owner or operator
that, if he shall report to the Police Headquarters of the Township of
Limerick and pay, for the use of the Township, the sum of $20 within 72
hours after the time of such notice, the same shall save such violator
from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs hereinafter
provided. The failure of said owner or operator to make the payment of
$20, as herein provided, at the Police Headquarters of the Township of
Limerick shall then render such owner or operator subject to the
penalties hereinafter provided in § 170-27 for such violation of the
provisions of this article. [Amended 4-13-2006 by Ord. No. 258]
§ 170-26 LIMERICK CODE § 170-27
168:564
ARTICLE V
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
§ 170-28. Authority; scope.
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle
Code202 and gives authority to the Township to remove and impound:
§ 170-29. Authority to remove and impound.
The Township shall have the authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 170-28 of this article, provided that no such vehicle
shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions
of this article.
§ 170-30. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time by
the Board of Supervisors. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the
Board of Supervisors that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance
in an amount satisfactory to the Board of Supervisors as sufficient to
indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those
vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of
towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to the Board
of Supervisors its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles
under this article, and, when the schedule is approved by the Board of
Supervisors, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage
garage; no different schedule of charges shall be adopted without approval
of the Board of Supervisors, and no different charges shall be demanded of
or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under
this article by any approved storage garage. The Board of Supervisors shall
delete from its list of approved storage garages any garage that makes any
unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle removed or impounded
under this article.
§ 170-31. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that the vehicle was removed shall
A. Vehicles that are parked overtime on any street in the Township in
violation of any provisions of this chapter; and
B. Vehicles parked in metered and unmetered parking lots in the Township
in violation of any provisions of this chapter.
202. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22).
§ 170-28 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-31
168:565
be sent by the Township to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice
shall designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason
for its removal and impounding and the garage in which it was impounded.
§ 170-32. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a Magisterial District Judge.
Payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver
of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the
provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 170-33. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Township shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded
under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the
owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to
the places of storage of the vehicles.
§ 170-34. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 170-31 LIMERICK CODE § 170-34
168:566
ARTICLE VI
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 170-35. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 170-37 of this
article, the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, in his discretion, may
declare a snow and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow
emergency"). Information on the existence of a snow emergency may be
given by the Township through radio, newspaper or other available media,
and information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use
of the same media.
§ 170-36. Parking and driving restrictions.203
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 170-37. Snow emergency routes designated.204
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Name of Street Limits
(Reserved)
§ 170-38. Violations and penalties.
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 170-37 of this
article; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 170-35 of this article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $20 and
costs. [Amended 4-13-2006 by Ord. No. 258]
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 170-35 of this article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
203. Editor’s Note: See also § 153-21.
204. Editor’s Note: See also § 153-21.
§ 170-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-38
168:567

ARTICLE VII
Interpretation
§ 170-39. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 170-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-39
168:569

ARTICLE VIII
Residential Permit Parking
[Adopted 2-1-2000 by Ord. No. 207]
§ 170-40. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
RESIDENT — A person who occupies real estate within a residential district
as his or her principal residence.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A contiguous or nearly contiguous area containing
public highways or parts thereof abutted by residential property.
RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT AREA — A residential area where
curbside parking on public highways is restricted as set forth in this article
on specified days during hours fixed by the Township Manager and, as the
case may be, by the Board of Supervisors to not more than a certain number
of consecutive hours unless the vehicle properly displays a parking permit
authorized by this article.
§ 170-41. Designation of permit area.
§ 170-42. Curbside parking time limit.
A. The Board of Supervisors is hereby empowered to determine whether a
residential area, or portion thereof, may be designated or may continue
to be designated a residential parking permit area. The decision of the
Township Manager and the Board of Supervisors shall become effective
by ordinance.
B. The residential areas designated by the Board of Supervisors are
eligible for a residential parking permit program, provided that the
following requirements are met:
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall, by motion, vote whether to
designate the residential area or portion thereof under
consideration as a residential parking area, and, if the area be so
designated, the Board shall, in such ordinance and in accordance
with § 170-42, fix the hours and days when the restriction on
curbside parking by persons shall be in effect.
(2) Public notice to residents of the designation of the residential
parking permit area shall be given in the manner set forth in
§ 170-43.
A. Within a designated residential parking permit area, curbside parking
on public highways by persons without permits shall be limited to not
more than one or two hours, as the case may be, between 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays falling between
Monday through Friday, or between the hours specified in § 170-47
§ 170-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-42
168:571
§ 170-43. Notice to residents.
Following the Board of Supervisors affirmative vote to designate a
residential parking permit area pursuant to § 170-41, the Township
Manager, or his designee, shall publish two times in a newspaper of general
circulation in this Township, a notice containing the following:
§ 170-44. Permit issuance; application.
§ 170-45. Use of parking permits; violations.
hereof. The Board may change the times of parking or the days of
parking based on the circumstances of the curbside parking needs of
the particular residential area involved.
B. After designation of a residential parking permit area, the hours of the
day during which the restriction on curbside parking by vehicles
without permits shall be in effect, shall be subject to change from time
to time upon recommendation by the Township Manager and the Board
of Supervisors.
A. The existence, exact location and numerical designation of the parking
permit area.
B. The parking restrictions applicable to all vehicles in curbside parking
spaces along public highways in the designated area which do not
properly display a parking permit authorized by this article.
C. The procedures to obtain information regarding the acquisition of
permits.
A. A residential parking permit shall be issued on the basis of one permit
per vehicle registered to an address in the approved area, up to a
maximum of four vehicles per household. The application for the
residential parking permit shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and residential address of the owner of the vehicle.
(2) The make, model and registration number of the vehicle.
(3) The signature of the applicant for the residential parking permit.
B. Upon the applicant's submission of a completed and validated
residential parking permit application and applicant's fulfillment of all
applicable provisions of this article controlling issuance of the
residential parking permit, the Township shall issue and the applicant
shall receive one residential parking permit for the vehicle described in
the application. Such residential parking permit shall be prominently
displayed in the front left side of the windshield, or in such other place
as the Township Manager may direct in writing. A vehicle shall be
issued a residential parking permit only if it displays a valid state
license and current inspection certificate.
§ 170-42 LIMERICK CODE § 170-45
168:572
§ 170-46. Visitor parking permit.
Upon application of any resident of a residential parking permit area, the
Township shall issue a visitor parking permit to the resident for a visitor's
vehicle, to be limited to the residential parking permit area in which the
applicant resides. For purposes of this section, the resident shall be the
holder of and responsible for the use and misuse of the visitor parking
permits issued to him or her. The visitor permit is to be used only when
visitors are actually visiting the household to which the permit was issued.
Any violation of the permitted use of the visitor permit shall be grounds for
the immediate termination of the permit. Any violation shall be determined
solely by the Township.
§ 170-47. Violation and penalties.
Any person who violates § 170-45 or § 170-46 of this article shall pay a
fine of $25. Provided, however, that it shall be the duty of Township police
officers and of Township parking enforcement personnel to report to the
Magisterial District Judge all violations of § 170-45 and § 170-46 and, in
each case, the section violated, the license number of the vehicle involved
in the violation, the location where the violation took place, and any other
A. A parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve a parking space within
a designated parking permit area. A parking permit shall not authorize
the standing or parking of any vehicle in such places and during such
times as the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited or
set aside for specified types of vehicles and shall not excuse the
observance of any traffic regulation other than the parking time limit
enforced in the residential parking permit area.
B. Whenever the holder of a parking permit or the vehicle for which the
parking permit was issued no longer fulfills one or more of the
applicable provisions of this article controlling issuance of parking
permits, the holder shall notify the Township which then shall direct the
holder to surrender the parking permit. Until its surrender or
revocation, a parking permit shall remain valid for such time as the
holder continues to reside within the designated residential parking
permit area.
C. A parking permit shall be valid only in the parking permit area for
which it is issued. It shall be a violation of this article for the holder of a
parking permit to fail to surrender it when directed to do so by the
Township. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to
represent in any fashion that a vehicle is entitled to a parking permit
authorized by this article when he or she is not so entitled. The display
of a parking permit on a vehicle not entitled to such a parking permit
shall constitute a representation. It shall be a violation of this article for
any person to duplicate, by any means, a parking permit authorized by
this article. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to display
on any vehicle such a duplicate parking permit.
§ 170-45 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 170-47
168:573
facts which might be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding on
the circumstances attending the violation. The police officer or other person
making the report shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a
notice stating that the vehicle was in violation of § 170-45 or § 170-46, as
the case may be. Any person violating any other provision of this article
or the regulations promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof in
a summary proceeding, be fined $25 for each violation and, in default of
payment of any fine so imposed, shall be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 10 days for each violation.
§ 170-48. Designated streets; Restricted days and times.
The following streets are restricted as identified:
Street Location
Days and Hours
of Restricted
Parking
Permitted
Nonpermit
Parking During
Restricted
Times
Spring Street Entire Street Monday through
Friday 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m.
1 hour
9th Street Intersection with
Spring Street
Monday through
Friday 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m.
1 hour
§ 170-47 LIMERICK CODE § 170-48
168:574
Chapter 181
WELLS AND WELL DRILLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Plumbing — See Ch. 129.
§ 181-1. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, said provisions
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the
provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall
be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
§ 181-2. Definitions.
§ 181-3. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to drill,
dig, construct or utilize a well, except in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 181-4. Use of wells restricted.
No well shall be drilled, dug, constructed or used for any purpose
whatsoever except the withdrawal of fluids from subterranean sources. The
discharge of sewage or any substance into a well is expressly prohibited.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
shall be construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any person, partnership, association or private
corporation, whether the same be an owner of real estate, lessee or
tenant, general agent, special agent or independent contractor.
WELL — A hole or shaft sunk into the earth, customarily utilized to
withdraw or obtain a fluid from a subterranean supply.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory.
§ 170-48 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 181-5
168:575
§ 181-5. Registration of well drillers. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord.
No. 109]
It shall be unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to drill,
dig or construct a well in the Township without having first registered
with the Township Manager. Such registration will be deemed completed
after submission of a written request, along with a registration fee, and the
issuance of a statement of registration by the Township Manager.
§ 181-6. Term and revocation of registration.
The registration provided for in § 181-5 hereof shall be perpetual unless
revoked for cause by the Township. Such registration will be automatically
revoked upon conviction or judicial decision that the registrant has violated
any terms of this chapter.
§ 181-7. Well permit required. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
No well may be drilled, dug or constructed nor shall any well drilled
after the effective date of this chapter be utilized without having first
received a well permit from the Code Enforcement Officer. Applications for
permits shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer, along with the
application fee.
§ 181-8. Fees.
The registration and application fees herein provided may be increased or
decreased or entirely eliminated by the Supervisors of Limerick Township
at any time by resolution.
§ 181-9. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 184
A. In the case of any violation of this chapter, the Township Supervisors, in
addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of the Township
any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such violation or to
restrain, correct or abate such violation.
B. For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, any person
who knowingly commits, takes part in or assists in any such violation
shall be liable, on conviction thereof, to a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the Montgomery County
Prison for a period not exceeding 30 days; and, whenever such person
shall have been notified by the Township that he is committing such
violation of this chapter, each day that he shall continue such violation
shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine or
imprisonment. Such fines shall be collected as like fines are now
collected by law. [Amended 4-4-1989 by Ord. No. 109]
§ 181-5 LIMERICK CODE § 181-9
168:576
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 60.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 73.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 89.
Junkyards — See Ch. 106.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 113.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 151.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
155.
§ 181-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 181-9
168:577

ARTICLE I
General Regulations; Districts Established
§ 184-1. Title, effective date.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Limerick Township
Zoning Ordinance of 1961, as amended by Comprehensive Amendment
enacted September 29, 1992," and shall become effective upon enactment.
§ 184-2. Legislative intent.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety,
morals and the general welfare of the Township. The chapter is in
accordance with a Comprehensive Plan and is designed to lessen congestion
on the roads and highways, to secure safety from fire, panic and other
danger, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of
land, to avoid undue congestion of population, to facilitate the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
public requirements, to conserve the value of buildings and to encourage
the most appropriate use of land throughout the Township.
§ 184-3. Community development objectives. [Amended 6-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 196]
This chapter is enacted in conformance with the requirements of the
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.205 The goals and
objectives of the Growth Management and Comprehensive Plan of 1995,
as may be amended, are hereby included by reference. In addition, the
following specific objectives are intended to guide the Township's future
development:
A. Residential development objectives.
(1) To encourage the maintenance of the rural character of the
Township while providing for a variety of housing types and
densities for persons of varying incomes, ages and lifestyles.
(2) To establish growth areas within the Township within which higher
density development will be concentrated and centralized sewer
and water service provided.
(3) To provide for low-density residential development in areas outside
the Township's growth area which neither have nor are planned to
have centralized sewer and water service.
(4) To provide for the timing of growth at a rate consistent with the
availability of community facilities and municipal services.
(5) To encourage the retention of agricultural uses and the
preservation and reuse of historic buildings and structures.
205. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 184-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-3
168:579
(6) To encourage development of the Township's villages, Limerick and
Linfield, as focal points for the neighborhoods around them, and to
encourage further village residential development at a pedestrian
scale.
(7) To encourage clustering and other flexible lotting techniques to
preserve open space and minimize disturbance of sensitive natural
features.
B. Office and industrial development objectives.
(1) To provide sufficient developable land for all types of industrial
development, in proximity to major regional roads and highway
interchanges.
(2) To concentrate office and limited industrial development around
highway interchanges, to facilitate circulation and minimize
interference with local traffic.
(3) To minimize conflict between industrial development and
surrounding land uses by means of performance standards
governing odors, emissions and other potential side effects of
industrial development.
(4) To ensure the protection of sensitive natural resources by limiting
building coverage and impervious coverage within all
nonresidential development.
C. Commercial development objectives.
(1) To make provisions for adequate commercial facilities to serve the
present and projected population of Limerick Township, rather
than a regional market.
(2) To encourage small-scale, pedestrian-oriented commercial
development within the villages, especially where it leads to the
reuse of existing historic buildings.
(3) To ensure that highway-oriented commercial development is
designed to maximize traffic safety and convenience, and avoid the
cluttered appearance and traffic hazards of traditional "strip"
development.
(4) To encourage development of planned commercial centers,
combining retail and office uses with strong design and circulation
controls at the intersections of major roads.
D. Institutional objectives.
(1) To encourage development of institutional uses needed and desired
by the Township.
§ 184-3 LIMERICK CODE § 184-3
168:580
§ 184-4. Establishment of districts.
(2) To provide guidance and standards for locating and developing
institutional uses within residential and commercial areas, in a
manner compatible with surrounding land uses.
E. Environmental and open space objectives.
(1) To provide standards to control the density and intensity of
development in areas of sensitive natural resources, such as stream
valleys, steep slopes, woodlands and groundwater recharge areas.
(2) To encourage the setting aside of suitable open space within
residential developments, to meet the needs of present and future
residents for active and passive recreational facilities.
(3) To provide for a comprehensive trail system within the Township, to
provide for nonmotorized recreation and to link neighborhoods
with recreational and community facilities.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the Township is hereby divided into the
following districts, which are designated as follows: [Amended
11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198; 7-19-2005 by Ord. No. 253; 6-19-2012
by Ord. No. 330; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
R-1 Residential-Agricultural
R-2 Low Density
R-3 Medium Density
R-4 Medium-High Density
R-5 Village Residential
MHP Mobile Home Park
VC Village Commercial
HC Highway Commercial
O/LI Office/Limited Industrial
LLI Limited Light Industrial
HI Heavy Industrial
RB Retail Business District
MS Main Street District
B. The locations and boundaries of these districts are shown on the Zoning
Map of Limerick Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
prepared by Carrigan Geo, dated May 1, 2018, and as may be amended,
which is hereby made a part of this chapter. The Zoning Map and all the
notations, references and other data thereon shall be as much a part of
§ 184-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-4
168:581
§ 184-5. District boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the district as
indicated on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
§ 184-6. Conflict with other provisions.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or interfere
with any existing ordinances or enactment or with any rule, regulation
or permit adopted or issued thereunder, except insofar as the same may
be inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter,
provided that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the use
of buildings or land, or upon the height and bulk of buildings, or prescribes
larger open spaces than are required by the provisions of such ordinance,
enactment, rule, regulation or permit, then the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
this chapter as if fully described herein.206 [Amended 12-16-1997 by
Ord. No. 191; 7-3-2018 by Ord. No. 392]
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately coinciding
with the center lines of streets, highways, railroad lines or streams,
such center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
B. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
coincide with lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said
boundaries; or where district boundaries are extensions of lot lines or
connect the intersection of lot lines, such lines shall be said district
boundaries.
C. Where a district boundary divides a lot, the locations of such boundary
shall be specified by figures on the Zoning Map, or where no figures
exist, by use of the scale appearing on the map.
D. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a street and a
district boundary, they shall indicate that the boundary runs parallel to
the center line of the street or highway, at a distance therefrom equal to
the number of feet so indicated.
E. In case any further uncertainty exists, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
interpret the map as to the location of district boundaries.
F. Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single or separate
ownership at the effective date of this chapter, the use regulations
applicable to the less-restricted district shall extend over the portion of
the lot in the more-restricted district a distance of not more than 50 feet
beyond the district boundary line.
206. Editor’s Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 184-4 LIMERICK CODE § 184-7
168:582
§ 184-7. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by a court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the chapter as a whole or of any other part thereof.
§ 184-8. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 184-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-8
168:583

ARTICLE II
Word Usage; Definitions; Abbreviations
§ 184-9. Word usage.
For purposes of this chapter, certain words shall be interpreted as follows:
§ 184-10. Definitions.
Words and terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings given in this
article. Unless expressly stated otherwise, any pertinent word or term not
a part of this listing, but vital to the interpretation of this chapter, shall be
construed to have its legal definition or, in absence of a legal definition, its
meaning as commonly accepted by practitioners, including civil engineers,
surveyors, architects, landscape architects and planners.
ACCESS DRIVE — A privately owned, constructed and maintained vehicular
access from a public or private right-of-way to off-street parking or loading
spaces.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A structure or building
detached from a principal building on the same residential lot or
agricultural lands and customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal residential or agricultural building.[Amended 8-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 379]
A. Words used in present tense include the future.
B. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
C. The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended
for," "maintained for" and "occupied for."
D. The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership,
incorporated association and/or any other similar entity.
E. The words "include" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specified examples, but are intended to extend the meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
F. The words "building" or "structure" shall always be construed as if
followed by the words "or part thereof."
G. The word "may" is permissive, and the words "shall" and "will" are
always mandatory.
H. If a term is not defined by this chapter, but is defined by the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, then the definition of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance207 shall also apply for
this chapter. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
207. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 184-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:585
ACCESSORY USE — A use on the same lot and customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use.[Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
ACCESS STRIP — A piece of land which provides physical access to and
legal road frontage for a lot, but which does not comply with the minimum
lot width regulations of this chapter. Access strips provide access to flag,
rear or interior lots. The area of an access strip shall not be included in the
minimum lot area required under the provisions of this chapter.
ACREAGE, BUILDABLE — See net buildable acreage.
ACREAGE, GROSS — The calculated land area contained within the deeded
boundaries of a lot.
ACREAGE, NET — The gross land area of the tract, minus all land contained
within the ultimate right-of-way of any existing roads abutting or crossing
the tract.
ACT 247 — See "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code."208
ADDITION — An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building
or structure.
ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY — Any premises operated for profit or not
for profit in which older adult daily living services, as defined herein, are
simultaneously provided for four or more adults who are not relatives of the
operator. The following types of adult day-care facilities are regulated by
this chapter:
ADULT USE — Any business, club or other similar operation which permits
patrons, clients, visitors or members to hear, view, read, lease, purchase,
trade or exchange and/or participate in activities, publications, movies,
video tapes and/or live or televised performances which have as their
dominant theme or themes explicit sexual activities and/or the exhibition
of portions of the human or animal anatomy which are not normally seen
in public or in commercial or other club-type operations, including the
genital areas, buttocks and female breasts, and which operations may or
may not exclude minors by virtue of age. Included in the term "adult use"
are bookstores, movie theaters, restaurants, bars and any other operation
which qualifies for inclusion by virtue of the definition above, regardless of
the type of other uses or operations which may also be conducted on or in
the property or properties involved.
AGE-QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY — A residential community
consisting of single-family detached, semidetached, and/or single-family
ADULT DAY-CARE HOME — Any adult day-care facility in which
services are provided to between four and eight adults and where the
day-care areas are being used as a family residence.
A.
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — Any adult day-care facility in which
services are provided to eight or more adults and where the day-care
areas are not being used as a family residence.
B.
208. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:586
attached dwellings, which shall be permanently occupied by at least one
principal resident who shall be 55 years of age or older, if the housing meets
the criteria of federal and state law.[Added 11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 236;
amended 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360]
AGRICULTURE — The cultivation of the soil, and the raising and harvesting
of products of the soil, including but not limited to nursery, horticulture and
floriculture operations and keeping of livestock. This definition also includes
all necessary accessory uses for packing, treating and storing agricultural
products; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses
shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities.[Amended
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
ALLEY — A minor, vehicular right-of-way, public or private, on which no
principal structures front, which serves as the secondary means of access
to two or more properties which otherwise front on a public street.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or mechanical equipment, or any
enlargement or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally
or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to
another.
ANCILLARY USE — A subordinate use that is controlled by a larger
permitted use. An example is a public garage (tires, batteries and
accessories) or garden shop controlled by a department store.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A place where animals or pets are given medical or
surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care
incidental to the hospital use.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — The raising and keeping of livestock, fish, furbearing
animals, honey bees or poultry for any commercial purpose, which
shall include, but not be limited to, the boarding of fewer than 10 horses
for a fee, and the keeping of horses for domestic purposes. The keeping of
livestock other than horses, fish, fur-bearing animals, honey bees or poultry
as farm pets or for domestic purposes shall not be construed as "animal
husbandry."[Amended 9-6-1994 by Ord. No. 165]
ANTENNA — Equipment designed to transmit or receive electronic signals.
APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for approval of
subdivision or land development plans, including his/her heirs, successors,
agents and assigns. The term also includes landowner, developer, builder
and/or other persons responsible for the plans and construction of buildings
or other improvements on any parcel of land.
AQUIFER — An underground bed or stratum of earth, gravel or porous
stone that contains water.
AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — The exposed ground-level portion of an
aquifer.
ARCADE — A place of business where three or more coin-operated video
screen game machines are located.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:587
AREA, GROSS OR NET — See "acreage, gross" or "acreage, net."
ASSEMBLAGE —
AUDITORIUM — A building containing a stage and seating for meetings
and/or performances.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION — Any premises used for supplying
gasoline and oil, tires, accessories and services for motor vehicles at retail
direct to the motorist consumer, including the making of automotive repairs.
AUTO SALVAGE — The dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles
or recreation vehicles or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BANK — A financial or fiduciary institution, including savings and loan,
finance companies, credit unions and other similar institutions.
BASEMENT — A space having 1/2 or more of its floor-to-ceiling height
above the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling
height of not less than 6 1/2 feet. A space which does not meet the above
criteria is a cellar.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A residential use consisting of one dwelling unit,
together with no more than seven rooms or suites that are rented to
overnight or weekly guests and where meals are prepared for the guests by
the proprietors. The rented rooms do not contain kitchen facilities and do
not constitute separate dwelling units.
BLOCK — A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets
and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways or any other barrier to
development.
BOARDING- OR ROOMING HOUSE — A building consisting of a single
dwelling unit and no more than five rooms or suites, where lodging is
provided with or without meals to tenants for periods generally longer than
30 days, for compensation.
BUFFER — An area that functions to visually separate site elements and
land uses to ease the transitions between them. Unless otherwise regulated,
buffers may be located within the required setbacks and yard
areas.[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature. (See
"accessory structure or building" and "principal building.")
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio obtained by dividing the maximum
horizontal cross section of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot,
including, but not limited to, balconies, covered porches, carports and
The merging of adjacent properties into a single unit of ownership or
use.
A.
B. The property so merged, considered as a unit.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:588
breezeways, by the total area of the lot upon which the buildings are
located. This definition specifically excludes all residential patios and
residential decks. All nonresidential decks or nonresidential patios shall be
included in the calculation of building coverage.[Amended 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 328]
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The area of a lot within which a principal building
may be erected. This area is defined by the limits of the minimum front, side
and rear yard areas and encompasses the area of the lot not found in the
yard areas and rights-of-way.
BUILDING LINE — The line which serves as the rear boundary of the
minimum front yard and which is used for the purpose of measuring lot
width. (See also "yard line.")
CALIPER — Tree diameter measured 2 1/2 feet from the ground.
CAMPGROUND — A plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are
located, established or maintained for occupancy by camping units of the
general public as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or
vacation purposes.
CAREGIVER — The person responsible for the direct care, protection,
supervision and guidance of children in a day-care setting.
CARPORT — A building open on three or more sides and used in conjunction
with a dwelling for the storage of private motor vehicles.[Amended
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street or highway desired for vehicular
traffic.
CELLAR — That portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade and having more than 1/2 of its height below grade. (See
"basement.")
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
deceased, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with the cemetery and within its
boundaries.
CENTRAL SEWER OR WATER — A sewage disposal network and facilities
or water supply network serving a group or series of property owners in
common; it may be publicly or privately owned.
CHILD — A person under 16 years of age.
CHILD DAY-CARE FACILITY — The following types of child day-care
facilities are regulated by this chapter:
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility in which care is provided for seven or
more children at any one time, where the child-care areas are not being
used as a family residence.
A.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any premise other than the child's own
home in which child day care is provided at any one time to four, five or
B.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:589
CLOSED-CUP FLASH POINT — The temperature at which a liquid sample
produces sufficient vapor to flash, but not ignite, when in contact with a
flame in a closed-cup tester.
CLUB — A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue
common goals, interests or activities and usually characterized by certain
membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings and
a constitution and/or bylaws.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — An alternative development method wherein
structures are arranged in closely related groups, reducing lot sizes,
preserving land for open space and permitting more imaginative site design
than may be possible under standard development.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — Indoor or outdoor commercial recreation
or amusement facilities, such as bowling alleys, skating rinks, fitness
centers, tennis and/or racquet clubs, miniature golf, golf courses/
clubs.[Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land within a development
site designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of the residents or
tenants of the development, not including streets, off-street parking areas
and areas set aside for public facilities. "Common open space" shall not
be part of individual residential lots and shall be free of structures, but
may contain such recreational facilities for residents as are shown in the
approved development plan.[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
COMMON USE AREA — That area which is set aside for public use and
enjoyment as part of a mixed-use office and commercial or residential
development, where required by this chapter. A "common use area" may
contain green areas, recreation facilities, courtyards, plazas and other
public amenities.[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334; 8-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 379]
COMMUNITY RECREATION CENTER — A use involving one or more indoor
gymnasium(s), plus indoor exercise rooms, classrooms and a mix of other
indoor and outdoor recreation facilities that are utilized by large numbers
of the population.[Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Limerick Township Comprehensive Plan
and amendments thereto, including maps, charts and/or descriptive matter
officially adopted by the Township Planning Commission and Township
Supervisors, indicating recommendations for the continuing development of
six children who are not relatives of the caregiver, and where the childcare
areas are being used as a family residence.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A facility in which care is provided for
more than seven but fewer than 12 children at any one time where the
child-care areas are being used as a family residence.209
C.
209. Editor's Note: The former definition of "church," which immediately followed this
definition, was renamed and subsequently moved 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196. See now
"place of worship."
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:590
the municipality and including all elements required by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.210
CONDITIONAL USE — A form of permitted use, authorized by this chapter,
under the jurisdiction of the Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors
is empowered to grant permission for "conditional uses," consistent with
the public interest, in compliance with the standards and procedures
established in this chapter, following thorough examination of the proposal,
and under any reasonable safeguards necessary to implement the purposes
and intent of this chapter and to protect the general welfare.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions, created under either the
Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of July 3, 1963, or the Pennsylvania Uniform
Condominium Act.211
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of mobile homes.
CONVERSION — The remodeling or alteration of a structure so as to
accommodate more leasable or saleable units or a different use than what
had originally been intended for the structure. Includes the alteration of a
nonresidential structure into a dwelling unit(s) for at least one family, the
modification of a single-family structure to accommodate more units than
originally intended, the alteration of existing dwellings into a commercial
use and the alteration of an existing dwelling into a mixed commercial and
residential use.
CORNER LOT — A lot having contiguous frontage on two or more
intersecting roads.
COUNTY — The County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CULTURAL USE — A use which promotes art, drama, music, science and/or
history, such as a library, museum, live theatre, community center, botanical
garden, including studios for dance, art, music and photography. Exercise
studios shall not exceed 3,000 square feet on any one floor.[Added
9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
CULVERT — A drain, ditch or conduit not incorporated in a closed system
that carries drainage water under a driveway, roadway or paved area.
CURATIVE AMENDMENT — An amendment, submitted either by a citizen
or by the municipality, to be considered by the Board of Supervisors as a
potential cure for a successful challenge to the substantive validity of a land
use ordinance.
CURATIVE CHALLENGE — A substantive challenge to the validity of the
land use ordinance and/or map brought before the Zoning Hearing Board
for consideration.
210. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
211. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:591
DAY-CARE FACILITY — See "child day-care facility" and "adult day-care
facility."
DECIBEL (DB) — A unit which describes the sound pressure level of
intensity of sound. A sound level meter is calibrated in "decibels."
DEED — A written instrument whereby an estate in real property is
conveyed by a grantor to a grantee.
DEED RESTRICTION — A restriction upon the use of a property placed in a
deed.
DEED, WARRANTY — A deed in which, either expressly or by implication,
the grantor guarantees that the title which he undertakes to transfer has
not been previously conveyed by him and is free from defects and that
the property is unencumbered except as stated, and for himself and heirs,
agrees to defend and protect the grantee against any loss which may be
suffered by reason of the existence of any other title or interest in the
property existing at the time the deed was executed and not accepted
therein.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per net buildable acre.
DETENTION BASIN OR POND — A facility for the temporary storage of
stormwater runoff.
DETONABLE MATERIALS — Materials which decompose by detonation.
Such materials include explosives, unstable compounds and fissionable
matter.
DETONATION — A rapid buildup of a destructive pressure wave caused by
chemical reaction and/or the sudden release of energy.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including buildings or other structures, streets and other paving,
utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for guiding development,
including a plan of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and
bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, parking facilities, ways, common open space and
public facilities.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in such a
manner that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the
environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged to the waters of the
commonwealth.
DRAINAGE — The natural or man-made features of land that are specifically
designed to store or carry surface water runoff.
DRIVE-IN USE — An establishment which by design, physical facilities,
service or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to
receive services, obtain goods or be entertained while remaining in their
motor vehicles.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:592
DRIVEWAY — A private cartway providing vehicular access between a
public street and a lot, property or development.
DUMP — See "solid waste disposal facility."
DWELLING TYPES — For the purposes of this chapter, the following are the
definitions of the various types of dwelling units:
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling designed for
and occupied exclusively as a residence for only one family and not
attached to any other building or dwelling units.
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED LOT LINE — A single-family dwelling on
an individual lot, with the building set on, or close to, one side property
line so that the lot has only one side yard. Lot line homes should be
designed so that this side yard and the rear yard constitute the primary
outdoor living areas for the dwelling. Typically, no windows are placed
on the wall of the building along the lot line. If the building is set on
the side lot line, a five-foot access easement is provided on the adjacent
property along the lot line for necessary maintenance of the building
wall.
B.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED VILLAGE HOUSE — A single-family
detached house on a separate lot. It differs from other forms of singlefamily
detached housing in its lot size and its placement on the lot,
which are similar to houses found in historic villages and boroughs.
The house is placed close to the street and is distinguished from other
single-family houses by planting or architectural treatments. In order to
qualify for this use, the garage shall be set back at least 10 feet behind
the front facade of the building, and each unit shall meet two or more
of the following criteria:
Two canopy trees per lot, or three flowering trees per lot, located
within the front yard.
(1)
An unenclosed porch, running across at least three-fourths of the
house front, being at least seven feet in width.
(2)
A front yard raised above sidewalk grade by at least 30 inches with
a retaining wall of at least 18 inches at the sidewalk line.
(3)
A fence of at least 30 inches and no more than four feet in height,
enclosing the front yard, plus one flowering shrub per 60 inches
across the width of the house front.
(4)
Intensive planting of one shade tree, one flowering tree, and one
flowering shrub per 30 inches across the width of the house front.
(5)
A hedge of shrubs planted 18 inches apart across the width of the
front yard.
(6)
C.
TWO-FAMILY BUILDING — A residential building containing two
dwelling units and which is not attached to any other building. A "twofamily
building" counts as two dwelling units for density purposes.
D.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:593
TWIN (SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED) — A two-family building
with dwelling units placed side-by-side and joined to each other by
a vertical common party wall, but otherwise surrounded by yard
areas. When lotted, each dwelling unit may be on a separate lot,
with the common boundary between the two lots running along
the common party wall. Separate ingress and egress is provided to
each unit.
(1)
DUPLEX (TWO-FAMILY DETACHED) — A two-family building with
one dwelling unit placed above the other so that they share a
common horizontal partition. When lotted, a duplex shall be
entirely on one lot. Separate ingress and egress is provided to each
unit.
(2)
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit
having its own independent outside access, with no other dwelling units
located directly and totally above or below it, and having party walls
in common with at least one but not more than three adjacent similar
dwelling units, and located in a building comprised of at least three
dwelling units. Each dwelling unit may be individually lotted, or owned
as a condominium. This dwelling type shall include but not be limited
to dwelling units commonly known as "townhouses," "rowhouses,"
"triplexes," "quadruplexes" and "multiplexes."
TOWNHOUSE (ROWHOUSE) — A single-family attached dwelling
in a row of at least three units, with one dwelling unit from ground
to roof, with individual outside access. Although these units are in
rows, their design should de-emphasize a lined up appearance.
(1)
MULTIPLEX — An attached dwelling arranged in a group of no
more than six units, in a variety of configurations: side-by-side,
back-to-back or vertically. Because of the variety of configurations,
a multiplex can be designed to look like a large, single-family
detached house; this feature is encouraged.
(2)
E.
MULTIFAMILY BUILDING — A detached residential building containing
three or more dwelling units. Units may not be arranged entirely in
vertical rows (like townhouses) and are generally located entirely above
or below one another. Units may share outside access and/or internal
hallways, lobbies and similar facilities. The dwelling units cannot be
individually lotted, but instead, share the lot or tract on which the
building containing them is located. The development is usually under
one operating unit, as a rental or condominium development. This
dwelling type includes, but is not limited to, garden apartments, flats
and multifamily conversions, as defined below:
MULTIFAMILY CONVERSION — A multifamily dwelling containing
not more than four dwelling units that results from the conversion
of a single-family or two-family dwelling.
(1)
F.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:594
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms designed, occupied or intended to
be occupied as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single
family maintaining a household.
EASEMENT — A vested or acquired right to use land other than as a tenant,
for a specific purpose, such right being held by someone other than the
owner who holds title to the land.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS[Added 4-6-1999 by Ord.
No. 202] —
EDUCATIONAL USE — A use whereby instruction is offered by a public or
private institution or individual and does not include a cultural use as a
primary use.[Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
ELECTRONIC SIGNAGE — A sign whose content may be changed by
electronic process through the use of intermittent light or lights, including
but not limited to light-emitting diodes, liquid crystal display, and plasma
screen image display or other similar technology.[Added 7-5-2011 by Ord.
No. 323]
ELEVATION —
EXPLOSIVE MATERIAL — A material which produces flammable or
explosive gases or vapors under ordinary temperature conditions, and
includes liquids which have a closed cup flash point of less than 105° F.
FAMILY —
APARTMENT — A single dwelling unit in a multifamily building; a single
dwelling unit in a duplex or other multifamily dwelling may also be
referred to as an apartment.
G.
DRIVE-THROUGH RESTAURANT — An eating establishment which
serves ready-to-consume food and/or drink. Food and/or drink may be
ordered while inside the restaurant or by placing orders while in a
vehicle at a drive-through window. Food may be consumed on- or offsite.
A.
RESTAURANT — An eating establishment that serves ready-to-consume
food and/or drink.
B.
TAVERN — A place where alcoholic beverages are consumed on the
premise and food may be served and consumed on-site.
C.
A. A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference level.
B. A flat scale drawing of the front, rear or side of a building.
Any number of individuals living together on a nontransient basis as
a single housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises,
when said individuals are related by blood, marriage or adoption,
including any number of foster children; no more than five unrelated
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit and doing
A.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:595
FARM OPERATION — A premise which is used for the production of
agricultural commodities in their unmanufactured state, such as raising
livestock, and which shall include those activities which are customarily
associated with such production, including the application of manure and/
or fertilizers for crop production.212
FLAMMABLE — Subject to easy ignition and rapid flaming combustion.
FLOODPLAIN-RELATED TERMS — [Amended 3-1-2016 by Ord. No.
364]
their cooking on the premises, except when an application for a special
exception to enable a greater number of unrelated individuals to occupy
a dwelling unit is reviewed and approved by the Zoning Hearing Board,
as provided in § 184-44C. The definition of "family" shall not apply to
the occupants of a club, fraternity house, lodge or residential club.
[Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
Notwithstanding the definition in Subsection A, a "family" shall also be
deemed to include any number of mentally or physically handicapped
persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single, nonprofit housekeeping
unit, if such occupants are handicapped persons as defined in Title
VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988. Such unrelated individuals shall have the
right to occupy a dwelling unit in the same manner and to the same
extent as any family unit as defined in the Subsection A of this
definition.
B.
FEMA AND FIA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the Federal Insurance Administration who have jurisdiction over the
National Flood Insurance Program and its related studies and
regulations. FEMA is the parent agency of the FIA.
A.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
B.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles,
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
C.
FLOODPLAIN — The identified floodplain area as determined by the
Floodplain Administrator.
D.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR — The appointed Limerick Township
Official designated to administrate and enforce the Limerick
Township’s Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.213
E.
212. Editor's Note: The former definition of "fast-food restaurant," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198. See now the definition of "eating
and drinking establishments."
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:596
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of the exterior
walls, or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings, but not
including interior vehicular parking or loading, or any space where the
floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking
and loading and all floor below the first or ground floor except when used or
intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public. The area
excluded as unusable may not exceed 15%.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — A ratio derived by dividing the total (gross) floor
area of all buildings on a lot by the net buildable area of the lot.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principals, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, which does not involve any land development.[Added 6-16-2015
by Ord. No. 360]
FRONTAGE —
GREEN AREA — Includes all landscape features, such as planters, planted
islands, landscaped buffers and screens, lawn areas, meadows, woods,
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — Any areas of the Township,
classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
dated March 2, 2016, and issued by the FEMA or the most recent
official version thereof adopted by FEMA, including all digital data
developed as part of the FIS and the above referenced FIS and FIRMs,
and any subsequent revisions and amendments are hereby adopted by
the Township and declared to be a part of this chapter.
F.
A. The length of the lot line abutting a street right-of-way.
In measuring frontage for the requirements of any Zoning or
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance section within the Code
of Limerick Township, a limited access highway shall not be used in the
calculation of frontage. [Added 8-7-2001 by Ord. No. 232]
B.
For the purpose of any Zoning or Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance section within the Code of Limerick Township, State Route
422 shall be considered a limited access highway. [Added 8-7-2001 by
Ord. No. 232]
C.
For the sole and exclusive purpose of calculating allowable signage
pursuant to Chapter 184, Article XII, §§ 184-90 through 184-96,
"Signs," of the Code of the Township of Limerick, the requirements for
calculating frontage along a limited access highway, as defined herein,
shall be waived. [Added 8-7-2001 by Ord. No. 232]
D.
213. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 89, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:597
hedgerows and any area that is not covered by buildings, paving, or
impervious surface. It is available and sometimes used for retention and
maintenance of natural vegetation and for infiltration of stormwater for
groundwater recharge. Decorative stone and mulch ground covers may be
included if placed upon an earth surface.[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No.
334]
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and upper
floors, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of
partitions and from outside wall faces. It is the space for which tenants
pay rent, including sales areas and integral stock areas. It does not include
public or common areas, such as public toilets, corridors, stairwells,
elevator lobbies or enclosed mall spaces.
GROUP HOME — The use of a lawful dwelling unit for the housing, support,
oversight and care of persons who need such assistance because of physical
disability, old age, mental retardation/developmental disability or another
condition that the applicant proves to the Zoning Officer involves a
handicap or disability under the Federal Fair Housing Act Amendments
of 1988 or the Americans With Disabilities Act, as amended.[Amended
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
GUEST ACCOMMODATIONS — See "bed-and-breakfast," "hotel" and
"motel."
HEALTH-CARE FACILITY — A facility or institution, whether public or
private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance,
diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity or physical
condition, including a general hospital, public health center, diagnostic
center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended-care facility, skilled
nursing home, nursing home, intermediate-care facility, chronic disease
hospital, maternity hospital, outpatient clinic, dispensary, home health care
agency or personal-care facility.
HEALTH SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in furnishing
medical, surgical or other services to individuals, including the offices
of physicians, dentists and other health practitioners, medical and dental
laboratories, outpatient care facilities, blood banks and oxygen and
miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the existing grade at the location of the building to the highest
A. Such persons shall function as a common household unit.
A group home shall meet the restrictions in the definition of family for
the maximum number of unrelated persons, except the number of bona
fide paid professional staff shall not count towards such maximum and
as may be approved under § 184-44C.
B.
C. A group home shall not include a "treatment center."
D. See standards in § 184-76.1.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:598
point of a flat or multilevel roof or, for gable, hip or gambrel roofs, to
the mean height between the eaves and ridge. Chimneys, spires, towers,
mechanical penthouses, tanks and similar projections not intended for
human occupancy shall be excluded.
HELIPORT, COMMERCIAL — A landing area for helicopters which includes
facilities for fueling, repair and storage of helicopters and which is licensed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PADOT).
HELIPORT, PERSONAL USE — A helicopter landing area (sometimes known
as a "helistop") licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PADOT) for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers or cargo.
No fueling, helicopter repair or storage area(s) are permitted in conjunction
with the operation of a personal use heliport.
HIGHLY HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS AND SUBSTANCES — Any substance
or material that, by reason of its toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive or other
injurious properties, may be detrimental or deleterious to the health of
any person handling or otherwise coming into contact with such material
or substance, or as otherwise defined by applicable federal
regulations.[Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198]
HOME OCCUPATION — The accessory use of a residence involving the
conduct of an art or profession, the offering of a service, the conduct of
a business or the production of handicrafts on a residential site, pursuant
to the provisions of Article IX of this chapter. The use is incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and shall not
change the character of the residential use or adversely affect the uses
permitted in the residential district of which it is a part.
HOTEL — An establishment providing transient accommodations,
containing a minimum of six rental rooms and having the following
characteristics:
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — Coverage of the site by materials which cannot
be penetrated by water and which therefore results in a stormwater runoff
coefficient of 0.85 or greater. Included are:[Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 196]
IMPROVEMENTS — The physical additions, installations and changes
required to render land suitable for the use proposed, including streets,
curbs, sidewalks, utilities and drainage facilities.
A. Access to rooms is provided through a lobby and internal hallways.
B. Building height is two or more stories.
It often provides meeting rooms, banquet facilities and ancillary
commercial shops within the building, with internal hallway access.
C.
A. All buildings.
All forms of impervious paving materials used for roads, driveways,
parking, loading, walks, courts, patios, etc.
B.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:599
INDUSTRY — Those fields of economic activity, including forestry,
construction, manufacturing, transportation, communication, extraction,
utility services and wholesale trade. (See "industry, light" and "industry,
heavy.")
INDUSTRY, HEAVY — Industrial activities which do not meet the definition
of light industry.
INDUSTRY, LIGHT — Industrial activities which are carried on entirely
within an enclosed building and involve no outdoor processes or outdoor
storage of primary raw materials.
JUNK — Any discarded scrap, unusable or abandoned man-made or manprocessed
article or material, including but not limited to scrap metal, rags,
containers, scrap building materials, unlicensed motor vehicles, unlicensed
trailers, trailer machinery and equipment or uninhabitable mobile homes.
The term "junk" shall not include the following: municipal solid waste and
recyclable materials that are stored in a sanitary manner and are awaiting
imminent pick-up and processing and farm machinery.[Amended 6-2-1998
by Ord. No. 196]
JUNK- OR SALVAGE YARD —
KENNEL, ANIMAL — Any structure or premises in which more than six
dogs or domesticated small animals more than one year old are housed,
groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold.
LAKES AND PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain
water year-round. Artificial ponds may be created by dams or result from
excavation. The shoreline of such waterbodies shall be measured from the
maximum condition rather than permanent pool, if there is any difference.
"Lakes" are bodies of water two or more acres in extent. "Ponds" are any
water body less than two acres in extent.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:[Amended
6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 330]
Any outdoor establishment or place of business which is maintained,
used or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling junk, and, for
the purposes of this section, the term shall include refuse, rubbish,
garbage and debris, whether salvable or not, and made of any or all
materials. It shall not include, however, refuse or garbage kept in
proper containers for the purposes of prompt disposal.
A.
The terms "junkyard" and "salvage yard" shall not apply to the
following: [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
The storage of operable vehicles by a duly licensed motor vehicle
dealer for resale;
(1)
The storage of a maximum of two inoperable motor vehicles on a lot
by a resident of such lot which are stored for restoration purposes.
(2)
B.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:600
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option of contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LOADING SPACE — A space, accessible from a street, in a building or on a
lot, for the temporary use of vehicles while loading or unloading materials
or merchandise.
LOT — A contiguous tract, parcel or unit of land held by a landowner and/
or intended for use, development, lease or transfer of ownership, and for
which a deed description is recorded or is intended to be recorded at the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery County.
LOT AREA, GROSS — See "acreage, gross."
LOT AREA, NET — See "acreage, net."
LOT, FLAG — A lot which conforms in all respects to the dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, except that the
only road frontage and access is limited to an access strip. This definition
does not include the commonly used wedge-shaped lots located on a cul-de-
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
B. A subdivision of land.
The following are specifically excluded from land development:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by proper authorities.
(3)
C.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:601
sac turnaround. A "flag lot" shall also be known as a "rear lot" or "interior
lot."
LOT LINE — Any property boundary line of a lot, further defined as follows:
LOT WIDTH —
MANUFACTURING — The process or operation of making wares or
products from raw materials by hand or by the use of machine(s).
MASTER LOT — A large contiguous area of open space, not less than 10
acres nor more than 55% of the total open space which is required under
the rural cluster zoning option contained in § 184-101C. The use of the
master lot shall be limited to one single-family dwelling and accessory uses
permitted under § 184-71. The master lot shall be restricted from further
subdivision by a deed restriction in a form acceptable to the Township
Solicitor and recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery
County.[Added 11-8-1995 by Ord. No. 175]
MINING — The extraction of minerals and coal from the subsurface of
grounds located within the Township and shall not include open-face
mining.[Added 4-22-2014 by Ord. No. 348]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one or more units, built on a permanent
Front lot line is the line identical with the ultimate right-of-way line
(also known as "street line").
A.
Rear lot line is the line or lines most nearly parallel or concentric to the
front lot line.
B.
Side lot lines are the lines most nearly perpendicular or radial to the
front lot line. On a corner lot, the side lot line shall be the line or
lines most nearly perpendicular or radial to the higher classification of
street, where applicable. The remaining line shall be considered the
rear lot line.
C.
A lot which fronts on more than one street shall have a front lot line on
each street frontage.
D.
The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the building
line, parallel or concentric to the ultimate right-of-way line. For a corner
lot, lot width shall be measured parallel or concentric to the ultimate
right-of-way line of the higher classification of street, where applicable.
A.
In measuring lot width for the requirements of any Zoning or
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance within the Code of
Limerick Township, a limited access highway shall not be used in the
calculation of lot width. [Added 8-7-2001 by Ord. No. 232]
B.
For the purpose of any Zoning or Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance section under the Code of Limerick Township, State Route
422 shall be considered a limited access highway. [Added 8-7-2001 by
Ord. No. 232]
C.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:602
chassis, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed
so that it may be used with or without a permanent foundation. It may
not meet local building codes but does meet the standards of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, as indicated by the
structural engineering bulletin(s) provided to the Board of Supervisors by
the applicant. This term does not include recreational vehicles or travel
trailers.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MODULAR HOME — A single-family dwelling unit for permanent
occupancy, made by assembling one or more factory-produced, threedimensional
sections into one integral building not capable of easily being
separated for repeated towing, whose construction materials must conform
to those of conventionally built units, as required by the Township's Building
Code,214 and must be placed on a permanent foundation. A copy of the
structural engineering bulletin(s) must be provided to the Board of
Supervisors, indicating approval of the dwelling or its components by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
MOTEL — An establishment providing transient accommodations,
containing a minimum of six rental rooms and having the following
characteristics:
MOTOR VEHICLES — All vehicles propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power and intended for use on public highways or in agricultural
activities.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AGENCY — A commercial use for the sale and
repair of motor vehicles, including new and used cars, trucks, recreational
vehicles and/or farm equipment, having both indoor and outdoor display
areas and providing maintenance and repair services for vehicle owners.
NET BUILDABLE ACREAGE — A calculated area upon which the density,
impervious coverage and building coverage requirements for the various
zoning districts are computed. "Net buildable acreage" is the area of a
site remaining after subtracting all or a percentage of road rights-of-way,
noncontiguous lands, floodplains, wetlands, utility rights-of-way and steep
A. Access to rooms is from directly outside the building.
B. Building height is only one or two stories.
C. The facility is generally served by a central office rather than a lobby.
214. Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Building Construction.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:603
slopes from the site's gross area. It can be calculated using the formula in
§ 184-78 herein.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:[Added 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 330]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails
to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use
provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure was lawfully in existence prior to the
enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or prior to the application of
such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such
"nonconforming structures" include nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or prior
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
D.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable in
the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:604
to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason
of annexation.
OCTAVE BAND — A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into
octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch.
OLDER ADULT DAILY LIVING SERVICES — Services provided or arranged
for part of a twenty-four-hour day to assist in meeting the needs, including
but not limited to personal care, social, nutritional, health and education
needs of a population of persons who are predominantly 60 years of age or
older or who are under 60 years of age but who have a dementia-related
disease, such as Alzheimer's disease, as a primary diagnosis. The term does
not include services provided for persons whose needs are such that they
can only be met in a long-term care facility on an inpatient basis, receiving
professionally supervised nursing care and related medical and other health
services. (See "adult day-care facility.")
OPEN SPACE — Public or private lands designated for the use and
enjoyment of residents or tenants of a development and/or the general
public, incorporating natural features, such as woodlands, streams or
meadows, and including Township parks, trails and other recreational
facilities; also includes common open space as defined above, and other
private lands which are available for the use of Township residents (i.e.,
through access easements). See "common open space."[Amended
9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
PARK — Any area which is predominantly open space, is used principally for
active or passive recreation and is not used for a profit-making purpose.
PARKING FACILITIES — Outdoor areas or specially designed buildings or
garages used for the storage of vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — An open or covered area with a dust-free, all-weather
surface which shall be at least nine by 18 feet in size for the storage of one
automobile, accessible via a driveway.
PARTICULATE MATTER — Material other than water which is suspended in
or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form, as a liquid or
solid.
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — The Municipalities
Planning Code, originally enacted as Act 247 of 1968, which establishes
the basic authority for the exercise of municipal land use controls in
Pennsylvania. All subsequent amendments are included. It is abbreviated as
"MPC" or "Act 247."215
PERMIT — A document issued by the proper authority authorizing the
applicant to undertake specified activities. See Article II of this chapter
for specific requirements regarding the following permits.[Amended
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
BUILDING (UCC) PERMIT — A permit indicating that a proposed
construction, alteration or reconstruction of a structure is in
A.
215. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:605
PERSONAL SERVICE — Personal service uses are the following and no
other: barber, beauty salon, tailor, dress maker, shoe repair, photography,
travel agent jeweler, watch repair, dry cleaner, tanning salon, dog grooming
with no more than two dogs at one time, repair of computers, business
service printing or duplicating, therapeutic massage and auto tag services.
These uses may include accessory retail sales of products related to the
services that are provided.[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
PIGGERY — The keeping and breeding of swine on a property for any
commercial purpose, where the animals are fed garbage as an integral part
of the business.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building used on a regular basis primarily for
religious worship by 10 or more unrelated persons.[Amended 6-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 196; 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198]
PLAN — A graphic representation of a proposal for subdivision and/or land
development, including necessary written notes.217
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Limerick Township Planning
Commission.218
PORCH — A roofed or unroofed structure projecting from the front, side or
rear wall of a building.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which it is located.
PRINCIPAL USE — The single dominant use or single main use on a lot.
PRIVATE ELECTRICAL UTILITY FACILITY — Aboveground structures and
facilities including buildings owned privately and used in connection with
the production, delivery and collection of electricity. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a coal, oil or nuclear powered facility is not permitted under this
definition. A private electrical utility facility shall not include any facility
that collects or burns trash or refuse.[Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No.
206; amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
PRIVATE UTILITY FACILITY — A private electrical utility facility, as well
as any aboveground structures and facilities, including buildings owned
privately and used in connection with the production, delivery and
accordance with construction provisions of the Building Code216 and
which authorizes an applicant to commence with said construction,
alteration or reconstruction.
ZONING USE PERMIT — A permit indicating that specific activities
regulated by this chapter may occur and which is issued when a
building (UCC) permit is not required. "Zoning use permit" may also be
referred to as "zoning permit."
B.
216. Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Building Construction.
217. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “planned commercial center,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379.
218. Editor's Note: See Ch. 31, Planning Commission.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:606
collection of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil or communications signals.
A private utility facility shall not include any facility that collects or burns
trash or refuse. [Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 206; amended
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
convert part or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing
facilities include but are not limited to transfer facilities, composting
facilities and resource recovery facilities.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — A building in which services are performed by a
member of a profession, including an accountant, architect, author, dentist,
engineer, insurance agent, landscape architect, lawyer, notary, optometrist,
physician, planner, realtor or similar occupations.
PROPERTY LINE — A recorded boundary of a lot. Any property line which
abuts a street or other public way shall be measured from the right-of-way.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
governing body, Planning Commission or other municipal agency, intended
to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.219
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of
July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act"220 ("...any
prearranged gathering of an agency which is attended or participated in by
a quorum of the members of an agency, held for the purpose of deliberating
agency business or taking official action").
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once a week for two successive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing and particular nature of the matter
to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than
30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven days from
the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC UTILITIES FACILITY — A building or structure and its equipment
used for the transmission and exchange of radio, gas, power, sewer and
water facilities; provided, however, that in a residential district these shall
not include public business facilities, storage of materials, trucks or repair
facilities or housing or repair crews. This shall not include a structure for
the generation of energy. This definition of "public utilities facility" shall not
include Wireless Telecommunication Facilities which are regulated under
Article XXXIV of this Zoning Ordinance.[Amended 12-21-1999 by Ord.
No. 206; 4-22-2014 by Ord. No. 347]
PUBLIC UTILITY — An agency which, under public franchise or ownership,
or under certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with
communication, gas, power, rail transportation, sewer or water facilities or
other similar service.
219. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
220. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa. C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:607
RECEIVE-ONLY EARTH STATION — An antenna and attendant processing
equipment for reception of electronic signals from satellites.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials separated from municipal waste
which are to be used as raw materials for the development of new usable
products. "Recyclable materials" can include the following items: newsprint,
high-grade office paper, glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, plastic,
corrugated paper and leaf wastes.
RECYCLING OPERATION — An establishment which is maintained or used
or operated for the purposes of temporarily storing and preparing scrap
and/or discard materials for consumption by other establishments whose
operations include producing products from recycled materials.
RELATIVE — Persons who are related by blood, marriage or adoption to
result in one of the following relationships: spouse, brother, sister, parent,
child, grandchild, great-grandchild, grandparent, great-grandparent, uncle,
aunt, niece, nephew, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, parent-in-law or first
cousin. "Unrelated persons" shall be persons who are not a relative of each
other. Persons with a formal foster relationship with a guardian shall also
be considered to be "relatives."221[Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
RETAIL GARDEN CENTER — The sale of plants and lawn and garden
supplies to the general public. This use may contain a greenhouse and plant
nursery to directly supply plants for retail sale on the same parcel. This use
shall not include a landscaping contractor business unless it is accessory to
the principal retail garden center use.[Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTTING — Lotting which extends between two
streets of differing classifications, with vehicular access provided from the
lesser street, in order to promote traffic flow and safety on the greater
street.
SALVAGE — Any discarded material or articles, including scrap metallic or
nonmetallic items, whole or parts of vehicles and equipment, paper, glass,
containers and structures, which is separated for industrial processing
or reprocessing and further used or re-used. (See "junk," "waste" and
"recyclable materials.")
SANITARY LANDFILL — See "solid waste disposal facility."
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A centralized sanitary sewer system or a
comparable common or package sanitary sewer facility approved by the
appropriate governmental health agency.222
SCRAP PROCESSOR — A firm engaged in the business of preparing scrap
(metal or rags and paper) for consumption by steel mills or paper companies
or other establishments whose purpose it is to use scrap in producing
products.
221. Editor's Note: The former definition of "restaurant," added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198,
which immediately followed, was repealed 4-6-1999 by Ord. No. 202. For current
provisions, see the definition of "eating and drinking establishments."
222. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “satellite use,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:608
SEWAGE FACILITIES, CENTRAL — A sewage disposal system in compliance
with all state and local regulations, approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection and applicable sewer authority, and providing
service to multiple customers. It includes the following
definitions:[Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments, planned
and developed as an integrated architectural and functional unit, providing
convenient on-site parking and controlled, common vehicular and
pedestrian access.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, service, event or location by any means,
including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination or projected images.
SIGN AREA — The area of a sign shall mean the area of all lettering,
wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the
background on which they are displayed (whether open or enclosed), but
excluding any supporting framework which are solely incidental to the
display itself, provided that the same do not contain any lettering, wording,
designs or symbols.
SIGN HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from ground level to the
highest point on the sign or its supporting structure.
SIGN TYPES — 223
PUBLIC SEWER FACILITIES — The central sewage system operated by
the Township Sewer Authority.
A.
COMMON SEWAGE FACILITIES — A sewage disposal system
independent of the public sewer system, serving more than one
residence or business through a community treatment plant, land
application system or similar satellite system.
B.
When the sign consists of individual letters, designs or symbols
attached to a building, awning, wall or window, the area shall be that
of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters, designs
and symbols.
A.
In computing the area of a double-faced sign, only one side shall
be counted, provided that both sides are identical in dimension and
content. If the interior angle formed by the two faces of the sign is
greater than 45°, then both sides of the sign shall be considered in the
calculation of area. [Amended 9-20-1994 by Ord. No. 166]
B.
AWNING SIGN — A sign painted on, printed on or attached flat against
the surface of an awning.
A.
223. Editor’s Note: See also the definition of "electronic signage."
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:609
BANNER SIGN — Any sign intended to be hung either with or without
frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations
applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. A single United States
flag of reasonable size shall not be considered a banner for the purpose
of this chapter unless its use or purpose is that of advertising the
location of a business at which it is flown.
B.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A self-supporting sign anchored to the
ground or supported by means of poles or standards.
C.
MONUMENT SIGN — A low profile freestanding sign supported by
columns and or a base primarily by solid structural features where
entire bottom of the columns and or a base sign is affixed to a base
on the ground not exceeding six feet in height, measured in the same
manner as height of building. [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
C.1.
MOVABLE SIGN — Any sign which is not fixed to a permanent
supporting structure or building, or which is capable of being moved
from one location to another, including trailer signs.
D.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which directs attention to an object,
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business located or offered elsewhere than upon the premises where
the sign is located or to which it is affixed.
E.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which directs attention to an object,
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization or
business located or offered on the premises upon which the sign is
displayed or to which the sign is affixed, including signs offering
premises for sale, rent or development or advertising building trades
during construction or alteration.
F.
ROOF SIGN — A sign which is mounted or otherwise affixed to the roof
of a building.
G.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which advertises community or civic
projects, construction projects, real estate for sale or lease or other
special events on a temporary basis.
H.
VEHICULAR SIGN — A vehicle to which a sign is affixed or painted
and which is used or parked in such a manner that display of such sign
becomes the vehicle's primary purpose.
I.
WALL SIGN —
PARALLEL SIGN — A sign mounted parallel to a wall or other
vertical building surface, but not extending beyond the edge of
the wall, roofline or other surface to which it is mounted, and not
projecting more than 10 inches from the surface to which it is
mounted.
(1)
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign mounted perpendicular to a wall or
other vertical surface.
(2)
J.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:610
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a contiguous
land area as one or more lots by one owner, whether a person, partnership,
corporation or other legal entity, irrespective of the fact that parts of the
land may have been acquired at different times or that the area may have
been divided into parts on any plan or plat.
SOIL SURVEY — The Montgomery County Soil Survey of 1967, prepared
by the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY — A land use including buildings, land
equipment and any other appurtenances used in the processing of solid
waste, resource recovery, cogeneration of energy, recycling, incineration
and/or landfilling as a means of disposal of solid waste.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A form of permitted use authorized by this chapter
under the jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing
Board is empowered to grant permission for "special exceptions," consistent
with the public interest, in compliance with standards and procedures
established in this chapter.
SPECIALIZED RETAIL — Retail shops and stores selling gifts, novelties,
flowers, books, periodicals, jewelry, apparel, tobacco, toys, crafts, hobby
supplies, cameras and film, stationery or antiques. Stores in excess of 7,500
square feet in a single structure are not included in this use. Adult uses are
excluded.
STEEP SLOPE — Areas with a gradient of 15% or greater, as determined by
the soil survey or accurate contour mapping.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it and including
those basements used for the principal use.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
STREET LINE — A line identical with the front lot line and ultimate rightof-
way line.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign which is fastened to or placed in the area of a
window or a display window of a building.
K.
DUMP — A site used primarily for the disposal by abandonment,
dumping, burial, burning or other means and for whatever purpose of
garbage, trash, junk, vehicles or parts thereof or waste material of any
kind.
A.
SANITARY LANDFILL — Any outdoor establishment or place of
business operated or maintained for the disposal of solid waste by the
method known as "landfilling" in accordance with any or all federal,
state and local landfilling laws, statutes, rules and regulations. The
term "landfill" shall have the same meaning as "sanitary landfill."
B.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:611
STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY — Rights-of-way for street purposes are defined
as follows:
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the ground.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SUPERVISORS — The duly-elected governing body of Limerick Township;
also known as the "Board of Supervisors."
SWIMMING POOL — A body of water or receptacle for water having a depth
at any point greater than 30 inches which is primarily used or intended to
be used for swimming or bathing.
TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL OCCUPANCY — The use of any premises or
structure for living and/or sleeping purposes for fewer than 100 consecutive
days in any calendar year.
TEMPORARY UNIT FOR RELATIVE — A living area involving one or more
rooms within an existing single-family detached dwelling or an accessory
building that is designed for and occupied by relatives of the owners of the
dwelling and which may include sleeping, kitchen and bathroom facilities
that are separate from those of the principal dwelling unit. See standards in
§ 184-71B.[Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
TRACT, TOTAL AREA — The total of the lot area(s) of lots within a proposed
development, after deleting existing rights-of-way of existing
streets.[Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198]
TRAVEL TRAILER — A recreational vehicle requiring a separate power
source for pulling, which may include living, sleeping, eating and sanitary
LEGAL RIGHT-OF-WAY — The street right-of-way legally in the public
domain at the time a plan is submitted.
A.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The street right-of-way projected as
necessary for adequate handling of anticipated maximum traffic
volumes. The "ultimate right-of-way" is the legal right-of-way where it
has been offered for dedication and accepted by the Township. Front
yard setbacks are measured from the ultimate right-of-way.
B.
EQUIVALENT RIGHT-OF-WAY — A street right-of-way required to be
reserved where private streets are permitted. The width shall be
determined by the street's function, in accordance with the street
classifications contained in Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land
Development.
C.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:612
facilities, but which is designed for vacation travel and not for long-term or
permanent occupancy.
TREATMENT CENTER[Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196] —
TRUCKING COMPANY TERMINAL — A use involving a large variety of
materials, owned by numerous corporations, being transported to a site
to be unloaded primarily from tractor-trailer trucks and reloaded onto
other tractor-trailer trucks and which does not involve substantial on-site
manufacturing or processing of the materials.[Added 6-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 196]
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the
outside limit of the ultimate right-of-way of a public street (identical with
"front lot line" and "street line").224
VARIANCE — The granting of permission by the Zoning Hearing Board to
use or alter land or structures which requires a variation from the strict
application of a requirement of this zoning chapter. Variances are granted
only if specific requirements are met, in accordance with the provisions of
Article VI.
VEGETATIVE COVER — The land area devoted to vegetative coverage,
including lawns, meadows, trees, shrubs, flowers and gardens.[Amended
9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
VEHICLE DISPLAY AREA — An open area, other than a street or parking
area, used for display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles,
recreational vehicles or boats in operable condition, and where no major
repairs are done.
VISUAL SCREEN — A barrier whose purpose is to obscure a view; generally
comprised of evergreen plant materials suitable for the purpose.[Amended
9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings primarily used for the
commercial storage, transfer and distribution of products and materials.
A use (other than a prison or a hospital) providing housing for persons
who need specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling because of:
(1) Criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal halfway house;
Current addiction to alcohol or a controlled substance that was
used in an illegal manner; and/or
(2)
A type of mental illness or other behavior that causes a person to
be a threat to the physical safety of others.
(3)
A.
B. See standards in § 184-76.2.
224. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "untended open space" (added 11-8-1995 by Ord.
No. 175) and "utility facilities," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed
6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 187 and 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 206, respectively.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:613
WAREHOUSE, MINI- — A building or group of buildings situated in a
controlled access compound which are divided into individual separate
access units which are rented or leased for the storage of tangible personal
property.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed.
This term does not include source-separated recyclable materials. "Waste"
is further classified as follows, in accordance with Act 97, the Solid Waste
Management Act225:
AGRICULTURAL WASTE — Poultry and livestock manure or residual
materials in liquid or solid form generated in the production and
marketing of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products,
if the agricultural waste is not hazardous. The term includes the
residual materials generated in producing, harvesting and marketing of
agronomic, horticultural and silvicultural crops or commodities grown
on the premises of a farm operation.
A.
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION WASTE — Solid waste resulting from
the construction or demolition of buildings and other structures,
including wood, plaster, metals, asphaltic substances, bricks, block and
unsegregated concrete. The term also includes dredging waste. The
term does not include clean fill separated from other waste.
B.
CLEAN FILL — Uncontaminated, non-water-soluable,
nondecomposable inert solid material used to level an area or bring the
area to grade. It includes uncontaminated soil, rock, gravel, brick, block
and concrete, as well as waste from clearing, grubbing and excavation,
including trees, brush, stumps and vegetative material.
C.
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
Municipal or agricultural waste which, because of its quantity,
concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics,
may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality
or an increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total
population; or
(a)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
(b)
(1)
The term does not include point sources subject to permits under
Section 102 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as
amended, or source, special nuclear or by-product material as
defined by the United States Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended.
(2)
D.
225. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., Municipal
Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:614
WATERCOURSE — A place intended or used for the directed surface flow
of water, including permanent and intermittent streams, brooks, creeks,
channels, ditches, swales and rivers.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system designed to transmit water from a
source to users, in compliance with the requirements of the appropriate
state agencies and the local authorities. Includes the following definitions:
WETLAND — An area that is considered to be a "wetland" under applicable
federal and/or state regulations, whichever is more inclusive.[Amended
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — Places of business primarily engaged in selling
merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or
professional business users or to other wholesalers, or acting as agents
or brokers and buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such
individuals or companies.
WOODLANDS — Areas, groves or stands of mature or largely mature trees
(i.e., greater than six inches in caliper) covering an area greater than 1/
4 of an acre or groves of mature trees (greater than 12 inches in caliper)
consisting of more than 10 individuals.
YARD — The area(s) of a lot which must remain free of buildings or other
structures and may be used as lawn or planted area, parking or driveway
space in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A "yard" is
measured at right angles from the right-of-way or lot line to the nearest
building wall. "Yard" is further defined as follows:
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste or other material resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities; and sludge not meeting the definitions of residual
or hazardous waste from a municipal, commercial or institutional water
supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air pollution
control facility.
E.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse or other discarded material or
waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials
resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and
sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous.
F.
SOLID WASTE — Waste, including municipal, residual or hazardous
wastes.
G.
WATER FACILITIES, PUBLIC — A water distribution system serving all
or a portion of the Township and operated by a certified public utility.
A.
WATER FACILITIES, COMMON — A water distribution system serving
a single neighborhood or development.
B.
§ 184-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-10
168:615
YARD LINE — A line which locates and delineates the minimum yard
setback requirements, measured from the front, rear and side lot lines.
YARD, SIDE, AGGREGATE — The total measurement of two side yards on
the same lot.[Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this zoning chapter.226
FRONT YARD — A yard which extends across the full width of a lot,
for a depth equal to the minimum front yard setback distance required
by the specific regulations of this chapter, measured from the ultimate
right-of-way line.
A.
REAR YARD — A yard which extends across the full width of a lot, for a
depth equal to the minimum rear yard setback distance required by the
specific regulations of this chapter, measured from the rear lot line.
B.
SIDE YARD — A yard which extends along a side lot line from the
required front yard to the required rear yard, the minimum width of
which shall be the minimum specified by the regulations of this chapter,
measured from the side lot line.
C.
226. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “zoning permit,” added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379.
§ 184-10 LIMERICK CODE § 184-10
168:616
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 184-11. Intent.
In expansion of and in addition to the declaration of legislative intent and
statement of community development objectives found in Article I, §§ 184-2
and 184-3, of this chapter, it is the intent of this article to provide specific
duties and responsibilities for the Zoning Officer in the issuance of building
and occupancy permits and the procedures for obtaining the same, as
contained in this article.
§ 184-12. Appointment, qualifications and compensation of Zoning
Officer; reports.
§ 184-13. Responsibilities of Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer shall have the authority to perform the following
responsibilities:
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a
Zoning Officer.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall annually appoint to a one-year term a
Zoning Officer, who shall meet qualifications established by the
Supervisors and demonstrate a working knowledge of municipal
zoning. The Zoning Officer may succeed himself.
C. The Zoning Officer shall receive compensation as determined by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
D. The Zoning Officer shall make reports to the Board of Supervisors as it
may require.
E. One or more Assistant Zoning Officers may be appointed who may carry
out the same duties as the Zoning Officer. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 196]
A. Receive all applications for building permits and zoning use permits.
[Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
B. Keep a public record of these applications, including:
(1) All relevant plans and information submitted therewith.
(2) Permits issued in their regard.
(3) Any special conditions attached thereto.
C. Review these applications for compliance with the literal terms of this
chapter, all other applicable ordinances and the laws and regulations of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which are relevant to the subject
and intent of this chapter.
§ 184-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-13
168:617
§ 184-14. Permits required.
D. Issue permits only in response to those applications which are in
compliance with this chapter, all other applicable ordinances and the
laws and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which are
relevant to the subject and intent of this chapter.
(1) When the Zoning Hearing Board grants a special exception or
variance, the application shall be considered in compliance with
this chapter for the purpose of issuing permits; the Zoning Hearing
Board action shall be made a part of the public record of these
applications.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall issue permits in regard to such
applications only upon receipt of written evidence from the Zoning
Hearing Board attesting to the granting of the special exception or
variance.
E. Enlist the assistance of other municipal agents and agencies in
performing these responsibilities.
F. Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or
noncompliance with the terms of this chapter.
G. Make written orders requiring compliance with the provisions of this
chapter to be served personally or by certified mail.
H. Institute proceedings in courts of proper jurisdiction for the
enforcement of provisions of this chapter, at the direction of the Board
of Supervisors.
I. Have available a map showing the current zoning classification of all
land.
J. Maintain a record of the identity, location and type of uses assigned
nonconforming status, as well as documentation of the evidence and
reasoning that led to the assignment of nonconforming status.
K. Participate in proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board, either at
the request of the Board of Supervisors as a representative of the
Township or at the request of the Zoning Hearing Board as a sworn
witness presenting fact and information.
L. Review all building (UCC) permits for compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance of Limerick Township and all other applicable UCC codes.
[Added 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
A. A building permit application shall be required and reviewed, and
permits issued, in accordance with the Limerick Township Building
Code, as amended.227
227. Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Building Construction.
§ 184-13 LIMERICK CODE § 184-14
168:618
§ 184-15. Zoning use permits. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No.
379]
B. A zoning use permit shall be required prior to any of the following:
[Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196; 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
(1) Occupancy of any new construction or any alteration or addition to
an existing structure when a building (UCC) permit is not required.
No fees shall be charged for farm buildings constructed or altered
for the purposes limited to agricultural use of the tract. However,
zoning use permits shall still be required for farm buildings.
(2) Change in use of any building or structure, whether or not the
change involves physical alteration to the building or structure.
(3) Use of land or change in the use thereof, except that the placing of
vacant land under cultivation shall not require a zoning use permit.
(4) Change in use of a nonconforming use.
(5) Change in occupancy in any nonresidential establishment. All new
occupants of buildings shall be required to apply for and obtain a
zoning use permit.
(6) (Reserved)
(7) Development of one or more new vehicle parking spaces.
(8) Development of any new or expanded outdoor commercial sales or
display area.
(9) Change in ownership of any nonresidential establishment.
C. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to use or occupy any
building, structure or land until a zoning use permit has been duly
issued. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
D. Before final approval of any zoning application, satisfactory evidence of
the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry,
other than for one- and two-family dwellings, shall be produced.
A. Applications for zoning use permits shall be made, in writing, by the
owner or tenant or authorized agent and shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer on forms prescribed by him. The Zoning Officer shall require
with the application some or all of the following, depending whether the
permit is for alteration or development of a previously undeveloped
property:
(1) A statement as to the proposed use of the building.
(2) A plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the building in
relation to property and right-of-way lines.
§ 184-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-15
168:619
§ 184-16. Issuance or refusal of permits. [Amended 6-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 196]
If the Zoning Officer determines that an application is in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, it shall be his/her duty to issue the
appropriate permit; and if he/she determines that an application is not
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be his/her duty
to refuse the permit, in which case he/she shall instruct the applicant in
the method as hereinafter set forth of appeal or application to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
§ 184-17. Appeals. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
Any appeal from a determination of the Zoning Officer that is adverse to
the landowner/applicant shall be filed by the landowner/applicant within 30
days after notice of the determination is issued. Any appeal from a decision
of the Zoning Officer shall comply with Section 914.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, which is hereby included by reference, as
amended.228
(3) A statement that the property and right-of-way lines shown on the
plan have been located and staked on the premises by a surveyor or
other person competent to give such location.
(4) The name and address of the person who has so located and staked
the lines.
(5) A copy of the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board granting any
special exception or variance required for the proposed use or
building.
B. Upon completion of the erection, addition to or alteration of any
building, structure or portion thereof authorized by any building permit
obtained in compliance with this chapter, and prior to occupancy or
other activity regulated by this chapter, the holder of such permit shall
notify the Zoning Officer of such completion. Occupancy or other
activity regulated by this chapter shall not be authorized until the
Zoning Officer has certified that the work has been inspected and
approved as being in conformity with this and other applicable
ordinances and the permit fee has been paid.
C. Pending completion of a building or alterations thereto, a temporary
zoning use permit may be issued with limits and conditions as
established by the Zoning Officer for a temporary occupancy of a part
or all of a building, provided that such temporary occupancy of a part or
all of a building would not tend in any way to jeopardize life or property.
D. Issuance of a zoning use permit or temporary zoning use permit shall in
no way be construed to warrant in any way the workmanship, safety or
quality of the structure or building materials used to construct the said
structure or alterations thereto.
§ 184-15 LIMERICK CODE § 184-18
168:620
§ 184-18. Expiration of permits. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No.
196]
§ 184-19. Permit fees. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
The applicant for a building permit or zoning use permit shall, at the time
of making application, pay to the Township a fee in accordance with a fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.230
§ 184-20. Exemption from permit requirements. [Amended
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
A. A Township zoning and construction permit shall be applied for within
12 months after a variance or special exception is approved. Otherwise,
such approval shall expire.
B. Any applicable Township zoning use permit shall expire 12 months after
the date of issuance, unless the permittee has commenced substantial
construction or use of the property in a manner authorized by the
permit. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
C. The time limits in Subsections A and B above may each be extended if:
(1) So stated as part of a conditional use or special exception approval
decision (such as for a development involving numerous phases
over many years);
(2) So stated in writing by the Zoning Officer, up to 12 additional
months, if the Zoning Officer determines the applicant has shown
good cause in writing; or
(3) A related subdivision or land development plan is actively under
consideration by the Township, in which case the time limits shall
apply from the date of final plan approval by the Township.
D. (Reserved)229
A. In accordance with Section 619 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended,231 the provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to any existing or proposed building, or extension thereof, used or
to be used by a public utility corporation if, upon petition of the
corporation, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after
public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the
building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or
welfare of the public. It shall be the responsibility of the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission to ensure that both the corporation and the
228. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10914.1.
229. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding the grandfathering of certain applications
against changes in Township ordinances, was repealed 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379.
230. Editor's Note: The Fee Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
231. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10619.
§ 184-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-20
168:621
Township have notice of the hearing and are granted an opportunity to
appear, present witnesses, cross-examine witnesses presented by other
parties and otherwise exercise the rights of a party to the proceedings.
B. This chapter shall not regulate uses or structures owned by Limerick
Township that serve a legitimate public purpose.
§ 184-20 LIMERICK CODE § 184-20
168:622
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 184-21. Violations.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to take cognizance of violations
of this chapter. He shall investigate each violation which comes to his
attention, whether by observation or communication. He shall order, in
writing, the correction of such conditions as are found to be in violation of
this chapter.
§ 184-22. Enforcement notice.
An enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel
on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed a written
request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel and to any
other person requested, in writing, by the owner of record. The notice of
enforcement shall include:
§ 184-23. Enforcement proceedings.
A. The name of the owner of record and any other persons against whom
the Township intends to take action.
B. The location of the property in violation.
C. The specific violation, with a description of the requirements that have
not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of the
chapter.
D. The date on which expires the period in which compliance with the
chapter is to be achieved.
E. A statement describing the recipient's right to appeal to the zoning
hearing board within 30 days of receipt of the notice.
F. A statement that failure to comply with the notice within the time
specified, unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
A. If a violation is not corrected within the period specified by the
enforcement notice, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to notify
the Township Supervisors, who shall take necessary action to correct
the violation, which action may include initiation of a civil enforcement
proceeding.
B. Where, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, a violation presents peril to
life or property, the Zoning Officer may recommend to the Supervisors
immediate initiation of a civil enforcement proceeding.
C. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board,
the Township shall have the responsibility of presenting its evidence
first. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
§ 184-21 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-23
168:623
§ 184-24. Penalties; civil actions.
§ 184-25. Fee Schedule.
The fees for permits, applications for special exceptions, applications for
variances, Zoning Hearing Board certificates, etc., and other charges
associated with this zoning chapter shall be fixed in accordance with a Fee
Schedule adopted by a resolution of the Board of Supervisors, and such
schedule may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.232
D. Any filing fee paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be returned to the appealing party by the
Township if the Zoning Hearing Board, or any court in a subsequent
appeal, rules in the appealing party's favor. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 196]
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this zoning chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. Each day that the violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. Causes of action. An aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who
shows that his property or person will be substantially affected by an
alleged violation of this chapter may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation.
(1) When any action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, the
Township shall be notified at least 30 days prior to the time the
action is begun.
(2) Notice must given by serving a copy of the complaint to the Board
of Supervisors. No action may be maintained until such notice has
been given.
232. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in Township offices.
§ 184-23 LIMERICK CODE § 184-25
168:624
ARTICLE V
(Reserved)233
§ 184-26. (Reserved)
§ 184-27. (Reserved)
§ 184-28. (Reserved)
§ 184-29. (Reserved)
§ 184-30. (Reserved)
§ 184-31. (Reserved)
§ 184-32. (Reserved)
233. Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Amendments, as amended, was repealed 4-13-2006 by Ord.
No. 256.
§ 184-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-32
168:625

ARTICLE VI
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 184-33. Appointments; terms; removal.
§ 184-34. Alternate members.
The Township Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution no more than
three residents of the Township to serve as alternate members of the Board.
The term of office of an alternate shall be three years.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five members. Each member
shall have a five-year term with one member being appointed every
January of every calendar year. The two remaining Board members
shall continue their remaining terms of one year and two years. The
three new Board members shall be appointed to terms of three years,
four years and five years. Any appointments thereafter shall be for five
year terms that will expire on December 31 with one reappointment
taking place at the reorganization meeting every January. [Amended
2-12-2009 by Ord. No. 304]
B. The members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be removable for cause
by the Board of Supervisors upon written charges and after a public
hearing.
C. Zoning Hearing Board members may hold no other office in the
Township.
D. The word "Board," when used in this article, shall mean the Zoning
Hearing Board.
A. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a
quorum. An alternate so designated shall be entitled to participate in all
proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as
provided by law for Board members, including specifically the right to
cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have
all the powers and duties set forth in this article and as otherwise
provided by law.
B. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board
in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate
was initially appointed until the Board has made a final determination
of the matter or case.
C. Designation of an alternate shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
D. Alternate members may hold no other office in the Township.
§ 184-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-34
168:627
§ 184-35. Officers; quorum; rules and regulations; records.
§ 184-36. Jurisdiction.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
E. Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion of the
Board but may not vote as a member nor be compensated unless
designated as a voting alternate as provided above.
A. The Board shall annually elect officers from its membership.
B. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum
shall be no fewer than three voting members, but the Board may
appoint from its own membership a Hearing Officer to conduct any
hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the
Board. [Amended 2-12-2009 by Ord. No. 304]
C. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Township and the laws of
the Commonwealth.
D. The Board shall keep public records of its business, which records shall
be the property of the Township, and shall submit reports of its
activities to the Township as requested by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except
those brought before the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the curative
challenge and amendment process.
B. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption,
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal filed within 30 days after
the effective date of said ordinance.
C. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including the
granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application
therefor, the issuance of any enforcement notice or the registration or
refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
D. (Reserved)234
E. Applications for variance from the terms of this chapter.
F. Applications for special exceptions under this zoning chapter or
Chapter 89, Flood Damage Prevention.
G. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of ordinance provisions for
234. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding appeals, was repealed 3-1-2016 by Ord. No.
364.
§ 184-34 LIMERICK CODE § 184-36
168:628
§ 184-37. Reversal, affirmation or modification of orders.
The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination of any Township officer and, to that
end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 184-38. Filing of appeals or applications. [Amended 6-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 196]
Challenges, requests for interpretations and appeals may be filed with the
Board, in writing, by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the
municipality or any person aggrieved. Requests for variance or special
exception may be filed by any landowner or any tenant with permission
of the landowner. An appeal or application regarding a matter within the
jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board may be filed with the Zoning
Officer on forms provided by the Zoning Hearing Board and shall state:
sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management insofar
as the determination does not involve an application pursuant to
Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
H. Interpretation upon the words, terms, rules, regulations, provisions and
restrictions of this chapter where there is doubt as to the meaning
thereof, including determination in specific instances whether
questionable uses are permitted by virtue of being similar to or
customarily incidental to permitted uses as provided by this chapter.
A. The name and address of the applicant, and of the applicant's
representative(s) or agent(s), where applicable.
B. The name and address of the record owner of the property that is the
subject of the application or appeal; where the applicant is not the
record owner of the subject property, a signed and notarized statement
from the record owner, authorizing the applicant to pursue the specific
appeal or application.
C. A brief description and location of the subject property, along with a
survey and/or sketch of the property boundaries.
D. A statement of the present zoning classification of the subject property
with the improvements thereon and the present use thereof.
E. A statement of the section of this chapter under which consideration by
the Board is requested, along with a summary of reasons or arguments
in support of the request.
F. A reasonably accurate description of the improvements or changes
intended to be made under the application. In addition, there shall be
attached a plot plan of the property to be affected, indicating the
location and size of the lot and the size and location of the existing and
proposed improvements or changes.
§ 184-36 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-38
168:629
§ 184-39. Action on appeals or applications.
G. A list of all landowners within 400 feet of the applicant's land, to be
supplied by applicant, who shall obtain the list at his own cost and
expense from the Montgomery County Board of Assessment Appeals, or
from the Tax Collector of Limerick Township and other municipalities
when the adjacent land is outside the Township, along with prestamped
and preaddressed envelopes for all landowners shown on the aforesaid
list.
H. Any and all additional information that may be required by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
I. A payment to the Township in accordance with a fee schedule adopted
by recommendation of the Zoning Hearing Board and adoption by the
Board of Supervisors, as amended.235
(1) Such fees may include compensation for the secretary and
members of the Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing.
(2) The fees may not include compensation for the legal expenses of
the Board or expenses for engineering, architectural or other
technical consultant or expert witness fees.
(3) All permissible costs shall be borne by the applicant, based on an
itemized list of expenses.
A. Immediately upon receipt of an application, the Zoning Officer shall
promptly forward the application to the Zoning Hearing Board
Chairman along with all of the above information, lists of neighboring
owners and prestamped and preaddressed envelopes.
B. The Chairman, in consultation with the Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor,
shall fix a reasonable time and place for a public hearing on the
application. Said hearing shall occur no more than 60 days after the
application is made to the Secretary, unless the applicant has agreed, in
writing, to an extension of time.
C. A true and correct copy of the application and all related information
shall be forwarded to each member of the Zoning Hearing Board and to
the Chairmen of the Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors.
D. Upon receipt of a Zoning Hearing Board application, the Planning
Commission, at its next regularly scheduled meeting, may consider the
application and may, at its sole discretion, resolve to comment thereon.
235. Editor's Note: The fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 184-38 LIMERICK CODE § 184-40
168:630
§ 184-40. Notice of public hearing.
The Board shall schedule a public hearing and shall give public notice as
follows:
§ 184-41. Hearing procedures.
A. By publishing a notice once a week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing, the particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing and the specific ordinance
provisions that permit consideration by the Zoning Hearing Board. The
first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second not less
than seven days from the date of the hearing.
B. By mailing or serving written notice to the record owner, applicant and
applicant's representative.
C. By conspicuously posting written notice of hearing on the affected tract
of land at least one week prior to the meeting.
D. By mailing or serving the notice to adjacent land owners by utilization
of the envelopes provided by the applicant pursuant to § 184-38G of this
chapter.
E. By mailing or serving notice thereof to the Township Supervisors,
Planning Commission and Zoning Officer.
F. By mailing a notice to any and all parties in interest who have entered
their appearance.
G. By mailing a notice to any person registered for that purpose.
A. Zoning Hearing Board hearings shall be held at the call of the Chairman
and at such times as the Board may determine.
B. Hearings may be conducted by the Board, which may appoint any
member as a hearing officer. The decision or findings shall be made by
the Board; however, the applicant or municipality may, prior to a
decision, waive a decision or findings by the Board and accept the
decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
C. The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality, any person affected
by the application who has made timely appearance of record before
the Board and any other person, including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
the power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances, in writing, on forms provided for that purpose.
D. The Chairman or Acting Chairman or hearing officer may administer
oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and
documents requested by the parties.
§ 184-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-41
168:631
§ 184-42. Decisions and findings.
E. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
F. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
G. The Board or the hearing officer shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared
equally by the applicant and the Board. The cost of the original
transcript shall be paid by the Board if the transcript is ordered by the
Board or hearing officer, or shall be paid by the person appealing from
the decision of the Board if such appeal is made, and in either event the
cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such
copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting the original
transcript shall bear the cost.
H. The Board or hearing officer shall not, except upon notice and
opportunity for all parties to be present:
(1) Participate and inspect and contest materials.
(2) Communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his
representative in connection with any issue involved.
(3) Take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or
other materials, except advice from their Solicitor.
(4) Inspect the subject site or its surroundings after commencement of
hearings with any party or his representative.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer shall render a written
decision or make written findings on the application within 45 days of
the last hearing. Each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact
and conclusions based upon findings. Conclusions based on any
provision of a Township ordinance shall contain a reference to the
provision.
B. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no
stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall make
his report and recommendations available to the parties within 45 days,
and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations to the
Board prior to final decision or entry of findings. The Board's decision
shall be entered no later than 30 days after the report of the hearing
officer.
C. Where the Board fails to render the decision within the required period
or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days of application, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
§ 184-41 LIMERICK CODE § 184-42
168:632
§ 184-43. Standards for special exception and conditional use
approval. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a special exception or
conditional use application shall only be approved if the applicant proves
that the following standards will be met, as applicable:
§ 184-44. Specific standards for variances and special exceptions.
applicant unless the applicant has agreed, in writing or on the record,
to an extension of time.
D. When a decision has been deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant because of the failure of the Board to hold a hearing or render
a decision as provided, the Board shall give public notice of said
deemed decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to
render a decision. Such notice shall be given in the manner prescribed
by this section. If the Board shall fail to provide such notice, the
applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right
of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
E. A copy of the final decision or findings shall be delivered to the
applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day following its
date. To all other persons who have filed their name and address with
the Board not later than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall
provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings
and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may
be examined.
A. That the proposal will not significantly negatively impact the use of
neighboring properties and/or the character of an existing or approved
residential neighborhood.
B. That the proposal includes adequate site design methods, such as plant
screening, tree preservation, setbacks and berming, as needed to avoid
significant negative impacts on nearby uses.
C. That proposals to provide water service, sewage service and
stormwater management are feasible and follow professionally sound
methods. However, if such matters will be subject to professional
review and approval under a separate Township ordinance, then the
zoning approval may defer to such other approval.
D. That the use will not create a significant hazard to the public health and
safety, such as fire, toxic or explosive hazards.
E. That the use will not result in or substantially add to a significant traffic
safety hazard or significant traffic congestion.
A. Variances. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this zoning chapter inflict unnecessary
§ 184-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-44
168:633
hardship upon the applicant. The Board may require preliminary
application to the Zoning Officer.
(1) The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following
findings are made, where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this zoning chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(b) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this zoning chapter and
that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That the unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(2) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this zoning chapter.
B. Special exceptions. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide
requests for special exceptions in accordance with the standards and
criteria found in the particular section of this zoning chapter that
permits application for said special exception, and with the general
standards in § 184-43. In granting any special exception, the Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this zoning chapter.
C. Persons with disabilities. After the Zoning Officer has received a
complete written application, the Zoning Hearing Board shall grant a
special exception allowing more than five unrelated persons to inhabit a
group home or other modifications to specific requirements of this
chapter if the applicant proves both of the following to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Hearing Board: [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
§ 184-44 LIMERICK CODE § 184-44
168:634
§ 184-45. Review of challenges and appeals.
(1) The approval is needed to provide a reasonable accommodation
under the Americans With Disabilities Act, the Federal Fair
Housing Act and/or related applicable state law, as amended.
(2) The facility will serve persons who the applicant proves have
handicaps or disabilities, as defined in and protected by such laws.
A. Time limitations on appeals.
(1) All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners shall be
filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the
determination is issued.
(2) Appeals designed to secure reversal or limit the approval of any
application for development, preliminary or final, shall be filed with
the Board no later than 30 days after the application is approved by
an appropriate municipal officer or agency, unless the person filing
proves that he had not notice, knowledge or reason to believe that
such approval had been given. If such person succeeded to his
interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of
his predecessor in interest.
B. Effect of filing. When an appeal is filed, further development or official
action pursuant to the appealed determination or approval shall be
stayed until issuance of a final decision or findings by the Board. If the
Zoning Officer or other municipal agency presents facts to the Board
indicating that such a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property, development or official action can only be stayed by
restraining order granted by the Board or by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
C. Substantive validity challenge. A landowner who desires to challenge,
on substantive grounds, the validity of a map or ordinance provision
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he
has an interest may submit the challenge either to the Zoning Hearing
Board or, with a request for curative amendment, to the Township
Board of Supervisors.
(1) The written application to the Zoning Hearing Board shall contain
the reasons for the challenge.
(2) Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of
the ordinance or map is in question and shall specify the place and
time where a copy of the request and its accompanying materials
may be examined by the public.
(3) Based upon the testimony at the hearing(s), the Board shall
determine whether the challenged ordinance or map is defective,
as alleged. If the challenge is found to have merit, the decision of
§ 184-44 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-45
168:635
§ 184-46. Expiration of variance or special exception. [Amended
5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 249; 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360]
Unless otherwise specified by the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors,
a special exception or variance shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain
all permits within one year of the date of authorization thereof, except as
modified below:
the Board shall include recommended amendments to the
challenged ordinance which will cure the defects found.
(4) In reaching its decision, the Board shall consider the plans and
explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also
consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(b) If the proposal is for residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the
proposal in providing housing units of a type actually available
to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully
excluded by the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map.
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodland, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features.
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodland, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources
and other natural features, the degree to which these are
protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to
development and any adverse environmental impacts.
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(5) If the Board fails to act on the request within 45 days of the last
hearing, a denial of the request is deemed to have occurred.
A. Zoning relief that requires the issuance of a building permit may be
extended up to an additional 12 months if the Zoning Officer
determines the applicant has shown good cause in writing.
B. In the event a subdivision or land development plan is required
following the granting of a special exception or variance, the variances
or special exceptions shall not expire so long as the plan is actively
under consideration by the Township, in which case the time limit shall
apply from the date of unappealable final plan approval by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 184-45 LIMERICK CODE § 184-47
168:636
§ 184-47. Appeal to court.
Any persons aggrieved by the decision of the Board may within 30 days
thereafter appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County by
petition duly verified setting forth the grounds upon which said appeal is
taken.
§ 184-47 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-47
168:637

ARTICLE VII
Nonconformities236
§ 184-48. Nonconforming status.
All buildings, structures, uses of land, uses of buildings, lots and signs which
do not conform to all of the applicable regulations of the district in which
they are located or other applicable requirements of this chapter shall be
considered as nonconforming, provided that:
§ 184-49. Classifications.
Nonconforming status shall be classified as follows:
§ 184-50. Regulations for nonconforming status properties.
The following regulations shall govern all properties to which
nonconforming status is applied:
A. They lawfully existed on the date of passage of this chapter; or
B. They lawfully existed on the date of passage of a text or map
amendment to this chapter, which amendment caused the
nonconforming status.
A. Nonconforming use: the existing lawful use of land and/or buildings
and/or structures upon the land which does not conform to any of the
permitted uses of the district in which it is located.
B. Nonconforming building or structure: any existing lawful building or
structure that does not conform to the height, location, size, bulk or
other dimensional requirements of the district in which it is located.
This does not include signs.
C. Nonconforming lot: any existing lawful lot which does not conform to
the area and/or width requirements for lots in the district in which it is
located.
D. Temporary nonconforming use: A temporary nonconforming use which
will benefit the public health or welfare or promote proper development
of a district in conformity with the intent of this chapter may be
permitted for a period of not more than 90 days on the approval of an
application for a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. Nonconforming status shall continue, and a property may continue to
be used as nonconforming until it complies with the requirements of
this chapter.
B. Change of use. A nonconforming use may only be changed to a different
nonconforming use if approved as a special exception. A special
exception for a change from one nonconforming use to another shall be
236. Editor's Note: The name of this article was amended.
§ 184-48 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-50
168:639
based upon the applicant proving that the new use will not be more
intense than the previous use, and the measure of intensity shall take
into consideration the following: [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No.
196; 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
(1) Traffic volume, ingress and egress and internal circulation
movements;
(2) Noise and the use of hazardous substances;
(3) There shall be no additional outdoor storage;
(4) The new nonconforming use must be compatible with the character
of the surrounding area;
(5) The appearance from the street must remain identical to the
previous nonconforming use;
(6) There shall be no additions to an existing structure;
(7) The weekday PM peak traffic trips generated shall be the same or
less than the previous use. The trips shall be measured by the latest
version of the Institute of Transportation Trip Generation Manual;
(8) The previous nonconforming use must be either a commercial or
industrial use and the change in nonconforming use must be
commercial if the previous use was commercial or industrial if the
previous use was industrial, but in either event, a residential
nonconforming use shall not be eligible for a special exception. A
special exception cannot be granted if a commercial use is being
converted to industrial or vice versa. If a nonconforming use is
changed to a conforming use, then the previous nonconforming
status shall become null and void.
C. Discontinuance. A nonconforming use, when discontinued, may be
resumed any time within one year from such discontinuance, but not
thereafter. The resumption may be of the same class or use, but shall
not be of a lower (less restrictive) classification.
D. Extension or expansion. A nonconforming use, building or structure,
not including signs, may be extended or expanded in compliance with
the following:
(1) The parcel on which extension or expansion occurs shall include
only that lot, held in single and separate ownership, on which the
use, building or structure existed at the time it became
nonconforming. Expansion onto adjoining lots is prohibited.
(2) (Reserved)237
237. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(2), regarding extension of nonconforming use
throughout floor area of buildings existing on 9-29-1992, as amended, was repealed
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327.
§ 184-50 LIMERICK CODE § 184-50
168:640
(3) A building which houses a nonconforming use may be expanded
only to the extent that new construction complies with the
dimensional and lot coverage standards of the district in which the
building is located. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196;
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
(a) A nonconforming use shall not be expanded throughout a
building by a total cumulative amount greater than 25%
beyond the size of the nonconforming use when it first became
nonconforming. A nonconforming use shall not be expanded on
the land comprising the nonconforming use by a total
cumulative amount greater than 25% of the land mass that
encompassed the nonconforming use at the time the
nonconforming use first became nonconforming. This
expansion for either a nonconforming use within a building or
a nonconforming use on land cannot be expanded again after it
has reached 25% of the square footage of the nonconforming
use within the building or 25% of the square footage of the
land mass comprising the original nonconforming use.
(4) Any expansion of a nonconforming use shall comply with the
dimensional and lot coverage requirements of the applicable
district. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
(5) In cases where a building is nonconforming as to front, side or rear
yard setback, an addition may be built on a line with the existing
building, as long as it does not create an additional encroachment
into a required yard. Any increase in the degree of nonconformity
with regard to required setbacks will require a variance.
[Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196; 7-19-2005 by Ord. No.
253; 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
(6) (Reserved)238
E. Use of nonconforming buildings. A nonconforming building may be
used for any use permitted in the district in which such building is
located. Any expansion of such a building shall comply with the
provisions of Subsection D above. The following regulations apply to
buildings:
(1) Buildings under construction to the extent of completion of footings
may be completed as nonconforming buildings, provided that valid
building permits have been issued for those buildings.
(2) Buildings not yet under construction shall be built in conformance
with this chapter.
238. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(6), Extension or expansion in R-1 District, as
amended, was repealed 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327.
§ 184-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-50
168:641
§ 184-51. Administration of nonconforming status properties.
(3) The use or uses of buildings governed by Subsection E(1) and/or (2)
above shall comply with the permitted uses for the district in which
they are located.
(4) Nonconforming primary structures damaged or destroyed by fire,
explosion, accident or calamity (as contrasted to deterioration due
to time or neglect) may be reconstructed and used as before,
provided that:
(a) The reconstructed building shall not exceed the dimensions of
the damaged or destroyed building, including height, width,
depth and volume.
(b) Building reconstruction shall be started within one year from
the date the building was damaged or destroyed and shall be
carried out without interruption.
(c) The building will pose no hazards to safety by virtue of its
location.
(5) Legally condemned nonconforming buildings shall not be rebuilt or
used except in conformance with this chapter.
F. Development of nonconforming lots. An undeveloped nonconforming lot
may be used for a single-family detached dwelling or another single use
that is permitted in the district in which such lot is located, in
compliance with all the dimensional and lot coverage standards of such
district. Any development not in compliance with such standards shall
require a variance from the Zoning Hearing Board.
G. Contiguous undeveloped lots. Where two or more contiguous
undeveloped lots are held in single ownership within a subdivision
which has been duly recorded prior to the effective date of this chapter,
which lots are individually not of the required minimum area or width
for the district in which they are situated, such lots shall be developed
in groups thereof in order to provide the minimum lot area and frontage
required for each structure and shall not be considered nonconforming
as to area or width.
A. Registration. The Board of Supervisors may require the Zoning Officer
to prepare a list and map of properties of nonconforming status,
including uses, buildings, structures, lots and signs. For each property
identified, the Zoning Officer shall have on file a written record
documenting the evidence and reasoning that led to the assignment of
nonconforming status.
B. Jurisdiction. In all matters pertaining to nonconforming status, the
Zoning Officer shall make the initial determination.
§ 184-50 LIMERICK CODE § 184-51
168:642
(1) The Zoning Officer may seek the advice of the Township Planning
Commission, Township Solicitor and/or others in making a
determination.
(2) If it cannot be determined by means of positive documentation that
a use or structure was in lawful existence at the time an ordinance
or amendment would have rendered it nonconforming, the Zoning
Officer must refuse to confer nonconforming status.
(3) If the applicant disagrees with the Zoning Officer's determination,
the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board as provided
by law.
§ 184-51 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-51
168:643

ARTICLE VIII
General Standards
§ 184-52. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to establish clear standards for activities that
may be associated with a variety of zoning districts or types of land use
and to cross-reference provisions in Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land
Development, that regulate activities in one or more zoning districts. Except
where noted in this article, these regulations apply to all zoning districts
within the Township.
§ 184-53. Requirements for land use proposals. [Amended
6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 330]
In addition to complying with the specific requirements in other applicable
articles of this Zoning Chapter, proposals shall comply with the following
additional regulations:
§ 184-54. Land use applications.
Applications shall be filed with the Township for subdivision and/or land
development and/or other uses of land as permitted by this chapter, in
compliance with the following:
A. Subdivision and/or land development proposals are further regulated
by the Limerick Township Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land
Development.
B. (Reserved)239
A. Ownership. The subject tract or land area shall be in one ownership or
shall be subject to a joint application filed by the owners of the entire
site, under single direction, using one overall plan.
B. Proposed plans.
(1) Subdivision and/or land development applications shall include a
proposed plan in compliance with the Limerick Township Chapter
155, Subdivision and Land Development, and all other applicable
Township ordinances.
(2) Applications for permitted uses which are not subdivisions or land
developments shall include a proposed plan in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Township to determine compliance with all
applicable regulations.
(3) The proposal for a tract or land area may be carried out in a single
phase or in sections, in compliance with the Pennsylvania
239. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding activities regulated by Chapter 155,
Subdivision and Land Development, was repealed 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379.
§ 184-52 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-54
168:645
§ 184-55. Water supply and sewage disposal.
All development in the Township shall be served by water supply and
sewage disposal facilities which are appropriate for the type of land use,
physical characteristics of the land, location in the Township and availability
of existing water and sewage systems and shall be further regulated by the
requirements below. All water supply facilities shall meet the requirements
of § 155-30, Water supply, of Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land
Development.
Municipalities Planning Code,240 and shall be in compliance with a
development agreement which shall be:
(a) Binding to the overall tract and its development.
(b) Acceptable to the Board of Supervisors, under the advice of the
Township Solicitor.
(c) Recorded with the final plan.
(d) Subject to renegotiation if the applicant proposes revisions to
the approved plans.
A. Individual on-site systems.
(1) Individual on-site water supply and sewage disposal facilities may
be used in all zoning districts where central water and/or sewer
facilities are not available.
(2) Written proof of compliance with the applicable state regulations
must be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer before
occupancy permits will be issued.
B. Common or shared on-site systems.
(1) Common or shared on-site water supply and/or sewage disposal
facilities may be used in all zoning districts where central water
and/or sewer facilities are not available.
(2) Common or shared facilities shall comply with the requirements of
§ 184-67 herein regarding ownership and maintenance of common
land areas and improvements.
(3) Written proof of compliance with the applicable state regulations
must be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer before
occupancy permits will be issued.
C. Off-site facilities.
(1) Off-site central water and/or sewage facilities provided by a
municipal authority or a utility certified by the Pennsylvania Public
240. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 184-54 LIMERICK CODE § 184-55
168:646
§ 184-56. Lot width.
Minimum lot width or frontage as required under this chapter shall be
measured at the building line, as defined herein. For the purposes of
measuring lot width at the building line, the following requirements apply:
§ 184-57. Access to street.
§ 184-58. Front yard setbacks; modification of requirements.
Utility Commission must be used for development in all zoning
districts when they are available.
(2) Written proof of compliance with the applicable state regulations
must be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer before
occupancy permits will be issued.
A. For wedge-shaped lots which are narrower at the street than at the rear
property line, the building line may be moved back to a point no more
than twice the required front yard depth, measured from the street line.
At this point, the lot width must equal the minimum lot width required
for the district. At least 50 feet of street frontage shall be provided for
each lot. Such flexibility in lot width measurement shall only be
permitted around the bulb of a cul-de-sac. [Amended 6-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 196]
B. Where flag lots are permitted, the building line shall be oriented as
parallel or concentric to the street from which access is provided as is
feasible and shall be set back from the intervening property line at least
the minimum front yard depth.
A. With the exception of flag lots, as defined herein, all lots shall abut a
public street, or a private street that meets all Township specifications,
for at least 50 feet at the right-of-way line of the public street; and said
50 feet must be usable for purposes of ingress and egress to the lot.
Flag lots shall abut a public or private street for at least 25 feet; this
access strip must be usable for ingress and egress to the lot.
B. Preexisting landlocked parcels may be developed with one single-family
detached house provided with a twenty-five-foot-wide easement of
access, and provided that the usable portion of the lot meets all other
lot size and dimensional requirements of the district in which it is
located.
A. All front yard setbacks required under this chapter shall be calculated
from the ultimate right-of-way of the street on which the lot fronts, as
specified in Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
B. If there is a pronounced uniformity or alignment of fronts of existing
buildings, the front yard of a proposed building in any district may, by
special exception granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, be decreased
in depth to the average alignment of existing buildings located within
§ 184-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-58
168:647
§ 184-59. Corner lots. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 328;
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
Corner lots shall meet the minimum front yard setback requirements for
the applicable districts on both intersecting streets. An accessory structure
shall not be placed in the front yard (that minimum setback area where the
principal building can be placed, as defined). An accessory structure shall
not be located between the principal building and the street on the principal
façade of the building (the side of the building that has the front door).
(NOTE: The setback line for an accessory structure of a house that sits on
an angle facing the corner and not in line with either street, the principal
facade line would be extended along the building line until it intersects the
two front yard lines.)
§ 184-60. Temporary uses. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
100 feet from each side of the proposed building on the same side of
the street and within the same block.
A. The owner of a travel-trailer type vehicle designed for living or sleeping
purposes may place said vehicle on a lot as a temporary residence for a
period not exceeding one year, provided that the placement of said
vehicle occurs only during the construction of a dwelling on said lot,
that proper facilities for water and sewage disposal have been approved
by the County Health Department and that the trailer shall be removed
upon completion of said dwelling.
B. Temporary sales uses. The following provisions shall regulate
temporary seasonal retail sales of Christmas trees: [Amended
9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 371]
(1) Such sales shall only be permitted in a district permitting retail
sales or as accessory to a lawful nonconforming principal
commercial use.
(2) An application for a temporary sales use permit shall be submitted
on a form prepared by the Zoning Officer. The application fee shall
be established and revised by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
(3) The retail sales use shall be limited from the fourth Friday of every
November until December 31.
(4) The retail sales shall meet setback requirements of the applicable
zoning district and shall not obstruct sight triangles.
(5) Only two sign faces shall be permitted which shall each have a
maximum sign area of six square feet. Such sign shall not be
illuminated.
(6) The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that adequate
parking and traffic control will be available for both the temporary
§ 184-58 LIMERICK CODE § 184-60
168:648
§ 184-61. Flag lots.
Flag lots, as defined herein, are permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Districts,
including areas where the R-1 requirements apply due to lack of public
water service, at the discretion of the Board of Supervisors on the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, in compliance with the other
applicable requirements of this chapter and of Chapter 155, Subdivision and
Land Development.
§ 184-62. Outdoor lighting.241 [Added 6-7-2005 by Ord. No. 251]
All outdoor lighting of property shall comply with the standard set forth
in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance at §§ 155-17 and
155-17.1.
sales and any other use of the property. The Zoning Officer may
place conditions upon the permit to address parking and traffic
control.
C. Carnivals. The following provisions shall regulate temporary seasonal
carnivals:
(1) Such use shall only be permitted in a commercial district, another
district permitting such use or on a lot with a minimum lot area of
two acres occupied by an established place of worship, fire
company or similar community service use granted nonprofit status
by the Internal Revenue Service.
(2) The carnival shall be limited to two time periods per lot per year.
Each time period shall not exceed seven days in length. A
temporary use permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer.
(3) The carnival shall not obstruct sight triangles.
(4) Temporary signs are not regulated during the carnival.
(5) The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that adequate
parking and traffic control will be available for both the carnival
and any other use of the property. The Zoning Officer may place
conditions upon the permit to address parking and traffic control.
A. In residential zoning districts, all outside lighting of buildings,
structures or other open areas shall be located, aimed, designed, fitted
and maintained so that the glare or reflection visible from a street or
residence adjacent to the building, structure or other open area being
illuminated shall not project illuminance greater than 0.3 footcandle,
measured in a plane perpendicular to the line of sight, at the property
or boundary line. [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
241. Editor's Note: Former § 184-62, Public utilities, was repealed 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196.
See § 184-20.
§ 184-60 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-62
168:649
B. In all nonresidential zoning districts, all outside lighting shall be
shielded so that the source of light shall not be visible from any point off
the lot on which the building, structure, driveway or parking area being
illuminated is located and so that only the building or area is directly
illuminated thereby. In no case shall lights be permitted to be directed
or reflected toward any residential district. [Amended 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 327]
C. In every district all outdoor lighting shall be arranged so as to protect
the street or highway as well as adjoining properties from direct glare
or hazardous interference of any kind. Any luminaire shall be equipped
with some type of glare shielding device approved by the Township
Engineer.
D. Outdoor lighting other than streetlighting shall comply with the
following: [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
(1) All lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and maintained
so as not to present a hazard to drivers or pedestrians by impairing
their ability to safely traverse and so as not to create a nuisance by
projecting or reflecting objectionable light onto a neighboring use
or property.
(2) Directional lights such as floodlights, spotlights and sign lights
shall be installed and aimed so that they do not project their output
into the windows of neighboring residences, adjacent uses, past the
object being illuminated, or onto a public roadway.
(3) Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary
means for controlling glare. Rather, such control shall be achieved
primarily through the use of sharp cut-off fixtures, the appropriate
application of mounting height, wattage, aiming angle, fixture
placement and fixture design, etc., and the addition of shields and
baffles as necessary.
(4) The intensity of illumination projected from any use onto a
residential use shall not exceed 0.3 vertical footcandle, measured
line of sight from any point on the receiving residential property.
(5) (Reserved)242
(6) Flag-lighting sources shall not exceed 10,000 lumens per flagpole.
The light source shall have a beam spread no greater than
necessary to illuminate the flag. The flags of the United States, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Montgomery County and Limerick
Township shall be permitted to be illuminated from dusk till dawn.
All other flags shall not be illuminated past 11:00 p.m.
242. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(5), regarding externally illuminated billboards and
signs, was repealed 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379.
§ 184-62 LIMERICK CODE § 184-62
168:650
§ 184-63. Private covenants.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to render inoperative any
enforceable restriction established by covenants running with the land,
and which restrictions are not prohibited by or are not contrary to the
regulations herein established.
§ 184-64. Height limits.
No building or structure in the Township shall exceed a height of 35 feet
except as specified below.
(7) Under-canopy lighting such as gas station, hotel/theater marquee,
drive-through windows, etc., shall be accomplished using flat-lens
full-cutoff fixtures aimed straight down and shielded in such a
manner that the lowest opaque edge of the fixture shall be below
the light source.
A. Exceptions to building height limits. The height limitations of this
chapter shall not apply to chimneys, place of worship spires, gables,
cupolas, standpipes, flagpoles, monuments, transmission towers, radio
or television antennas, water tanks and similar structures and
necessary mechanical appurtenances, provided that: [Amended
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
(1) No such exception shall cover at any level more than 10% of the
area of the roof or the ground on which it is located; and
(2) The minimum setback from any property line of any freestanding
structure more than 35 feet in height shall equal the height of the
structure.
B. Agricultural buildings. A maximum height of 55 feet is permitted for
agricultural buildings, provided that the setback from any property line
equals the height of the building or structure, and provided that no
maximum height shall apply to the agricultural silos or attached
mechanical equipment. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
C. Fences and walls. No freestanding fence or wall (except for retaining
walls) shall exceed six feet in height, except where necessary for the
screening or shielding of outdoor storage or equipment areas, where
permitted under this chapter, and/or refuse collection facilities, in
compliance with § 184-66 herein.
D. Outdoor storage and outdoor display. Outdoor storage or outdoor
display located between a building and a lot line adjacent to a
residential district shall not exceed 12 feet in height. [Added
4-23-2019 by Ord. No. 395]
§ 184-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-65
168:651
§ 184-65. Projections into required yards.
No building and no part of a building shall be erected within or shall project
into any required yard in any district, except that:
§ 184-66. Refuse collection facilities. [Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord.
No. 334]
In all single-family attached, multifamily and nonresidential developments,
refuse collection facilities must be provided by the applicant, either inside
the building(s) or within an area enclosed by either walls or opaque fencing.
A. An unenclosed porch, not more than 14 feet in height, may be erected
to extend into a required front or rear yard a distance of not more than
10 feet, provided that in no case shall it extend into such front or rear
yard more than 1/2 the required depth of the yard.
B. A terrace, platform or landing place, not covered by a roof, canopy or
trellis, which does not extend above the level of the first floor of the
building may be erected to extend into a required yard a distance of not
more than 10 feet, provided that it shall not extend into such yard more
than 1/2 the required depth or width of the yard.
C. A porte-cochere or carport may be erected over a driveway in a
required side yard, provided that such structure is:
(1) Not more than 14 feet in height and 20 feet in length.
(2) Entirely open on at least three sides, exclusive of the necessary
supporting columns and customary architectural features.
(3) At least 10 feet from the side lot line. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 196]
D. A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier or pilaster of a building may project
not more than 18 inches into a required yard.
E. Open, unenclosed fire escapes, steps, bay windows and balconies may
project no more than three feet into a required yard.
F. Accessory buildings as permitted under § 184-71 shall be permitted in
required yards in compliance with the minimum setback requirements
for such buildings.
A. Refuse areas are prohibited between the street right-of-way and any
building, and between the side property lines and any building. Refuse
areas shall only be permitted behind or to the rear of the building. In
the case of double frontage lots, refuse areas are permitted between
the side yard setback and the building on the side located closest to the
roadway of lowest classification.
B. Walls or fencing shall be designed to shield the refuse facilities from
direct view from adjacent properties to a height of at least six feet but
§ 184-65 LIMERICK CODE § 184-66
168:652
§ 184-67. Private ownership and maintenance of common elements.
Common elements, including but not limited to open space, recreation,
sewer, water and stormwater management facilities which will not be
publicly owned shall be subject to a form of ownership established in private
agreements acceptable to the Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation
of the Township Solicitor. Such private ownership, including but not limited
to corporate, individual, condominium, landlord or fee-simple homeowners'
or landowners' association, shall be governed by the following:
no more than 12 feet high. Refuse materials may not exceed the height
of the fence. Such facilities shall be architecturally compatible with the
building(s) as determined by the Township.
C. The refuse area shall be located at least 10 feet from any adjacent
nonresidential zoning district and at least 75 feet from any adjacent
residential zoning district or ultimate right-of-way.
D. The refuse area shall not interfere with circulation within the parking
lot.
E. Facilities shall be designed in a manner which can accommodate large
collection trucks and shall be large enough to accommodate recycling
containers.
F. Refuse facilities attached to or within buildings shall be subject to the
same building setbacks as the buildings.
G. Landscaping is required around these facilities in compliance with the
requirements of Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
A. Access to and use of these common elements may be restricted to the
following:
(1) Property owners or tenants within the development.
(2) Nearby property owners or tenants who wish to join.
B. Perpetual maintenance shall be guaranteed by trust indenture or
similar instrument, approved by the Board of Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Township Solicitor, which instrument shall:
(1) Be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County
simultaneously with the recording of the final plan.
(2) Restrict the common elements by deed restrictions granting the
Township the right to enforce the restrictions.
(3) Include provisions for:
(a) Bonds posted by the developer to cover expenses incurred
before formation of a homeowner's association.
(b) Adjustment of association fees to account for inflation.
§ 184-66 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-67
168:653
§ 184-68. Conditional use applications.
An application for any conditional use as specified in the various Articles of
this chapter shall be considered by the Township Supervisors according to
the following procedure:
(c) A reserve fund to cover capital improvements and/or
unforeseen major maintenance requirements.
(d) Funds for professional management.
(4) Authorize the Township to maintain the common elements and
assess the private ownership accordingly if private ownership fails
to function as required in the private agreements. This shall
include but need not be limited to:
(a) Failure to clear streets and parking areas of snow.
(b) Failure to maintain stormwater control facilities.
(c) Failure to correct any hazardous conditions.
(d) Failure to perform, abide by and complete any duties,
obligations or requirements as set forth in the private
agreements and/or the final plan approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
A. Application.
(1) The application shall be submitted, in writing, to the Township
Secretary. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee
adopted pursuant to the provisions of § 184-32. [Amended
5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 249]
(2) The application shall include the request for approval of a
conditional use and sufficient information to document compliance
with the applicable standards of this chapter. A tentative sketch
plan of the proposed development shall be included.
(3) The applicant shall provide prestamped and preaddressed
envelopes for all landowners within 400 feet of the applicant's land,
according to the requirements of § 184-38G herein.
(4) The Township Secretary shall submit one copy of the application to
the Township Planning Commission for its reviews and
recommendations, one copy to the Township Board of Supervisors
and other copies to agencies and/or technical consultants whose
review may be relevant. [Amended 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360]
B. Public hearing.
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall schedule a public hearing within 60
days from the date of the application, unless the applicant has
agreed in writing to an extension of time and shall give public
§ 184-67 LIMERICK CODE § 184-68
168:654
notice of such hearing. The Board shall render a written decision
within 45 days after the last hearing before the Board. For the
purpose of this subsection, the last hearing before the Board shall
not terminate until the transcript of the hearing has been filed
with the Board by the court stenographer. Upon receipt of the
transcript, the Board shall give notice to the parties of the date
of such filing and the forty-five-day period shall commence unless
the parties have requested time to file with the Board requests for
findings of fact and conclusions of law in which case the Board
shall establish a time during which such filing are to be made.
[Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 249]
(2) The Board of Supervisors shall consider the comments and
recommendations of the Township and County Planning
Commissions, other advisors and those present at the public
hearing prior to deciding to approve or deny the proposed use and
any conditions to be imposed upon approval.
(3) Where the Board fails to render the decision within the required
period or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days of
application, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in
favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed, in writing or
on the record, to an extension of time.
C. Decision. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
(1) The Board of Supervisors shall render a written decision or, when
no decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional
use application within 45 days after the last hearing before the
Supervisors.
(2) Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact or conclusions based thereon,
together with any reasons therefor; conclusions based on any
provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code or of any ordinance,
rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied
upon and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in
the light of the facts found.
(3) Deemed decision. Where the Board of Supervisors fails to make a
decision within the time period required above, or fails to hold the
required hearing within the time period required by state law, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant, unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the
record to an extension of time.
(a) When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant
because of the failure of the Board of Supervisors to meet or
render a decision as required, the Board of Supervisors shall
give public notice of the decision within 10 days from the last
day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner
§ 184-68 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-68
168:655
as required by the public notice requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.243
(b) If the Board of Supervisors shall fail to provide such notice, the
applicant may do so.
(4) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
the applicant no later than the day following its date.
D. Standards. For an application for a conditional use, the Board of
Supervisors shall consider the standards listed in § 184-43. [Added
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
243. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 184-68 LIMERICK CODE § 184-68
168:656
ARTICLE IX
Supplemental Regulations
§ 184-69. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to establish clear standards for certain
supplemental uses and activities that are authorized in various zoning
districts and for other uses not specifically designated within one or more
zoning districts. Where such uses or activities occur, they should comply
strictly with the standards of this article, which have been created to
address their particular impacts.
§ 184-70. Residential conversions.
The Zoning Hearing Board may allow as a special exception the conversion
of a single-family detached dwelling into a dwelling for a greater number of
families, subject to the following requirements:
§ 184-71. Accessory and livestock uses. [Amended 9-6-1994 by Ord.
No. 165; 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
The following accessory uses shall be permitted, subject to the additional
requirements herein:
A. (Reserved)244
B. Each dwelling unit shall not have less than 500 square feet of floor area.
C. The lot area per dwelling unit is not reduced thereby to an amount less
than that required by this chapter for the district in which the
designated lot is located.
D. The yard and building area requirements for the district in which the
building is located shall not be reduced.
E. There is no external alteration of the building except as may be
necessary for reasons of safety. Fire escapes and outside stairways
shall, where practicable, be located to the rear of the building.
F. The Zoning Hearing Board shall specify the maximum number of
families permitted to occupy such building and may prescribe such
further conditions and restrictions as the Board may consider
appropriate.
G. The off-street parking requirements of this chapter, or any other
arrangements as deemed appropriate by the Zoning Hearing Board, are
met.
H. All applicable state and federal water and sewer requirements shall
apply.
244. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, concerning petition of neighbors, was repealed
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196.
§ 184-69 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-71
168:657
A. Uses accessory to agriculture.
(1) Greenhouses.
(2) Roadside stands for display and sale of farm products, in
accordance with the following:
(a) A minimum of 50% of the total products offered for sale shall
have been produced by the operator of the market, by his/her
relatives. A maximum of 1,500 square feet of building floor
area shall be occupied by such use.
(b) At least three off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the
lot. Where building area exceeds 600 square feet, one
additional parking space shall be provided for each additional
200 square feet of building area.
(c) Sale of farm products shall be conducted either from a
temporary stand, dismantled at the end of the growing season,
or from a permanent building, sited in compliance with all
setback requirements for the zoning district in which it is
located. Any temporary structure shall be set back at least 25
feet from the edge of the cartway of the adjacent road.
(d) See sign provisions in § 184-92G(7). [Amended 12-20-2011
by Ord. No. 327]
(3) Other agricultural buildings used for storage or preparation of
products produced on the premises.
(4) Keeping of livestock is permitted in conjunction with a principal
agricultural use, provided that the following requirements are met:
(a) No maximum number of animals shall apply if there is a tenacre
minimum lot area. If the lot area is less than 10 acres,
then the requirements of § 184-71B(4) below shall also apply.
(b) All feed lots and structures used for housing the animals shall
be placed a minimum of 150 feet from any lot line of any other
property, unless a written waiver is provided by all owners of
record of such other property.
(c) The keeping of 15 or more pigs or hogs that involves the
feeding of garbage shall:
[1] Only be permitted in the HI district;
[2] Require a fifty-acre minimum lot area;
[3] Be set back a minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines; and
[4] Be completely enclosed by fencing.
(d) Height. See § 184-64B.
§ 184-71 LIMERICK CODE § 184-71
168:658
(e) A grass strip at least eight feet wide should be provided
between a field and any street cartway or shoulder.
(f) New or expanded manure storage areas shall be set back the
following minimum distances:
[1] One hundred feet from a perennial stream, river, spring,
lake, pond or reservoir.
[2] One hundred feet from a private water well or an open
sinkhole.
[3] One hundred feet from an active public water drinking
well or water source surface intake, unless a larger
distance is required by federal or state regulation.
[4] Two hundred feet from each property line, unless
landowners within such distance execute a written waiver
of the setback, or unless a wider setback is established by
state regulations.
(g) A person owning or having in his/her custody livestock or
poultry shall maintain the livestock or poultry so as to minimize
health or safety hazards and noxious odors to persons
occupying other properties and to properly control rodents and
vectors, except as this provision may be preempted by the
State Right to Farm Act, the State Agricultural Security Areas
Act or other applicable state law.
(h) A person owning or having in his/her custody livestock or
poultry shall not permit the animals to enter other property
without advance permission from the owner or appropriate
authority. Such lack of control of animals is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and dangerous to the public health and safety.
B. Uses accessory to dwellings.
(1) Private garages, private parking spaces, barns, shelters for pets.
(2) Noncommercial swimming pools or other recreational facilities.
(a) All aboveground and in-ground pools as well as all filters,
pumps and other mechanical equipment shall conform to a tenfoot
side yard setback and ten-foot rear yard setback.
[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
(b) Any floodlighting or other illumination used in conjunction with
the pool shall be shielded and directed away from adjoining
properties.
(c) Fencing.
[1] In-ground pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence or
wall not less than four feet in height. If a fence is used, the
§ 184-71 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-71
168:659
vertical and horizontal interfaces shall be no more than
two inches. All gates or doors shall be equipped with locks.
[2] Aboveground pools four feet or higher need not be
enclosed by a fence or wall, but the ladder serving the pool
shall be locked in an inaccessible position at least four feet
above the ground or removed and locked up elsewhere.
(3) Private greenhouses and garden sheds.
(4) Keeping of livestock or pets, not in conjunction with a principal
agricultural use, shall meet the following requirements:
(a) A person owning or having in his/her custody animals shall
maintain them so as to minimize health or safety hazards and
noxious odors to persons occupying other properties and to
properly control rodents and vectors. Only animals that are
domesticated and do not represent a known safety hazard to
humans shall be permitted as pets.
(b) A person owning or having in his/her custody animals shall not
permit the animals to enter other property without advance
permission from the owner.
(c) The following maximum numbers of animals shall be kept on a
lot:
[1] A minimum lot area of two acres shall be required to keep
one cow, horse, pig, hog or similar-sized animal. One
additional animal of such size may be kept for each acre of
lot area in excess of two acres.
[2] A minimum lot area of one acre shall be required to keep
one sheep, goat or similar-sized animal. Three additional
animals of such size may be kept for each acre of lot area
in excess of one acre.
[3] A minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet shall be required
to keep poultry or similar-sized animals. A maximum of
four such animals shall apply, except that an average of
four such animals shall be permitted for each acre of lot
area.
[4] A maximum of six dogs, cats or similar domesticated small
animals over the age of one year shall be permitted to be
kept as accessory to a dwelling. A maximum of six rabbits
or similar-sized animals shall be kept as accessory to a
dwelling. A "kennel," as defined by § 184-10, shall only be
allowed where specifically permitted by the applicable
district regulations.
(5) Home occupations, as listed in § 184-72A herein, subject to the
regulations in § 184-72B.
§ 184-71 LIMERICK CODE § 184-71
168:660
(6) Temporary unit for relative. A temporary dwelling unit may be
established as accessory to a principal single-family dwelling unit if
the following requirements are met: [Amended 11-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 301]
(a) The unit shall be totally enclosed within the principal building.
(b) The principal dwelling unit shall be owner-occupied.
(c) An internal connection shall be maintained as a means of
access between the principal and accessory dwelling units,
such as a stairway or corridor.
(d) The owners shall file a written covenant in the Montgomery
County Recorder of Deeds office that prohibits the use of the
property as two or more dwelling units. The covenant must be
approved by the Township Solicitor. It must run with the land
and require the removal of cooking facilities in one of the
dwelling units within six months after the dwelling unit is no
longer occupied by a member of the owner's immediate family.
(e) The applicant must agree to annually renew the permit by
proving that the unit is still occupied by immediate family
members of the owner and make the property available for
Township inspection if requested.
(f) If an on-lot septic system will be utilized, it shall be found
adequate by the County Health Department for the expanded
use.
(g) Any exterior changes to the principal building to incorporate
an attached accessory unit shall not decrease its appearance
as a single-family detached dwelling as viewed from a street or
another property.
(h) Immediate family members are limited to parents,
grandparents, children, grandchildren, sisters, brothers,
aunts, uncles, stepparents and stepchildren.
(i) Detached temporary dwellings are specifically prohibited.
(j) Access to the temporary dwelling unit shall be through the
principal dwelling unit unless the building code requires
additional access.
(7) No-impact home-based business, as defined in Chapter 184,
Zoning, Article II, § 184-10. [Added 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 330]
C. Setback requirements for detached buildings and structures accessory
to dwellings.
(1) Accessory buildings and/or structures shall not be permitted in the
front yard (that minimum setback area where the principal building
§ 184-71 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-71
168:661
can be placed, as defined). An accessory structure shall not be
located between the principal building and the street on the
principal façade of the building (the side of the building that has
the front door). (NOTE: The setback line for an accessory structure
of a house that sits on an angle facing the corner and not in line
with either street, the principal facade line would be extended
along the building line until it intersects the two front yard lines.)
[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327; 8-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 379]
(2) Rear yard: 10 feet minimum, except that:
(a) If a structure has a floor area of over 1,200 square feet in gross
floor area including interior vehicular parking, it shall meet the
minimum rear yard for a principal building; [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
(b) A detached structure that has a floor area less than 250 square
feet, has a maximum height of 12 feet and is accessory to a
dwelling shall have a minimum rear yard of five feet, if such
rear yard is not adjacent to a street. [Amended 6-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 360]
(3) Side yard: 10 feet minimum, except that: [Amended 12-20-2011
by Ord. No. 327]
(a) If a structure has a floor area of over 1,200 square feet in gross
floor area including interior vehicular parking, it shall meet the
minimum side yard for a principal building;
(b) A detached structure that has a floor area less than 250 square
feet, has a maximum height of 12 feet and is accessory to a
dwelling shall have a minimum side yard of five feet, if such
side yard is not adjacent to a street. [Amended 6-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 360]
(4) Setback between buildings: If an applicant proposes to have two
accessory buildings that if added together in floor area would not
comply with the setbacks of this section, then five-foot minimum
setbacks shall apply between each such accessory building and
between the principal and each accessory building.
(5) Any accessory structure constructed to serve a home occupation
shall be reviewed and approved under the standards of § 184-72.
(6) See Subsection D below for large structures.
(7) Measurement. In measuring the floor area of accessory buildings,
the square footage shall be those areas with a clear height of six
feet or greater.
D. Size limit for accessory buildings. Any accessory building (with the
exception of agricultural buildings) which exceeds 1,200 square feet in
§ 184-71 LIMERICK CODE § 184-71
168:662
§ 184-72. Home occupations.
gross floor area including interior vehicular parking or 25 feet in height
may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception
subject to the following standards: [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 327]
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board may impose additional setback
requirements from property boundaries, in addition to the
requirements of Subsection C above.
(2) The visual impact of the building on neighboring properties shall be
considered.
(3) Compatibility of the building with the size and scale of surrounding
buildings shall be considered.
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions on a special
exception approval to ensure compatibility with neighboring
properties, such as requiring additional landscaping or driveway
and parking improvements.
E. Uses accessory to noncommercial recreational use. Customary
recreation, refreshment and service uses and buildings in any
noncommercial recreational area.
F. Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts.
(1) Routine parking of not more than two commercially registered
vehicles no more than 18 feet in length which are used regularly or
frequently for business purposes shall be permitted. Routine
parking of more than two such vehicles shall constitute a business
operation and shall not be permitted in a residential district.
(2) Routine parking of one commercially registered vehicle of more
than 18 feet in length which is used regularly or frequently for
business purposes shall be permitted; more than one shall
constitute a business operation and shall not be permitted in a
residential district.
G. Other accessory uses. Accessory uses other than those listed above may
be permitted in compliance with the requirements for principal uses in
the district in which they are located and which they are accessory to.
H. Temporary sales uses. See § 184-60.
A. Permitted and prohibited home occupation uses.
(1) The following home occupations are permitted in any district,
subject to the requirements in § 184-72B and all other applicable
requirements of this chapter:
§ 184-71 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-72
168:663
(a) The professional office or studio of a teacher, artist,
accountant, architect, landscape architect, minister, musician,
engineer or practitioner of a similar character.
(b) Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring, sewing of fabric for
custom apparel and custom home furnishing.
(c) (Reserved)245
(d) A family day-care home, as defined in this chapter, in
compliance with the standards of § 184-72D(3) below.
(e) (Reserved)246
(f) Any office in which chattels or goods, wares or merchandise
are not commercially created, exchanged, or sold on site. No
outdoor storage is permitted as part of this use. [Amended
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196; 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360]
(g) Tutoring, limited to not more than two students at one time;
tutoring of more than two students shall be considered a
special exception, in accordance with § 184-72C below.
(h) A fine arts studio in which only individual works of art are
created.
(i) (Reserved)247
(j) A barbershop and beauty parlor, limited to not more than two
clients at one time. More than two clients shall be considered a
special exception, in accordance with § 184-72C below.248
(k) The professions of lawyer, doctor, and dentist. [Added
6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360]
(2) Home occupations shall not include commercial businesses,
hospitals, clinics, animal hospitals, restaurants or cafes, hotels,
boardinghouses or any similar use.
(3) Activities which qualify as no-impact home-based business as
defined in Article II, § 184-10, shall not be subject to the provisions
of this section. [Added 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360]
B. Home occupation regulations.
245. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1)(c), listing foster family care, was repealed
6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360.
246. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1)(e), listing home cooking and catering, was repealed
6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360.
247. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1)(i), listing home crafts, was repealed 6-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 360.
248. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1)(k), pertaining to other comparable uses, was
repealed 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196.
§ 184-72 LIMERICK CODE § 184-72
168:664
(1) The office, studio or rooms used shall be located in the dwelling in
which the practitioner resides, or in a building accessory thereto.
(2) The exterior appearance of the dwelling must be maintained as a
residence. No home occupation activities shall be visible from a
public street or from any neighboring property. No goods shall be
publicly displayed on the premises.
(3) No more than two outside employees, assistants, helpers,
subcontractors, etc., shall be permitted, unless authorized as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, considering the
size of the lot and the impacts upon nearby properties. [Amended
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
(4) Vehicular access improvements shall be provided by the
practitioner when a use generates more traffic than would normally
be expected for a residence, as determined by the Board of
Supervisors with the advice of the Township Engineer.
(5) When more than two outside employees are permitted by the
Zoning Hearing Board and/or when customers, patients, clients,
etc., will come to the property, the home occupation proposal and
use shall comply with the applicable requirements of Chapter 155,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(6) When more than two outside employees are permitted by the
Zoning Hearing Board, one additional off-street parking space shall
be provided for each employee, outside of the front yard area of the
property.
(7) When customers, patients, clients, etc., will come to the property,
one additional off-street parking space shall be provided for each
300 square feet of gross floor area devoted to the home occupation.
(8) One sign meeting the requirements for nameplates and
identification signs of § 184-92A herein shall be permitted for any
home occupation.
(9) (Reserved)249
(10) All home occupations in the Lewis Road Conditional Use Overlay
District shall comply with the requirements of Article XXXII and
§ 184-72. [Added 8-16-2011 by Ord. No. 325]
C. Special exception home occupations. The following home occupations
shall be permitted only as special exceptions subject to the
requirements of Subsection D below:
(1) (Reserved)250
249. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(9), regarding annually renewable permits for home
occupations, was repealed 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 328.
§ 184-72 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-72
168:665
(2) A barbershop and beauty parlor serving more than two clients at
one time.
(3) Tutoring of more than two students at one time.
(4) Group day-care homes, as defined in this chapter.
(5) Adult day-care homes, as defined in this chapter.
(6) Such other home occupations that the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board would meet the provisions
of this § 184-72 and would be comparable in terms of scale and
impact to permitted home occupations. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 196]
D. Standards for special exceptions. All special exception home
occupations shall be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with § 184-43 herein and the following standards:
(1) All special exception home occupations must comply with the
standards of § 184-72B herein, except as specified below.
(2) For uses in Subsection C(1) through (3) above, a minimum of one
off-street parking space shall be provided per 200 square feet of
gross floor area of the office plus one off-street parking space per
employee. Such parking shall not be located within the required
front yard area.
(3) Family day-care homes and group day-care homes shall comply
with the following standards:
(a) The owner must be registered with the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare (DPW) and must demonstrate
compliance with all DPW regulations for such homes.
(b) The requisite outdoor play area shall be surrounded by a safety
fence or natural barrier impenetrable by children or small
animals.
(c) Outdoor play shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
(d) One additional off-street parking space shall be provided per
nonresident employee and one safe passenger unloading space
measuring at least 10 by 20 feet shall be provided.
(4) Adult day-care homes.
(a) Adult day-care homes shall meet the applicable standards of
the Department of Aging and all other state and Township
ordinances.
250. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1), listing the professions of lawyer, doctor and
dentist, was repealed 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360.
§ 184-72 LIMERICK CODE § 184-72
168:666
§ 184-73. Day-care centers and related facilities.
Child day-care centers, private nursery schools and kindergartens and adult
day-care centers, as defined herein, are allowed as a conditional use in any
district, except where permitted by right. All such uses, whether by right or
conditional, shall demonstrate compliance with the following requirements:
(b) One additional off-street parking space shall be provided per
nonresident employee and one safe passenger unloading space
measuring at least 10 by 20 feet shall be provided.
A. Child day-care centers, nursery schools and kindergartens.
(1) The operator must be registered with the Pennsylvania Department
of Public Welfare (DPW) and must demonstrate compliance with all
DPW regulations for such homes.
(2) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee
and one safe passenger unloading space measuring 10 by 20 feet
for each 10 children that the center is licensed to accommodate.
(3) When an off-premises play area is utilized, it must be located within
500 feet and be safely accessible without crossing at grade any
arterial street or other hazardous area.
(4) The requisite outdoor play area shall be surrounded by a safety
fence or natural barrier impenetrable by children or small animals.
(5) Outdoor play shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m.
(6) No portion of the outdoor play area shall be located less than 100
feet from an existing occupied dwelling without the owner's written
consent.
(7) Any sign shall comply with the regulations applicable to the district
in which the center is located.
(8) In any residential district, no day-care center in a freestanding
building shall be located within 500 feet of any other freestanding
day-care center, private nursery or kindergarten. Day-care centers
in schools or places of worship are exempt from this requirement.
[Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
(9) All other applicable requirements of this zoning chapter, the
Building Code, the Fire Code251 and all other applicable Township
and state ordinances shall be met.
B. Adult day-care centers.
251. Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Building Construction, and Ch. 84, Fire Prevention.
§ 184-72 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-73
168:667
§ 184-74. Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
Bed-and-breakfast facilities, as defined in this chapter, may be permitted
as a special exception in any residential district, as determined by the
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the standards of § 184-43 herein
and the following additional standards. Where permitted by right, bed-andbreakfast
facilities shall also comply with the following standards:
(1) Adult day-care centers must be registered with the Pennsylvania
Department of Aging and must demonstrate compliance with all
applicable regulations for such facilities.
(2) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee
and one safe passenger unloading space measuring 10 by 20 feet
for each 10 clients the center is licensed to accommodate.
(3) Any sign shall comply with the regulations applicable to the district
in which the center is located.
(4) All other applicable requirements of this zoning chapter, the
Building Code, the Fire Code252 and all other applicable Township
and state ordinances shall be met.
A. A bed-and-breakfast facility shall be permitted only in single-family
detached, owner-occupied dwellings.
B. The principal use of the property shall remain that of a single-family
residential dwelling.
C. No more than seven guest rooms may be offered on any individual
residential property.
D. One full bathroom (one toilet, wash basin, bath and/or shower) shall be
provided for each three guest rooms.
E. The length of stay for any guest shall be not more than seven
uninterrupted days.
F. Meals shall consist of breakfast only, and only for guests of the
establishment. Owners shall comply with all federal, state and local
requirements for the preparation, handling and serving of food.
G. Any amenities (swimming pool, tennis court, etc.) shall be solely for the
use of the resident owner and occupants of the facility.
H. The owner shall maintain a current guest register.
I. Area and dimensional standards shall be those that apply to a singlefamily
detached dwelling within the applicable zoning district.
J. One additional on-site parking space shall be provided per guest room
and shall not be located in the required front yard area.
252. Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Building Construction, and Ch. 84, Fire Prevention.
§ 184-73 LIMERICK CODE § 184-74
168:668
§ 184-75. Kennels.
Kennels, as defined in this chapter, are permitted as a special exception in
the R-1 District and in all nonresidential districts, except where permitted
by right, as determined by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with
§ 184-43 herein and the following additional standards:
§ 184-76. Adult uses.
Adult uses may be permitted as a special exception in the Heavy Industrial
District in accordance with § 184-43 herein and the following standards:
K. Any sign shall meet the requirements of § 184-92A herein for residential
nameplates and identification signs.
L. Each bed-and-breakfast facility shall be equipped with smoke detectors
and fire extinguishers in accordance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and with the
stipulations of the Township Fire Code.253 Guests shall be provided with
information regarding the floor plan of the building and the location of
emergency exits.
M. If the bed-and-breakfast facility is to be served by an on-site sewage
system, the owner must obtain written approval from the Township's
Sewage Enforcement Officer concerning the adequacy of the on-site
system to serve the increased demand resulting from the facility.
N. A bed-and-breakfast facility shall only be permitted in a building that
existed prior to 1940, although additions to such building may be made.
[Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
A. A minimum lot size of five acres shall be provided;
B. No animal shelter or runway shall be permitted within 100 feet of any
property line or 200 feet of any other dwelling.
C. The use shall be screened from adjacent residential properties, using
Screen Type No. 2, 3 or 4, as specified in § 155-27.1D of Chapter 155,
Subdivision and Land Development, to control noise and odor.
D. The total number of dogs permitted shall not exceed five per acre, not
including dogs under six months old.
A. No adult use shall be permitted to be located within 500 feet of an
existing residence, residential district, place of worship, school or
school property line, playground, park or any other adult use.
[Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
B. No adult use shall be considered to be a permissible change of use, in
conformance with Article VII, Nonconforming Status Properties, unless
the subject property is located in a district where adult uses are
253. Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Fire Prevention.
§ 184-74 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-76
168:669
§ 184-76.1. Group homes. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
Group homes are permitted within a lawful dwelling unit, provided that the
following additional requirements are met:
permitted and can be shown to comply with the regulations, standards
and criteria of this section.
C. Adult uses shall be housed in completely enclosed buildings, designed
and used in a manner which prevents the viewing of adult use activities
or materials from outside the building. No exterior display of products,
activities or shows shall be permitted, except for a sign which identifies
the name of the establishment and its hours of operation, in
conformance with the requirements of Article XII herein.
D. If any portion of a use meets the definition of adult use, then that
portion must comply with the requirements of this section.
E. The use shall not operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00
a.m. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
F. The application for the use shall list the full legal names and addresses
of all owners of the use and all shareholders of any company that owns
the use, in addition to the full legal name, address and day and evening
telephone numbers of an on-site manager. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 196]
A. See definition.254
B. A group home shall not include any use meeting the definition of a
treatment center.
C. See provisions for accommodations in § 184-44C.
D. The facility shall have adequate staff supervision for the number and
type of residents.
E. The applicant shall provide evidence of any applicable federal, state or
county licensing or certification to the Zoning Officer.
F. The group home shall register, in writing, its location, general type of
treatment/care, maximum number of residents and sponsoring agency
with the Zoning Officer.
G. Any medical or counseling services shall be limited to a maximum of
three nonresidents per day. Any staff meetings shall be limited to a
maximum of five persons per day.
H. A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided per on-site
employee, plus one space for every two residents of a type reasonably
expected to be able to drive a vehicle.
254. Editor's Note: See § 184-10, Definitions, "group home."
§ 184-76 LIMERICK CODE § 184-76.1
168:670
§ 184-76.2. Treatment centers. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
§ 184-76.3. Drive-through restaurants. [Added 4-6-1999 by Ord. No.
202; amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No.
334]
I. If a group home is in a residential district, an appearance shall be
maintained that is closely similar to nearby dwellings, and no sign shall
identify the use.
A. See definition.255
B. The applicant shall provide a written description of all types of persons
intended to occupy the use during the life of the permit. Any future
additions to this list shall require an additional special exception
approval.
C. The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing
Board that the use will involve adequate on-site supervision and
security measures to protect public safety.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions upon the use to protect
public safety, such as conditions on the types of residents and security
measures.
A. Drive-through restaurants will be only permitted in the MS Main Street
District; the Highway Commercial District Class II and Class III; the
Retail Business District; and the LLI Interchange Overlay District.
Drive-through restaurants will not be permitted in any other district.
[Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
B. Drive-through restaurants must meet the following standards:
(1) A minimum stacking area for eight cars shall be provided, including
the space at the pickup window.
(2) (Reserved)256
(3) Additional parking spaces will be required at a minimum of one
parking space for 100 square feet of gross floor area.
(4) Drive-through restaurants must meet all of the other requirements
of the district in which they are located.
(5) If a drive-through is located within 300 feet of the ultimate right-ofway
of Ridge Pike and located in the MS Main Street District then
all drive-through windows shall be located on a side and/or rear
building wall that does not have frontage on Ridge Pike.
255. Editor's Note: See § 184-10, Definitions, "treatment center."
256. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), providing that spaces not interfere with other
parking spaces or internal circulation on the site, was repealed 6-16-2015 by Ord. No.
360.
§ 184-76.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-76.4
168:671
§ 184-76.4. Mining uses and mining operations. [Added 4-22-2014
by Ord. No. 348]
Mining, as defined in Article II, § 184-10, shall be permitted in the HI Heavy
Industrial District, subject to the following regulations and requirements:
§ 184-76.5. Forestry. [Added 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360]
To encourage maintenance and management of forested or wooded open
space and promote the conduct of forestry as defined in Article II, § 184-10,
as a sound and economically viable use of forested land throughout the
Township, forestry activities, including, but not limited to, timber
harvesting, shall be a permitted use by right in all zoning districts, subject
to the following regulations and requirements:
A. Setbacks. Buildings and the outward edge which is part of any mining
operation within the Township shall be set back from property lines and
road frontages as follows: [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
(1) Front yard setback: 100 feet.
(2) Side yard setback: 100 feet.
(3) Rear yard setback: 100 feet.
(4) Setback from any residential building: 100 feet.
(5) Setback from road frontages: 100 feet.
B. Hours of operation. No mining operations conducted in the Township
shall commence operations of any machinery utilized in the mining
business, including motorized vehicles engaged in the business, until
7:00 a.m., and all such operations shall cease by 5:00 p.m., prevailing
time, Monday through Friday only.
C. Exterior storage. Any exterior storage of mining product or byproduct
shall comply with all recognized fire standards and safety standards
and shall be screened from view with the planting of an appropriate
evergreen screen.
D. Deliveries or transport to and from the site. No deliveries to the location
or transportation of product or byproduct of the mining operation shall
be conducted except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, Monday through Friday only.
E. External illumination. Any external illumination to be placed on the site
as part of or to assist in the mining operation shall be shielded from
direct visual observation on any adjoining property or along any
adjacent roadway.
F. (Reserved)257
257. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection F, Signage and retail operations, was repealed
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379.
§ 184-76.4 LIMERICK CODE § 184-76.5
168:672
A. Hours of operation. No forestry operations conducted in the Township
shall commence operations of any machinery utilized in the forestry
business, including motorized vehicles engaged in the business, outside
the permitted hours in accordance with Limerick Township Chapter 72,
Construction Activities.
B. All outside agency approvals shall be obtained prior to commencing of
forestry activities.
§ 184-76.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-76.5
168:673

ARTICLE X
Performance Standards
§ 184-77. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to reduce or avert adverse environmental
impacts caused by use and/or development of land in the Township. In
addition, it is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-78. Calculation of site capacity.
Land use and/or development shall be regulated by a calculation of site
capacity according to the net buildable acreage concept. The applicant shall
determine the net buildable acreage using the following method and submit
sufficient evidence in the form of plans and data to verify the calculations:
A. Provide standards to control the amount and type of open space and
pervious and impervious surfaces within developments.
B. Control the intensity of development in areas of sensitive natural
resources.
C. Minimize the adverse impacts of development on the Township's roads,
air quality, water supplies and existing neighborhoods.
D. Apply these standards to all activities in all zoning districts within the
Township, except where noted in this article.
A. Net buildable acreage calculations: [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 327]
From the gross acreage of the site, subtract the following:
Existing road rights-of-way acres
Ultimate rights-of-way of existing
road
acres
Noncontiguous land acres
100% of floodplain land acres
100% of wetlands acres
100% of ponds or lakes acres
50% of slopes from 15% to 25% acres
85% of slopes over 25% acres
50% of existing utility rights-ofway
acres
The result is net buildable acreage
(NBA)
acres
B. In the calculations in Subsection A above, the following shall apply:
§ 184-77 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-78
168:675
§ 184-79. Cluster development standards.
(1) Land separated by roads or railroads or land where the connecting
link is less than 50 feet wide is noncontiguous land.
(2) The identified floodplain area shall be determined in accordance
with the provisions of the Limerick Township’s Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance. [Amended 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 364]
(3) Where two or more categories overlap, the overlapping acreage
shall be counted only once, using the most restrictive classification.
(4) Utility corridors owned in fee simple by the utility shall not be
counted towards the applicant's land area.
C. Density calculations. To determine the number of units permitted on a
given site, multiply the net buildable acreage by the permitted density
listed in the standards for each zoning district, rounding to the nearest
whole number. Density will differ within each district depending on type
of development (traditional, cluster or lot averaging) and the presence
of central or on-site water and sewer service.
A. Intent. The intent of these standards is to:
(1) Protect environmentally sensitive areas, such as floodplains,
groundwater recharge areas, steep slopes, woodlands, historic
features and other uniquely valuable sites.
(2) Provide more usable and suitable open space and recreation for
community residents than would normally be provided.
(3) Provide for a more creative, flexible and efficient pattern of roads
and utilities than would occur under traditional lotting.
B. Clustering is encouraged in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Districts.
The R-4 and R-5 Districts use the concepts of cluster development by
providing for common open space for higher density housing.
C. Open space. Open space in cluster developments shall meet the
requirements of § 184-82 of this chapter and the following additional
requirements: [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
(1) (Reserved)
(2) A buffer area at least 75 feet in width shall be provided along the
external road frontage of a cluster development. The buffer area
shall not be lotted out to homeowners and not included in the
setback areas.
D. Tract size; dimensional standards. The minimum tract size required for
any cluster development is 10 acres. All dimensional standards are
covered in the regulations for the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts.
§ 184-78 LIMERICK CODE § 184-79
168:676
§ 184-79.1. Unified development. [Added 9-3-1996 by Ord. No. 178]
§ 184-80. Lot averaging.
E. Water and sewer. All properties developed in accordance with the
cluster development regulations shall be connected to public water and
sewer facilities. [Added 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 249]
A. Whenever a landowner or developer undertakes the development of a
single tract which is situate in multiple residential zoning districts, the
owner or developer may submit plans with sufficient detail and in
accordance with Subsection E demonstrating the total number of
dwelling units permitted if each portion is developed according to the
district in which it is situate. The Supervisors, following consideration
and review by the Planning Commission, may permit development of
the entire tract as one unified development and intersperse the total
number of residential dwelling units throughout the entire tract so long
as the bulk, ground cover and dimensional requirements of the more
restrictive residential district shall be observed.
B. The unified development concept shall not be permitted for multitenant
or multiunit building usage.
C. The unified development concept shall be applicable only in the R-1 and
R-2 Zoning Districts.
D. The minimum tract size for application of the unified development
concept shall be 20 acres.
E. Section 184-78, entitled "Calculation of site capacity," and the net
buildable acreage concept shall be utilized to determine the total
number of dwelling units permitted.
F. Public water and sewer facilities shall be required.
G. Open space in accordance with § 184-82 shall comprise no less than
50% of the net buildable acreage of the tract.
A. Intent. The intent of these standards is to:
(1) Maximize lotting flexibility while protecting environmentally
sensitive areas without creation of significant common open space.
(2) Foster the preservation of agricultural uses and retain rural
character by allowing creation of large estate-type lots that are
suitable for agricultural purposes.
(3) Increase the variety and interest of single-family residential
development by providing for a wide range of lot sizes.
B. Lot averaging is encouraged in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential
Districts.
§ 184-79 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-80
168:677
§ 184-81. Protected areas.
Site alterations, regrading, filling or clearing of vegetation by a landowner
or developer which would violate the following standards shall be a violation
of this chapter. The landowner or developer is responsible for determining
the presence of the following natural features on the site and for meeting
the following standards:
C. Under lot averaging, minimum lot sizes and dimensional standards are
those permitted under cluster development, while densities are the
same as those permitted under traditional lotting. A minimum average
lot size is required to ensure a suitable range of lot sizes. Specific
dimensional standards are included in the regulations of the R-1, R-2
and R-3 Districts.
D. All lots capable of being further subdivided shall be deed restricted
against further subdivision by a deed of easement, which will designate
the owner, his heirs, successors and assigns as the grantee of the
easement and shall also designate Limerick Township as the third party
donee beneficiary. The restrictions of the easement shall be enforceable
either by the grantee, his heirs, successors and assigns or by the
Township.
A. Floodplains. All such lands shall remain as permanent green areas.
Floodplains are further regulated by the Limerick Township’s Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No.
196; 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 364]
B. Floodplain soils. In areas where a floodplain boundary has not been
designated, floodplain soils shall remain as permanent green area.
[Amended 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 364]
C. (Reserved)258
D. Woodlands. No more than 50% of any woodland may be cleared or
developed. The remaining 50% shall be maintained as permanent green
area.
E. Lakes, ponds, wetlands or watercourses. These areas shall be left as
permanent open areas. No development, filling, piping or diverting of
such areas shall be permitted except for required roads.
F. Lake and pond shorelines. These areas shall, to a distance of 100 feet
from the shorelines, contain no more than 10% impervious coverage. At
least 90% shall remain as permanent green area.
G. (Reserved)259
258. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Steep slopes, was repealed 6-18-2013 by Ord. No. 340.
See now Subsection I of this section.
259. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G, Drainage considerations, was repealed 3-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 364.
§ 184-80 LIMERICK CODE § 184-81
168:678
H. Permanent removal of topsoil. The permanent removal of topsoil from
any parcel of land shall be prohibited, except as follows:
(1) During actual construction on premises, that portion of the topsoil
present which covers an area to be occupied by permanent
structures or permanently located materials of an impervious
nature or ponds and lakes may be considered excess and may be
removed by the owner.
(2) During regrading operations conducted upon premises, whether or
not carried on in conjunction with on-site construction, excess
topsoil remaining after restoring proper topsoil cover (at least
eight inches) to the areas of the parcel upon which regrading
operations were conducted may be removed by the owner.
I. Steep Slope Conservation Overlay District. [Added 6-18-2013 by Ord.
No. 340]
(1) Definition and establishment of Steep Slope Conservation Overlay
District. The Steep Slope Conservation Overlay District is
established as all those areas of the Township with a slope of 15%
or more, referred to as "steep slopes" or "steep slope areas." This
district may be referred to as the "Steep Slope District." This
district shall not include man-made steep slope areas if the
landowner can prove that the steep slope is man-made and existed
before the passage of this Subsection I.
(a) Steep Slope Map.
[1] Areas of steep slopes shall be plotted on a map known as
the "Steep Slope Map," as determined from United States
Geological Survey (USGS) Maps to indicate the
approximate boundaries of the Steep Slope District.
[2] The boundaries shown on the Steep Slope Map may be
supplemented or modified by boundaries determined by
examination of one or more of the following sources in
accordance with the provisions set forth herein:
[a] Soil Survey of Montgomery County, Pennsylvania,
1967, USDA Soil Conservation Service.
[b] Contour maps prepared from aerial photography.
[c] On-site topographical survey prepared by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor.
[3] Changes in the boundaries of the Steep Slope District shall
be plotted as amendments to the Steep Slope Map when
feasible.
(b) Boundary delineation, interpretation, and appeals.
§ 184-81 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-81
168:679
[1] Applicants shall show the boundaries of the Steep Slope
District on plans, based on one or more of the sources
listed in § 184-81I(1)(a) herein. Steep slopes shall be
further divided into the following two categories:
[a] Slopes of 15% but less than 25%.
[b] Slopes of 25% or more.
[2] The Township Engineer shall decide whether or not the
Steep Slope District has been shown with sufficient
accuracy on the applicant's plans. Based on the Township
Engineer's advice, the Township Zoning Officer may
require applicants to revise the boundaries shown on the
plans.
[3] Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Township
Zoning Officer may appeal the decision to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
[4] The burden of proving the correct boundary shall be on the
appellant, supported by engineering and/or surveying data
or mapping, testimony of a soil scientist, or other
acceptable evidence.
(2) Overlay concept. The Steep Slope District shall be an overlay on all
zoning districts and shall function in accordance with the following:
(a) For any lot or portion thereof lying within the Steep Slope
District, the regulations of the overlay district shall take
precedence over the regulations of the underlying district.
(b) Should the underlying zoning of any lot or any part thereof
which is located in the Steep Slope District be changed
through any legislative or judicial action, such change shall
have no effect on the overlaying Steep Slope District unless
such change was included as part of the original application.
(c) Should the overlaying Steep Slope District be declared
inappropriate to any lot through any legislative or judicial
action, such change shall have no effect on the underlying
zoning district.
(d) All uses, activities and development occurring within any Steep
Slope District shall be undertaken only in strict compliance
with the provisions of this article, with all federal and state
laws, and with all other applicable Township codes and
ordinances.
(3) Uses permitted by right. The following open space and
conservation uses are permitted as "by right," provided that they
shall not include any structures, roads, driveways, parking areas,
§ 184-81 LIMERICK CODE § 184-81
168:680
construction, or other development, or grading, or clearing of
vegetation, unless it's on the Limerick Township Official Map:
(a) Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve, arboretum, and passive
park and recreation areas.
(b) Game farm, or hunting preserve.
(c) Forestry and reforestation in accordance with recognized
natural resource and soil conservation practices.
(d) Pasture and grazing land in accordance with recognized
natural resource and soil conservation practices.
(e) Outdoor plant nursery or orchard in accordance with
recognized natural resource and soil conservation practices.
(f) Cultivation and harvesting of crops in accordance with
recognized natural resource and soil conservation practices.
(g) Front, side, or rear yards, and required lot area for any district,
subject to the requirements of § 184-81I(8), Development
regulations, herein, and provided such yards shall not be used
for any use prohibited under § 184-81I(5) herein.
(h) Nonstructural accessory uses necessary to the operation and
maintenance of the above permitted uses.
(i) Pedestrian, bicycle and other trails designed for nonmotorized
use.
(4) Uses permitted by conditional use. The following uses shall be
permitted on slopes of less than 25% when authorized by the
Township Board of Supervisors as conditional uses, in accordance
with the conditional use standards and criteria in § 184-81I(7)
herein:
(a) Structures, roads, driveways, parking areas, construction, or
other development.
(b) Clearing of vegetation, or grading, including the addition of fill
composed of earth, rock, or inorganic construction debris.
(c) Sealed public water supply wells with approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(d) Sanitary or storm sewers and stormwater detention basins
with the approval of the Township Engineer and the
Department of Environmental Protection.
(e) On-site sewage disposal systems, when approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection.
(f) Public utilities.
§ 184-81 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-81
168:681
(g) Extractive uses and borrow pits in accordance with recognized
conservation practices and regulations of the State
Department of Environmental Protection.
(5) Prohibited uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
(a) On slopes of 15% but less than 25%:
[1] Removal of topsoil, except when related to a use permitted
by right or an approved conditional use.
[2] Solid waste disposal, recycling uses, junkyards, or other
outdoor storage uses.
(b) On slopes of 25% or more: all uses listed in § 184-81I(4)(a)
through (e) and § 184-81I(5)(a) herein.
(6) Conditional use application. For any use permitted by conditional
use in the Steep Slope District, excepting uses existing as of the
date of enactment of this article, an application to the Township
shall be filed with the Township in accordance with the following:
(a) For a use other than those permitted as 'by right," as stated in
§ 184-81I(3) herein, an application seeking approval by
conditional use shall be forwarded to the Township along with
any required studies, documentation, or information as set
forth herein.
(b) A plan by a registered professional engineer or surveyor which
accurately locates the proposed use with respect to the Steep
Slope District boundaries and existing development within 200
feet of the proposed use, together with all pertinent
information describing the proposal, and a topographical
survey with contour elevations at no greater than ten-foot
intervals.
(c) The applicant shall provide a suitable erosion and sediment
control plan and supporting evidence for the site.
(d) Proposed modifications to the existing topography and
vegetative cover, as well as the means of accommodating
stormwater runoff.
(e) Documentation of any additional engineering and/or
conservation techniques designed to alleviate environmental
problems created by the proposed activities, in compliance
with the Township's sedimentation and erosion control
regulations.
(f) The following, as deemed necessary by the Township:
[1] Typical tract cross sections at a scale of one inch equals
100 feet, or larger, and/or typical tract cross sections at a
§ 184-81 LIMERICK CODE § 184-81
168:682
vertical and horizontal scale deemed appropriate by the
Township Engineer.
[2] Specifications of building materials and construction,
including filling, grading, materials storage, water supply,
and sewage disposal facilities.
(7) Conditional use standards and criteria. In considering a conditional
use application, the Township shall consider the following:
(a) That the use is one which is permitted as a conditional use in
§ 184-81I(4) herein.
(b) The design standards as set forth in Limerick Township
Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
(c) The erosion and sediment control plan submitted with the
application, drawn in accordance with Limerick Township
Chapter 147, Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Grading Control,
and Limerick Township Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(d) Abutting property shall not be adversely affected by runoff or
erosion from the proposed use.
(e) The need for a forestry woodland management plan on wooded
steep slope areas.
(f) Evidence that:
[1] Proposed buildings or structures are of sound engineering
design and that footings are designed to extend to stable
soil and/or bedrock and that the proposal will be sound
from architectural, engineering, and environmental
perspectives and will have no adverse impacts on the
health, safety, and welfare of the community.
[2] Proposed roads, drives, and parking areas are designed so
that land clearing and/or grading will not cause
accelerated erosion. Both vertical and horizontal
alignment for such facilities shall be so designed that
hazardous conditions are not created.
[3] Alternative placements on non-steep-slope areas were
carefully evaluated for structures, including buildings,
retaining walls, swimming pools, roads, access driveways,
parking facilities, and other development, and can be
shown to be inappropriate or infeasible to the satisfaction
of the Township.
[4] Proposed on-lot sewage disposal facilities are properly
designed and constructed in conformity with applicable
health regulations.
§ 184-81 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-81
168:683
[5] Proposed nonagricultural displacement of soil is for
purposes consistent with the intent of this Subsection I
and will be executed in a manner that will not cause
erosion or other unstable conditions.
[6] Surface runoff water will not create unstable conditions,
including erosion, and that appropriate stormwater
management facilities will be constructed as necessary.
(8) Development regulations. The following regulations shall apply to
all proposals within the Steep Slope District:
(a) All setback requirements for the underlying zoning district
shall be met by the proposed application for development of
the site.
(b) All structures, roads, driveways, parking areas, grading,
construction, and other development, and cleaning of
vegetation shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the
boundary of the Steep Slope District, unless otherwise
approved as part of a conditional use application or shown on
the Limerick Township Official Map.
(c) No building lot shall be created unless it contains sufficient
buildable area with slopes less than 25%. If it is infeasible to
provide this buildable area in accordance with the setbacks
required by the underlying district, the lot area shall be
increased as necessary to provide a buildable area equal to at
least 1/2 the building envelope provided by the minimum lot
dimensional standards of the underlying district.
(9) Certificate of compliance. No steep slope areas shall be occupied
until a certificate of compliance and as-built plans have been
submitted to the Township by a registered professional engineer
and/or land surveyor, as applicable, that the construction of any
buildings or other improvements or any other changes was
accomplished in compliance with this Subsection I.
(10) Limit of municipal liability. The granting of a zoning use permit or
the approval of a subdivision or land development plan on or near
the Steep Slope District shall not constitute a representation,
guaranty, or warranty of any kind by the Township or any official or
employee thereof regarding the practicability or safety of the
proposed use and shall not create liability upon the Township, its
officials, or its employees. Protections provided by this Subsection I
are reasonable for regulatory purposes and are based on
engineering and scientific studies. This subsection does not imply
that areas outside the Steep Slope District are free from the
adverse effects of erosion and sedimentation. [Amended
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
§ 184-81 LIMERICK CODE § 184-81
168:684
§ 184-81.1. Landscaping and buffers. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No.
196; amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
Any new principal nonresidential use or any expansion of such use involving
over 3,000 square feet in total building floor area shall comply with the
following sections of the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,260 regardless of whether the application would be a subdivision
or a land development: §§ 155-16C, 155-27, 155-27.1, 155-27.2 and
155-27.3.
§ 184-82. Open space. [Amended 6-17-1997 by Ord. No. 187]
When open space is required to be permanently preserved for common
benefit and use by the requirements of this chapter, the regulations of the
chapter shall apply.
(11) Nonconforming uses or structures. Following the adoption of this
article, any existing use or structure which is situated within the
boundaries of the Steep Slope District and which does not conform
to the permitted uses specified in § 184-81I(3) or § 184-81I(4) of
this article shall become a nonconforming use or structure,
regardless of its conformance to the district in which it is located
without consideration of this article. However, the Township shall
enforce the standards contained in § 184-81I(7) of this article to the
expansion or continuance of said nonconforming use or structure,
to the extent permitted by law.
A. Open space shall be so designated on the plans, and such designation
shall include the category and description of the open space (as
hereinafter set forth) along with the notation "Open space shall not be
separately sold and shall not be further subdivided or developed."
B. Open space categories. Open space shall be identified in accordance
with the following categories, or by such other categories as the Board
of Supervisors, following recommendation by the Planning Commission,
shall so designate:
(1) Active open space (OS-1). Areas so designated shall be usable for
such activities as sports, ballfields, hockey fields, exercise courses,
walking, biking, jogging, playgrounds and similar open air
recreation activities. Open space must be fully maintained and
mowed and shall not interfere with adjacent dwelling units, other
buildings, parking, driveways and/or roads.
(2) Passive open space (OS-2). Areas so designated shall be usable for
such activities as picnic groves and walking paths. Open areas
must be fully maintained and mowed.
260. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 184-81 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-82
168:685
(3) Untended open space (OS-3). Areas so designated shall be left in a
natural state and shall include woodlands, wetlands, lakes, ponds,
streams, rivers, floodplains (as defined elsewhere in this chapter),
slopes (exceeding 15% as delineated by the Montgomery County
Soil Survey or by accurate contour mapping as confirmed by the
Township Engineer). Walkways and nature paths may be provided.
No maintenance or mowing shall be provided.
(4) Agricultural open space (OS-4). Areas so designated shall be
utilized for farming and agricultural purposes, including the
keeping of animals. Maintenance shall be in accordance with
standardly accepted agricultural practices and shall not be the
responsibility of the Township.
(5) Buffering open space (OS-5). Areas so designated shall be either
left in a natural state as described in § 184-82B(3) above or be
maintained and mowed, as the Township shall so designate.
Buffering open space shall be designated along the setbacks or
perimeter of the development.
(6) Connecting/greenway open space (OS-6). Areas so designated shall
connect adjacent, abutting or contiguous open space parcels by
means such as walking, biking or equestrian trails for access. The
operation of motorized vehicles, other than those operated for
maintenance, shall not be permitted on areas so designated.
C. Stormwater detention basins shall not be counted toward minimum
open space requirements unless the basin is a preexisting natural water
body such as a stream or pond.
D. The open space shall be acceptable to and approved by the Board of
Supervisors in conjunction with final plan approval. Upon consideration
of a plan, the Board of Supervisors may further refine the category(ies)
and description(s) of open space as applied to the particular plan.
E. Open space design guidelines. In making determinations with respect
to the issue of satisfactory preservation of open space, the Board of
Supervisors may consider but not be limited by the following principles
or factors:
(1) Open space shall be consistent with the Township's Comprehensive
Plan.
(2) Wherever practicable, open space shall be designed as a
continuous system of areas, interspersed among groupings of
residential dwelling units.
(3) Wherever possible, open space shall be interconnected with open
space areas on abutting parcels.
(4) Open space shall be provided with safe and convenient access by
adjoining public road frontage or other rights-of-way or easements
§ 184-82 LIMERICK CODE § 184-82
168:686
capable of accommodating pedestrian, bicycle and maintenance
vehicle traffic and containing appropriate access improvements.
(5) Sufficient perimeter parking shall be provided when necessary.
(6) Open space shall be comprised of areas not less than 75 feet in
width, except that:
(a) Trails with right-of-way widths of at least 25 feet may comprise
up to 15% of the required open space area; and
(b) Individual tot-lots or playgrounds may be included in the
required open space area.
(7) Open space shall include at least one contiguous area to contain
not less than 30% of all required open space areas, which is
generally suitable and improved for OS-1 or OS-2 uses.
(8) Open space shall be comprised of not more than 50% floodplain
and/or steep slope areas which are 15% or greater.
(9) Open space shall be conveniently located for access by potential
users.
(10) Open space shall not be divided by crossing of public or private
roads except where necessary for proper traffic circulation, upon
recommendation of the Township Engineer and Planning
Commission.
(11) Fuel, power and other utility lines, whether underground or
overhead, shall comprise no more than 40% of the required open
space area. Furthermore, land within utility easements may be
used for open space purposes only if the utility companies
possessing legal rights to these easements do not prohibit their use
for such purposes.
F. Provision for ownership and maintenance of open space shall be made
in a manner so as to ensure its preservation, which shall be
accomplished in one of the following ways:
(1) The developer shall offer the open space for dedication for public
use and maintenance, free and clear of any conditions, liens or
encumbrances if required by the Township. However, the Township
need not require that the open space be dedicated nor accept a
dedication of the open space if offered.
(2) With permission of the Township, and with appropriate deed
restrictions in favor of the Township and in language acceptable to
the Township Solicitor, the developer may transfer the fee simple
title in the open space, or a portion thereof, to a private, nonprofit
organization among whose purposes is the conservation of open
space land and/or natural resources, provided that:
§ 184-82 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-82
168:687
(a) The organization is acceptable to the Township and is a bona
fide conservation organization with a perpetual existence.
(b) The conveyance contains appropriate provision for proper
retransfer or reverter in the event that the organization
becomes unable or unwilling to continue to carry out its
functions.
(c) A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Township is
entered into by the developer, organization and Township.
(3) If the Township does not require dedication or permit transfer to a
conservation organization as provided in Subsection F(2) hereof,
the developer shall provide for and establish an organization for
the ownership and maintenance of the common open space
consistent with the requirements for unit owners' associations
found in the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa. C.S.
§ 3103 et seq., or the Pennsylvania Uniform Planned Community
Act, 68 Pa. C.S. § 5101 et seq. Such common open space shall be
managed according to the requirements of § 184-67 of the Limerick
Township Zoning Ordinance. If such an organization is created, the
deeds and agreements of sale for the common open space and for
all individual lots within the tract shall contain the following
requirements in language acceptable to the Township Solicitor:
(a) Such organization shall not dispose of the common open space
by sale or otherwise except to the Township or other
governmental body, unless the Township has given prior
approval. Such transfer shall be made only to another
organization which shall maintain the common open space in
accordance with this chapter.
(b) The organization and all lot owners within the development
shall agree to be bound by the provisions of Section 705(f)(1)
through (6) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 10705(f)(1) through (6), relating to Township maintenance of
deteriorating open space and providing for the ability of the
Township to assess and lien the properties within the
development.
(c) All lot owners within the development shall be required to
become members of the organization and pay assessments for
the maintenance of the common open space, which assessment
may be increased for inflation and which may provide for
professional management.
(d) The Township may require the formation of a reserve fund to
cover capital improvements to the common open space.
G. Following acceptance of open space dedicated to the Township, upon
appropriate public notice, the Board of Supervisors may hold a public
§ 184-82 LIMERICK CODE § 184-82
168:688
§ 184-83. Industrial standards.
All permitted uses within the Township shall comply with these standards
wherever applicable:
hearing and, upon finding it appropriate, pass a resolution to change
a category of open space applied to such lands to a less intensive
category as set forth herein.
A. Air pollution controls. All uses shall comply with the standards of the
Air Pollution Control Act, 35 P.S. §§ 4001 through 4015, as amended,
and the following standards:
(1) Visible emissions. Visible air contaminants shall not be emitted in
such a manner that the opacity of the emissions is equal to or
greater than 20% for a period or periods aggregating more than
three minutes in any one hour, or equal to or greater than 60% at
any time, and shall comply with Pennsylvania Code Title 25,
Chapter 127A(7), or its most recent update.
(2) Particulate, vaporous and gaseous emissions. No person shall
cause, suffer or permit the emission of fugitive particulate,
vaporous or gaseous matter from any source in such a manner that
the emission is visible or detectable outside the property of the
person where the source is being generated.
(3) Hazardous air emission. All emissions shall comply with National
Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants promulgated by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the
Federal Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7412) as promulgated in 40 CFR
61, or its most recent update.
(4) Odor.
(a) No person shall cause, suffer or permit the emission into the
outdoor atmosphere of any malodorous air contaminants from
any source in such a manner that the malodors are detectable
outside the property of the person where the source is being
generated.
(b) The prohibition on odors shall not apply to odor emissions
arising from the premise of a farm operation.
(c) Any process which causes an odor emission shall be operated
in a manner such that escaping odors are eliminated. Backup
odor reduction equipment shall be maintained to support
primary odor reduction equipment.
B. Noise control. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
(1) No use shall generate a sound level exceeding the maximum limits
established in the following table, as measured at the specified
locations: [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
§ 184-82 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-83
168:689
Location Receiving
the Noise Hours of the Day
Maximum Sound
Level in
(A)Weighted
Decibels
At a lot line of a
residential use in a
residential district or
an institutional use
(1) Monday through
Friday, 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
Saturday and Sunday,
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(1) 67 dB(A)
(2) Monday through
Friday, 8:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
Saturday and Sunday,
6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
(2) 57 dB(A)
At a lot line of an
industrial use in an
industrial district
All hours 72 dB(A)
At any other lot line of
a lot
All hours 69 dB(A)
(2) To measure the above noise levels, a sound level meter shall be
used that is capable of measuring A-weighted decibels and that
should have been designed in a manner consistent with applicable
standards of the American National Standards Institute or other
similar standards organization.
(3) Exemptions. The operation of tools, to include but not be limited to
gas-powered lawn or garden tools or similar devices used for the
purpose of mowing a golf course within Limerick Township, shall be
exempt from this chapter. [Added 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
C. Vibration control. No vibration which is discernible to the human sense
of feeling shall be perceptible without instruments at any point beyond
the lot line.
D. Glare or heat control. Any operation producing intense glare or heat
shall be performed within an enclosed building or behind a solid fence
in such manner as to be completely imperceptible from any point
beyond the lot lines.
E. Control of radioactivity or electrical disturbance. There shall be no
activities which emit dangerous or harmful radioactivity. There shall be
no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances)
adversely affecting the operation of any equipment located beyond the
property boundary of the creator of such disturbance.
F. Fire and explosive hazards. Flammable and explosive materials shall be
stored, used and transported in accordance with the applicable state
§ 184-83 LIMERICK CODE § 184-83
168:690
§ 184-84. Traffic impact analysis.
When a traffic impact analysis is required by this chapter, the standards of
this section shall apply:
and federal regulations regarding such materials and associated
storage vessels.
G. Outdoor storage.
(1) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, flammable or explosive
materials and raw materials shall be enclosed by a fence adequate
to prevent the access of children and other members of the general
public.
(2) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
or forces.
(3) All material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise be
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in
closed, sealed containers.
(4) (Reserved)261
H. Waste disposal. No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge
any treated or untreated sewage except as shall be approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection and/or the Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer, as appropriate; nor shall industrial wastes be
stored, discharged, incinerated or otherwise disposed of except in
conformance with the applicable state and federal regulations
regarding solid and hazardous wastes. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 196]
I. Electrical power. Every use shall be designed and operated so that the
service lines, substation, etc., shall conform to the most acceptable
safety requirements recognized by the Pennsylvania Bureau of Labor
and Industry, shall be so constructed, installed, etc., as to be an integral
part of the architectural features of the plant or, if visible from abutting
residential properties, shall be concealed in accordance with the
landscaping requirements herein.
J. Public water service. Industrial uses shall be served by public water,
where available.
A. A professional traffic engineer shall prepare the analysis.
B. Potential traffic hazards and/or congestion identified by the analysis
shall be avoided and/or mitigated in compliance with accepted traffic
261. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G(4), regarding storage of materials or wastes in a
floodplain area, was repealed 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 364.
§ 184-83 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-84
168:691
§ 184-85. Community impact analysis.
When required by this chapter, the applicant shall submit a community
impact analysis to identify the following:
engineering principles, subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors,
upon recommendation of the Township Engineer and Planning
Commission.
C. The traffic impact analysis shall include the following elements:
(1) Traffic impact on all roadways, intersections and interchanges
within a one-half-mile radius of the site.
(2) Description of traffic characteristics of the proposed development.
(3) Traffic volumes for average daily traffic at peak hours, before and
after proposed development.
(4) Source of trip generation rates used.
(5) Origin and destination analysis of projected traffic.
(6) Documentation of on-site and off-site improvements proposed to
mitigate any adverse impacts.
(7) All other information, findings, conclusions and recommendations
necessary to produce a complete analysis in compliance with
accepted traffic engineering principles and practice.
A. Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan of Limerick Township and
compatibility with existing and proposed adjacent land uses.
B. Impact on floodplains, wooded areas, steep slopes and other sensitive
natural features, if any.
C. Impact on public utilities, including sewage disposal, solid waste
disposal, water supply, storm drainage and electric utilities.
D. Impact on provision of police and fire protection.
E. Impact on the school district.
F. Impact on character of surrounding neighborhood. This section shall
include a visual analysis of the development as it will appear from
surrounding neighborhoods and major roads.
G. Documentation of on-site and off-site improvements proposed to
mitigate any adverse impacts on natural features, utilities and
municipal services or surrounding neighborhoods.
§ 184-84 LIMERICK CODE § 184-85
168:692
ARTICLE XI
Off-Street Parking Standards
§ 184-86. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to:
§ 184-87. Required capacity. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
Any building or structure erected, altered or used and any lot used or
occupied for any of the following purposes shall be provided with the
minimum number of parking spaces set forth below, together with adequate
driveways and street access in compliance with the standards set forth
in Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development. No parking shall be
permitted on any lot except within an improved parking space. Where a
use is not specifically listed below, the requirements of the most similar use
shall be applied. Required parking spaces shall be kept available for parking
and shall not be used for other purposes.
Use
Requirement
(number of spaces)
Single-family dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Other dwellings not listed
separately
1 per studio unit; 2 per unit for any other
unit1
Retirement community or
senior housing
1 per dwelling unit
Tourist home, boarding- or
rooming house or bed-andbreakfast
2, plus 1 per rental unit
Place of worship or public
auditorium
1 per 4 seats
Community center, library or
public building
1 per 500 square feet gross floor area
Elementary or intermediate
school2
1.75 per classroom
High school2 5 per classroom
A. Set reasonable standards to assure sufficient parking capacity for the
uses of land in the Township.
B. Provide flexibility in the implementation of these standards by
permitting construction of a reduced number of parking spaces under
appropriate conditions.
C. Prevent hazards to public safety caused by the intrusion of parking
upon public rights-of-way.
§ 184-86 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-87
168:693
Use
Requirement
(number of spaces)
Hospital, nursing home,
rehabilitation center or
institutional home
1 per 2 beds, plus 1 per employee
Membership club
(nonresidential)
1 per 6 members of total designed capacity,
plus overflow parking (on lawn or field) for
100 cars. Restaurants or other public
facilities shall be treated as separate uses
for parking calculations.
Indoor recreation
Bowling alley 5 per lane
Court for racquet sports 2 per court
Sports club/health spa,
billiard room, etc.
1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Outdoor recreation
Golf course 3 per hole, plus 1 per employee. Any area
for restaurant, clubhouse, etc., shall be
treated as a separate use for parking
calculations.
Ballfield or other outdoor
court
1 per 4 persons of total designed capacity
Medical/dental office 7 per doctor and/or technician, plus 1 per
additional employee
Retail store 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Personal service shop 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
devoted to customer service, plus 1 per
employee
Shopping center or
supermarket
1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Bank or financial institution
Without drive-in 6 per teller window
With drive-in 6 per inside teller window, plus 3 per selfservice
facility
Indoor theater 1 per 3 seats
Restaurant, bar or tavern,
banquet hall, etc.
1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area
Vehicle sales 1 per 500 square feet of indoor gross floor
area, plus 1 per 5,000 square feet of outside
sales area, to be set aside for customer
parking, and not used for display or storage3
§ 184-87 LIMERICK CODE § 184-87
168:694
Use
Requirement
(number of spaces)
Motor vehicle service/repair 3 per service bay
Gasoline service station 1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area or
3 per service bay, whichever is larger
Car wash
Full-serve 10 stacking spaces per washing space, plus
one per employee
Self-serve 5 stacking spaces per washing space, plus 1
per employee
Undertaking or funeral
establishment
1 per 4 seats or per 50 square feet of public
floor area, whichever is larger
Job printing 1 per employee on largest shift, plus 1 per
250 square feet of public floor area
Hotel or motel 1 per room, plus 1 per 200 square feet of
additional public floor area. Any restaurant,
bar, etc., shall be treated as a separate use.
Office 1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Warehouse or storage 1 per 1,500 square feet of gross floor area
or per employee on largest shift, whichever
is larger
Industry or research and
development
1 per 450 square feet of gross floor area or
per employee on largest shift, whichever is
larger
Newspaper publishing 1 per 450 square feet of gross floor area or
per employee on largest shift, whichever is
larger
Veterinarian, animal hospital
or kennel
7 per doctor, plus 1 per additional employee
NOTES:
1 If, in addition to required off-street parking spaces, on-street parking
spaces equal to an average of 0.3 parking spaces per dwelling unit are not
available in front of the dwellings, then additional parking spaces equal
to 0.3 spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided in conveniently located
nearby off-street parking area(s).
2 All schools shall designate an area of level lawn or field for overflow
parking for special events, which shall provide at least 100 parking spaces
or one space per two students of total capacity, whichever is less. This area
may be on an adjacent property, if written permission is secured from the
property owner.
§ 184-87 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-87
168:695
NOTES:
3 Parking areas for vehicles offered for sale are not required to meet
minimum parking space and aisle width requirements, provided that there
is sufficient width to allow access by fire trucks throughout the lot.
§ 184-88. Reserve parking.
Where the requirements of this chapter specify a larger number of parking
spaces than the applicant anticipates a need for, the requirements of this
chapter may be reduced only by the use of the reserve parking method,
under the following requirements:
§ 184-89. Shared parking.
A. The total number of spaces required may be reduced up to 50% by the
Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the Township
Planning Commission and Township Engineer.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence of reduced parking needs to the
Township Planning Commission and Township Engineer for their
review.
C. A sufficient area of the applicant's site shall be held in reserve as green
space for construction of the remainder of the required spaces. All
stormwater engineering shall be designed based on total parking
requirements, including the reserve.
D. Parking capacity will be reevaluated by the Township Planning
Commission and Township Engineer should any change occur in the
use, ownership or size of buildings or number of employees. On the
recommendation of the Planning Commission and Township Engineer,
the Board of Supervisors may require the construction of the reserve
parking spaces.
E. The applicant shall provide a financial guaranty to cover the costs of
engineering and construction of the reserve parking spaces for a period
of 18 months following the construction of the initial spaces.
A. The parking spaces required under § 184-87 above may be reduced by
conditional use from the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors when
two or more establishments share the same parking area, whether on
the same lot or abutting lots, according to the following formula:
[Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 249; 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360]
(1) Calculate the minimum amount of parking required for each land
use as if it were a separate use.
(2) To determine peak parking requirements, multiply each amount by
the corresponding percentage in Table 1 below for each of the five
time periods.
§ 184-87 LIMERICK CODE § 184-89
168:696
(3) Calculate the column total for each time period.
(4) The column total with the highest value is the shared parking
requirement.
B. When shared parking is used, sufficient area shall be set aside for the
remainder of the required spaces, according to the requirements of
§ 184-87 above.
Table 1
Shared Parking Requirements
Weekday Weekend
Day (9:00
a.m.-4:00
p.m.)
Evening
(6:00
p.m.-
midnight)
Day (9:00
a.m.-4:00
p.m.)
Evening
(6:00
p.m.-
midnight)
Night
(Midnight-6:00
a.m.)
Use (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent)
Office/
Industrial
100 10 10 5 5
Retail and
public
community
60 90 100 70 5
Hotel/
Motel
75 100 75 100 75
Restaurant 50 1,000 100 100 10
Entertainment/
Recreational
40 100 80 100 10
(SOURCE: Montgomery County, Maryland, Planning Department,
1983, from Flexible Parking Requirements, Planning Advisory Service
Report No. 377.)
Table 2
Example of Calculations
Use Area Number of Spaces
Office 50,000 square feet 166
Retail 50,000 square feet 200
Hotel 75 rooms 75
Restaurant 5,000 square feet 50
Total Required: 491
§ 184-89 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-89
168:697
Weekday Weekend
Day Evening Day Evening Night
(9:00
a.m.-4:00
p.m.)
(6:00
p.m.-
midnight)
(9:00
a.m.-4:00
p.m.)
(6:00
p.m.-
midnight)
(Midnight-6:00
a.m.)
Use (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent) (percent)
Office 166 17 17 8 8
Retail 120 180 200 140 10
Hotel 56 75 56 75 56
Restaurant 25 50 50 50 5
Totals: 367 322 323 273 79
Shared parking requirement: 367 spaces or a reduction of 25%.
§ 184-89 LIMERICK CODE § 184-89
168:698
ARTICLE XII
Signs
[Amended 9-20-1994 by Ord. No. 166; 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196;
11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198; 10-7-2003 by Ord. No. 239]
§ 184-90. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-91. General regulations.
A. Recognize that signs perform an important function in identifying
properties, businesses, services, residences, events and other matters
of interest to the public.
B. Set standards and provide controls that permit reasonable use of signs
while restricting their potential adverse visual effects on community
character.
C. Encourage signs which are attractively designed in order to enhance
the economic value of the community's commercial and industrial
districts.
D. Link sign area to building size to ensure that signs are compatible with
their surroundings.
E. Control the size, number, location and illumination of signs to reduce
potential hazards caused by glare or obstruction of visibility and to
reduce visual clutter which results from competition among signs.
A. Placement of signs.
(1) All freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from
the curbline or outer edge of shoulder and outside the legal rightof-
way. If a building is located within the setback area, no
freestanding signs shall be permitted in front of the building.
(2) If it is necessary to relocate a sign located within a street ultimate
right-of-way because of road improvements, the relocation shall be
the responsibility of the property owner.
(3) No sign shall project more than four feet over a public walkway,
and any projecting sign must have at least eight feet of clearance
from the ground.
(4) A wall sign shall not project above the cornice of the building and
should not obscure architectural features of the building.
(5) No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to prevent free ingress
and egress to or from any door, window or fire escape.
(6) No sign shall be placed in a position as to create traffic hazards by
interfering with minimum safe sight distances, as specified in
§ 184-90 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-91
168:699
§ 155-15 of Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development, or by
causing confusion with official street signs due to color or location.
(7) All signs shall be constructed of durable materials, using
noncorrosive fastenings, shall be structurally safe and erected or
installed in compliance with the Township Building Code262 and
shall be maintained in a safe condition and good repair at all times.
(8) Illumination of signs. All signs may be illuminated unless otherwise
specified herein. Floodlighting of any sign shall be so shielded that
the source of the light shall not be visible from any point off the lot
on which the sign is erected and so that only the sign is directly
illuminated. No more than 1/2 footcandle of light shall be
detectable along the boundary of any adjacent property.
Illumination of signs shall be subject to the currently adopted
Electrical Code.263
(a) Externally illuminated billboards and signs shall be lighted by
fixtures that shall be designed, fitted and aimed to limit the
light output to and not beyond the sign or billboard. [Added
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
(9) No off-premises signs shall be placed on any property without the
written permission of the owner of such property.
(10) Signs along state roads must meet state sign control requirements.
B. Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in any district:
(1) Permanent signs affixed to trees or utility poles or upon rocks or
other natural features, with the exception of "no trespassing" or
similar warning signs.
(2) Electronic signage is prohibited unless the electronic signage
complies with the following standards: [Amended 7-5-2011 by
Ord. No. 323]
(a) The electronic display of a sign may not change any more
frequently than one time every five seconds;
(b) Scrolling script, either vertically or horizontally, is not
permitted;
(c) Signs that move, rotate, oscillate, vibrate or shimmer are not
permitted;
(d) Signs that flash, scintillate or blink are not permitted;
262. Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Building Construction, and Ch. 73, Construction Codes,
Uniform..
263. Editor's Note: See Ch. 80, Electrical Standards.
§ 184-91 LIMERICK CODE § 184-91
168:700
§ 184-92. Signs permitted in all districts.
(e) Signs that change script electronically must have an
instantaneous change of script and not a gradual or scrolling
change of script;
(f) The entire electronic portion of the sign must change at the
same time, thereby preventing different portions of the sign
changing at different times;
(g) The degree of brightness shall not be greater than necessary
for adequate visibility.
(h) All signs containing electronic messaging must be a monument
type sign only and no higher than six feet from the ground
including the base and structure of the sign and no wider than
eight feet including the base and structure of the sign. The
height of the sign shall be measured in the same manner as the
height of the building.
(i) The base of the monument sign must be at least one foot from
the ground and no higher than three feet from the ground. The
base must have a stone or brick face on all four sides.
(j) The display area of the sign must have no more than 50% used
for electronic messaging with at least 50% of the display
reserved for nonelectronic signage.
(k) The above requirements are in addition to all other sign
regulations in the Zoning Code, and, if any other provision of
the Zoning Code conflicts with the above regulations, then the
above regulations shall apply.
(3) Vehicular signs.
(4) Off-premises signs, except as may be specifically permitted in
§ 184-93I. [Amended 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 323]
(5) Beacons or searchlights.
A. Nameplates and identification signs.
(1) One wall or freestanding sign per residence, indicating the name
and/or address of the occupant, not to exceed four square feet in
area and five feet in height, shall be permitted.
(2) Within a development of 10 or more dwelling units, one
identification sign shall be permitted where each street enters into
the development from an exterior street. Such sign may have two
faces, which may include one face on either side of the entrance
street. Each sign face shall have a maximum sign area of 32 square
feet. The sign may be attached to a wall, fence or similar feature,
§ 184-91 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-92
168:701
provided that the wall, fence or similar feature does not exceed
eight feet in height and 20 feet in length.
B. Directional or informational signs of a public or quasi-public nature for
the purpose of stating the name or location of a hospital, community
center, school, church, nonprofit or charitable organization, park, etc.,
or the name and place of meeting of an official civic or service body may
be permitted in any zoning district. Such signs shall not exceed six
square feet in area.
C. Additional signs in residential districts.
(1) A residence containing a home occupation may be permitted one
sign indicating the name, profession or activity of the occupant of
the residence, not exceeding eight square feet, by special exception
from the Zoning Hearing Board.
(2) One identification sign or bulletin board of a school, college,
church, hospital, sanatorium, municipal building, farm, estate, club
or any permitted use other than a dwelling, not exceeding 24
square feet in area.
D. A principal use permitted by special exception or conditional use (such
as a place of worship, golf course, nursing home, personal care center
or cemetery) in a residential district is permitted to include the
following signs:
(1) One identification sign per street frontage, which shall not exceed
40 square feet in sign area and 12 feet in total height.
(2) One wall sign on each principal building, which shall not exceed 10
square feet in sign area.
E. Trespassing signs and signs indicating private ownership, not to exceed
one square foot in area, to be spaced at intervals of no less than 75 feet
of street frontage, shall be permitted.
F. Official street and traffic signs and any sign required by law shall be
permitted.
G. Temporary signs.
(1) Real estate signs for sale of individual properties.
(a) One nonilluminated sign per street frontage, advertising the
sale or rental of the premises on which it is located, not to
exceed six square feet in size and six feet in height, shall be
permitted. Such signs may remain in place until the property is
no longer available for sale or rent, at which time they shall be
removed promptly.
(b) Unimproved properties other than residential with a minimum
of 150 feet of frontage are permitted one freestanding sign per
§ 184-92 LIMERICK CODE § 184-92
168:702
street frontage, not to exceed 32 square feet in area and 20
feet in height.
(c) Directional signs. One nonilluminated off-premises sign shall
be permitted for each home for sale, not to exceed six square
feet in size and six feet in height, to be removed promptly when
the property is no longer available for sale or rent.
(d) Open house signs (on- or off-premises).
[1] No more than one nonilluminated open house sign shall be
permitted on the property for sale.
[2] A maximum of three off-premises directional signs shall be
permitted for each home or group of homes for sale.
[3] Signs shall not exceed four square feet in area and four
feet in height.
[4] All open house signs shall be permitted no more than 48
hours preceding the open house and shall remain for a
period of not more than four days.
(2) Contractor's signs. One nonilluminated sign per contractor, not to
exceed six square feet in size and six feet in height, to be removed
within 10 days after the contractor has completed work on the
property, shall be permitted. Total signs for any property shall not
exceed 32 square feet.
(3) Development signs. Signs advertising or directing persons to new
development shall be permitted. Signs may be externally
illuminated. Development signs may remain in place until 95% of
all residential units are sold or leased or until 75% of all
nonresidential area is sold or leased, at which time, they shall be
removed or replaced with identification signs.
(a) On the property where the development is located or proposed,
one development sign per external street frontage, not to
exceed 32 square feet in area and 12 feet in height, shall be
permitted. See § 184-92A(2) above for permanent
identification signs.
(4) Temporary noncommercial signs. Temporary noncommercial signs,
such as political signs, religious signs, educational signs, civic
event signs, and any other noncommercial signs erected for
noncommercial purposes, shall be subject to the following:
[Amended 9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 371]
(a) Signs shall not be illuminated.
(b) Signs may not exceed six square feet in area and four feet in
height.
§ 184-92 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-92
168:703
§ 184-93. Signs permitted in commercial, office and industrial
districts.
(5) Special commercial event signs. Temporary, nonilluminated signs
erected for a commercial purpose, such as directing persons to
temporary exhibits, trade shows, grand openings, etc., may be
erected subject to the following requirements: [Amended
9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 371]
(a) One additional temporary sign may be erected at four
interspersed times during the calendar year, provided that
such sign shall be displayed for a period of not more than 30
consecutive days, and further provided that such permits shall
not be issued at intervals of less than 60 days.
(b) Total temporary sign area permitted per property shall not
exceed 35 square feet. Freestanding signs shall not exceed six
feet in height and shall meet the setback requirements of
§ 184-91A(l) herein.
(c) Signs on or in windows shall not exceed 25% of the window
area.
(d) An on-premises banner shall be affixed to a building or awning.
(e) A maximum of two off-premises directional signs, not
exceeding six square feet in area and six feet in height, shall be
permitted for any special event, provided that permission has
been obtained from the property owner where the sign is to be
placed.
(6) Temporary sign permits. All temporary signs that exceed six square
feet in area shall require a thirty-day permit, the fee for which shall
be determined by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The
maximum number of temporary sign permits allowed per parcel or
per unit is four in any twelve-month period for the calendar year.
(7) Signs advertising sale of farm products shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) One on-site sign may advertise the sale, with a maximum sign
area of six square feet. Such sign shall not be illuminated.
(b) Up to three seasonal signs may direct customers to the farm
products sale. Such signs shall be limited to sales within
Limerick Township. Each sign shall not exceed four square
feet.
(c) All signs shall be removed from public view during months
when the farm products sales are not underway.
H. Illumination. See § 184-91A(8).
§ 184-92 LIMERICK CODE § 184-93
168:704
A. Total amount of signage permitted per street frontage shall equal two
square feet per linear foot of building frontage, up to a maximum of 300
square feet. Only building facades that face the street frontage in
question shall be used in calculating sign area. For properties with
multiple tenants, the requirements of § 184-94 below apply.
B. Total sign area may be divided between a maximum of two signs per
external street frontage, which may be either freestanding or wall
signs, meeting the size requirements below.
C. Freestanding sign requirements. The sign area of a freestanding sign
advertising goods, services, etc., available on the premises shall not
exceed 40 square feet if located at the ten-foot setback line specified in
§ 184-91A(1). The sign area may be enlarged by one square foot for
each additional foot the sign is set back beyond this point, up to a
maximum of 50 square feet. Sign height shall not exceed 25 feet.
D. Wall sign requirements.
(1) Projection signs shall not exceed 15 square feet in area nor project
more than four feet from the wall of the building. At least eight feet
of clearance from the sidewalk to the bottom edge of the sign shall
be provided.
(2) Parallel signs may not exceed 20% of the building face area on the
frontage, up to a maximum of 250 square feet.
(3) A marquee sign (for example, on the canopy over gas station
pumps) may be substituted for one wall sign, provided that the area
of such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet per street frontage.
E. Additional incidental signs for the convenience and safety of the public
(for example, signs identifying parking areas, telephones, rest rooms,
etc.) not to exceed four square feet in size and containing no
advertising, shall not be counted toward total permitted sign area.
F. Window signs shall not be counted toward total permitted sign area,
provided that their sign area does not exceed 25% of the area of the
window.
G. Gasoline station signs. Gasoline and/or filling stations shall be
permitted one additional freestanding sign per property for purposes of
advertising current fuel prices only, not to exceed 16 square feet in size.
Such signs shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the nearest
access driveway.
H. Illumination. See § 184-91A(8).
I. Off-premises signs. Only the following off-premises signs shall be
permitted:
(1) An off-premises sign shall only be permitted in the HI and LLI
Districts.
§ 184-93 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-93
168:705
(2) An off-premises sign shall have a maximum sign area of 300 square
feet. An off-premises sign shall only be attached to another offpremises
sign if they are attached approximately back-to-back.
(3) An off-premises sign shall have a maximum total height above the
ground level of 25 feet.
(4) An off-premises sign shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from
any existing dwelling or any residential district and a minimum of
1,000 feet from any other off-premises sign.
(5) Off-premises signs shall not have electronic signage and must
contain a static message or copy. [Added 7-5-2011 by Ord. No.
323]
J. Directional signs. Signs indicating the location of a business
establishment or complex shall be permitted in any nonresidential
district provided that they be located on an arterial street, less than one
mile from the business. Such signs shall be a maximum of six square
feet in area with a maximum height of six feet and shall not be located
closer than 25 feet to any other directional sign.
K. (1) Sign review in VC District. Any application for a new sign with a
sign area greater than 10 square feet within the VC District shall
also provide information on the design of the sign for Township
review.
(a) As part of the application, the applicant shall provide a sketch
of the proposed design of the sign and state in writing the
proposed materials, colors and method of lighting.
(b) Freestanding sign requirements. The sign area of a
freestanding sign shall not exceed 35 square feet if located at
the ten-foot setback line specified in § 184-91A(1). The sign
area may be enlarged by one square foot for each additional
foot the sign is set back beyond this point, up to a maximum of
50 square feet. Sign height shall not exceed 25 feet.
(c) The sign must be compatible with the historic character of the
area and the historic features of the building.
[1] Signs should not dominate the building but should relate
in placement and size to the architectural elements of the
building.
[2] Signs preferably should not be internally illuminated.
[3] Signs should not cover windows or decorative
architectural features.
[4] Freestanding signs should be ground-mounted.
[5] Garish or Day-Glo colors should be avoided.
§ 184-93 LIMERICK CODE § 184-93
168:706
[6] Signs that have the appearance of relief-cut wood are
specifically encouraged.
(2) Signage for any proposed use in the Lewis Road Overlay District
shall receive conditional use approval per § 184-228I(12) for
materials/architectural design and shall be regulated in
accordance with Article XII, Signs, of this chapter, except to the
extent specifically modified or limited by the following: [Added
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
(a) Wall signs. The façade facing Lewis Road of each structure
constructed within 200 feet of the legal right-of-way of Lewis
Road shall be limited to total sign area of 100 square feet. No
such signage shall be internally illuminated.
(b) In the case of multiple uses on the same lot, the total permitted
sign area shall be governed by the regulations set forth in §
184-94, Requirements for multiple-tenant properties,
Subsection A, of this chapter.
(3) Signage in association with mining operations. Permitted signs
shall not exceed 12 square feet. [Added 8-15-2017 by Ord. No.
379]
L. These requirements apply to planned office and/or industrial parks
meeting the applicable requirements of the Office/Limited Industrial,
Limited Light Industrial and Heavy Industrial Districts. Total sign area
per street frontage need not be calculated; however, only the following
types of signs are permitted: [Added 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
(1) A freestanding identification sign of the monument type, with a
maximum area of 150 square feet and a maximum height of six feet,
shall be permitted at up to three primary entrances to the park.
Signs shall be located at least 15 feet from the curbline or edge of
pavement or on a median island, provided that they do not interfere
with required sight triangles.
(2) One freestanding directory sign shall be permitted at up to three
primary entrances to the park, not to exceed 50 square feet in area
and 25 feet in height, and meeting the setback requirements of
Subsection L(1) above. The sign shall identify not more than four
tenants of the lot. A directory sign with the names of more than four
tenants may be permitted if a pull-off lane is provided to allow
vehicles to safely stop while drivers are reviewing the sign.
(3) Each building shall be permitted one wall sign per street frontage
or one freestanding sign per street frontage. Sign area shall equal
two square feet per linear foot of building frontage, up to a
maximum of 300 square feet. Freestanding signs shall be of a
monument type, not exceeding six feet in height, and shall meet the
size limitations of § 184-93C above. Wall signs shall meet the size
requirements of § 184-93D above.
§ 184-93 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-93
168:707
§ 184-94. Requirements for multiple-tenant properties.
The requirements of this section shall apply to any lot with more than one
nonresidential tenant or business operation, including shopping centers,
office parks and other nonresidential complexes.
(4) Additional incidental signs for the convenience and safety of the
public, not to exceed four square feet in size and containing no
advertising, shall also be permitted.
(5) A coordinated system of street and traffic control signs within a
park may also be permitted with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors following review by the Planning Commission and
Township Engineer.
(6) All signs within an office and/or industrial park shall be designed
with a similar style and compatible materials to project a unified
appearance.
(7) Window signs shall not be regulated under the maximum sign area
provisions if they are not internally illuminated and they do not
exceed 25% of the total area of the windows along each exterior
wall.
A. For lots with more than one nonresidential tenant, with the exception of
shopping centers and office or industrial parks, total permitted sign
area per street frontage shall not exceed two square feet per linear foot
of building frontage, up to a maximum of 300 square feet. Sign area per
street frontage may be divided among the following sign types:
[Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
(1) One freestanding identification or directory sign is permitted at
each vehicular entrance to the property, except that signs along the
same street frontage shall be at least 500 feet apart.
(a) Sign area shall not exceed 40 square feet if located at the tenfoot
setback line specified in § 184-91A(1), but may be
enlarged by one square foot for each additional foot the sign is
set back beyond this point, up to a maximum of 75 square feet.
Sign height shall not exceed 25 feet.
(b) The sign shall identify the name and/or address of the property,
or not more than four tenants of the lot. A directory sign with
the names of more than four tenants may be permitted if a pulloff
lane is provided to allow vehicles to safely stop while
drivers are reviewing the sign.
(2) One wall sign shall be permitted on each building facade that faces
the street frontage in question. Wall signs shall meet the size
requirements of § 184-93D above.
§ 184-93 LIMERICK CODE § 184-94
168:708
§ 184-94.1. Signs permitted in LLI Interchange Overlay District.
[Added 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 330]
(3) All signs for multi-tenant properties shall be designed with a
similar style and compatible materials, to project a unified
appearance.
(4) Window signs shall not be regulated under the maximum sign area
provisions if they are not internally illuminated and they do not
exceed 25% of the total area of the windows along each exterior
wall.
B. For shopping centers, planned retail business centers or other
storefronts arranged in strip fashion, total sign area per street frontage
need not be calculated. The following requirements shall apply:
[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 328; 8-15-2017 by Ord. No.
379]
(1) One freestanding sign shall be permitted at the primary entrance to
the development and one additional sign at another location. Signs
along the same street frontage shall be at least 500 feet apart.
(a) Sign area shall not exceed 40 square feet if located at the tenfoot
setback line specified in § 184-91A(1) but may be enlarged
by one square foot for each additional foot the sign is set back
beyond this point up to a maximum of 75 square feet. Sign
height shall not exceed 25 feet.
(b) (Reserved)
(c) The sign shall identify the name and/or address of the property
or not more than four tenants of the lot. A directory sign with
the name of more than four tenants may be permitted if a pulloff
lane is provided to allow vehicles to safely stop while
drivers are reviewing the sign.
(2) Wall signs for multi-tenant buildings shall be permitted for each
tenant. Area may not exceed 20% of the building face on the
frontage, up to a maximum of 250 square feet. One sign shall be
permitted for each tenant. Sign bands are prohibited.
(3) Wall signs for pad sites. Signs on freestanding buildings within
such districts shall comply with the provisions of § 184-93D above.
(4) Window signs shall not be regulated under the maximum sign area
provisions if they are not internally illuminated and they do not
exceed 25% of the total area of the windows along each exterior
wall.
C. (Reserved)264
264. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Office and/or industrial park signs, was repealed
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327. See now § 184-93L.
§ 184-94 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-94.1
168:709
§ 184-95. Sign permits.
A permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer for all signs, except the
following:
§ 184-96. Nonconforming signs.
Any sign existing on the effective date of this chapter which does not
conform in use, location, height or size to the requirements of this chapter
shall be considered a lawful, nonconforming sign and may be continued.
A. Freestanding signs along expressway right-of-way: one for every 1,000
feet of frontage along the right-of-way with a maximum of two such
signs per development. Each sign may have a maximum area of 300
square feet, with a maximum height of 25 feet (measured from the
grade at the expressway right-of-way line at the point closest to the sign
location). All freestanding signs shall be set back 500 feet from
property lines of any existing dwellings or any residential district.
B. Freestanding signs at vehicular entries or at the intersection of public
roads serving as an entry to a development: one at each entry or
intersection, with a maximum area of 200 square feet per sign and a
maximum height of 20 feet.
C. Freestanding signs for individual buildings within the development
separated from other buildings: one per building with a maximum area
of 100 square feet per sign, and a maximum height of 20 feet.
D. Wall signs permitted for each building face: a maximum area equal to
25% of the area of the building face; provided, however, that in no case
shall the signage on any single building face exceed 400 square feet.
E. Marquee or canopy signs: maximum of 100 square feet per street
frontage; graphic treatment on such signs shall be permitted but not be
computed as part of sign area.
F. All other signs will be in accordance with Article XII, Signs, of Chapter
184, Zoning.
A. Real estate signs and other temporary signs not exceeding six square
feet in area.
B. Residential nameplates and incidental signs.
C. Other incidental signs not exceeding four square feet in area.
D. Official signs and "no trespassing" signs.
A. Such signs may be resurfaced, but shall not be structurally altered or
changed in overall dimensions, except to conform to the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 184-94.1 LIMERICK CODE § 184-96
168:710
B. A nonconforming sign shall be made to comply with the requirements of
this chapter when a sign frame is replaced or when the sign is relocated
or repaired.
C. If the nonconforming use is abandoned, then the signs on the parcel
must be brought into conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Any nonconforming sign structures that have either been destroyed and
not replaced, or abandoned for a period of one year, must be removed.
§ 184-96 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-96
168:711

ARTICLE XIII
R-1 Residential-Agricultural District
§ 184-97. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-98. Permitted uses.
On any lot in the R-1 District, any one of the following uses and no other is
permitted:
A. Permit continued operation of agricultural uses while allowing limited
and compatible residential development.
B. Encourage the retention of woodlands, hedgerows and other vegetation
to moderate the effects of storms, absorb pollutants and noise, shelter
wildlife and provide a diverse natural environment.
C. Direct lower density residential development to those areas of the
Township that are rural in character and not intended to be served by
public water and sewer.
D. Provide minimum lot dimensions compatible with the need for on-site
water and sewer.
E. Identify natural resources and provide standards for their protection,
especially as they relate to groundwater supply and recharge.
F. Promote the use of land and waterways for open space purposes where
appropriate because of location and/or natural characteristics.
G. Provide reasonable density and dimensional standards to permit use of
the land for residential purposes, including traditional and flexible
lotting standards.
A. Agricultural uses and farm buildings (with the exception of pig farms or
piggeries) meeting the requirements of § 184-71A(4). [Amended
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
B. Single-family detached dwellings.
C. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to the
principal use, as specified in § 184-71 herein.
D. Home occupations as specified in § 184-72 herein.
E. Public or private noncommercial open space, parks, playgrounds, totlots
and similar recreational facilities, if ancillary to residential
development.
F. Uses and structures owned or operated by Limerick Township or public
recreation facilities owned by Montgomery County or the state.
[Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
§ 184-97 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-99
168:713
§ 184-99. Conditional uses.
On any lot in the R-1 District, any one of the following uses, and no
other, may be permitted as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors,
according to the requirements of § 184-100 of this article and § 184-68
herein:
A. Public or private primary or secondary school. [Amended 6-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 196]
B. Place of worship, which may include one accessory dwelling unit.
[Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
C. Cemeteries.
D. Publicly owned recreation use or noncommercial athletic fields or a
swim club or a horse-riding academy or uses that the applicant proves
to the Board of Supervisors are closely similar. [Amended 6-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 196]
E. A golf course of at least nine holes in length, with an area of at least 50
contiguous acres, including a clubhouse and/or restaurant facilities.
F. A fire station, ambulance or other emergency services.
G. A summer camp, day camp or camping area, provided that no yearround
dwellings will be permitted except for a caretaker's or owner's
residence.
H. Public utility facilities customarily located in a residential district to
serve nearby residences, excluding cellular phone towers and related
equipment, and ground base cabinet structures. [Amended 6-2-1998
by Ord. No. 196; 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 324]
I. Day-care facilities as permitted by § 184-73. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 196]
J. Golf course residential community, according to the provisions of
§ 184-101C of this article. A golf course residential community shall
include a golf course, plus any of the following uses and no other:
[Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 210]
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(3) Single-family attached dwellings, with a maximum of three units
per building.
(4) Golf course uses, including the following: [Amended 8-15-2017
by Ord. No. 379]
(a) Retail pro shop and golf club repair facility.
(b) Golf teaching facility.
§ 184-99 LIMERICK CODE § 184-99
168:714
§ 184-100. Conditional use standards.
(c) Golf practice facilities, including driving ranges and putting
greens.
(d) Club house with locker and shower facilities.
(e) Golf shelter facilities and comfort stations adjacent to tees of
golf holes.
(f) Golf cart facilities and caddy shacks.
(g) Kitchen, restaurant, or snack bar, intended primarily for the
use of the golf course patrons. These facilities may serve
alcoholic beverages.
(h) Offices for administration, membership, or management of the
golf course.
(5) Health club or athletic club.
(6) Day-care facility. [Added 12-18-2001 by Ord. No. 236A]
A. For uses that generate 50 or more peak hour trips, a traffic impact
analysis shall be submitted, according to the requirements of § 184-84
herein.
B. Evidence shall be submitted that adequate sewage disposal facilities
will be provided in accordance with current standards and meeting all
state, Township and County Health Department requirements.
[Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
C. A minimum lot size of two acres shall be required for the following uses:
(1) Fire stations and emergency services.
(2) Religious uses.265
D. A minimum lot size of five acres shall be required for all other
conditional uses except where larger minimum lot sizes are required by
this chapter.
E. Outdoor active recreational uses shall be set back at least 50 feet from
any lot line or street right-of-way line and 100 feet from any existing
residential building on an adjacent property. Active recreation areas
shall be sufficiently screened and insulated so as to protect the
neighborhood from excessive noise or disturbances.
F. Dimensional standards.
265. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(3), regarding public utilities, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 206.
§ 184-99 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-100
168:715
§ 184-101. Development standards for residential uses. [Amended
11-8-1995 by Ord. No. 175; 9-3-1996 by Ord. No. 177; 6-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 196; 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 210; 12-18-2001 by Ord. No.
236A; 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 249]
(1) Buildings and structures shall meet the setback requirements for
R-1 residential development, traditional lotting, according to
§ 184-101 herein.
(2) Parking area setback shall be at least 25 feet from any lot line or
street right-of-way line.
(3) Maximum building coverage shall be 20% of net acreage.
(4) Maximum impervious coverage shall be 50% of net acreage or net
buildable acreage, whichever is less.
(5) Maximum height shall be 35 feet.
A. General development standards for residential uses shall be as follows:
[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
Standard Traditional Cluster
Lot
Averaging
Minimum tract size (acres) --- 10 ---
Maximum density (dwelling
units per net buildable acre)
0.451 0.50 0.45
Minimum lot area (square
feet)
80,000 40,000 40,000
Minimum average lot area
(square feet)
--- --- 75,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 225 125 125
Front yard (feet) 75 50 50
Rear yard (feet) 75 50 50
Side yard (feet, each) 50 25 25
Minimum common open space
(percentage of net acres)
102 35 102
Maximum building height
(feet)
35 35 35
Maximum building coverage
(percentage of individual lot)
10 20 10
§ 184-100 LIMERICK CODE § 184-101
168:716
NOTES:
1 Any lot of at least four acres that is held in single and separate
ownership at the time this chapter becomes effective may be
subdivided into two building lots, in compliance with all the other
development standards of this article.
2 For traditional lotting or lot averaging, all or a portion of the tenpercent
open space requirement may be waived by the Board of
Supervisors, based on the recommendation of the Planning
Commission and the Township's Open Space and Recreation Plan.
B. See § 184-61 of this chapter and the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance concerning flag lots.
C. Golf course residential development standards.
(1) Density and area criteria for golf course communities and
accessory uses. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
(a) A minimum tract size of 200 acres shall be required for a golf
course residential community. Land shown in a previously
approved subdivision or land development as reserved for open
space shall not be included in the minimum tract area.
(b) The overall permitted density shall be one dwelling unit per net
buildable acre.
(c) All residential uses within the golf course residential
community shall be served by public water and community
sewage disposal facilities, in compliance with § 184-55 herein.
Well water may be used for the golf course irrigation.
(2) Development standards for golf courses and accessory uses.
[Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
(a) Any proposed golf course shall have a minimum of 18 holes.
(b) The golf course shall be a minimum length of 6,200 yards,
measured from the center of the rearmost tee to the center of
the green of each hole.
(c) The golf course and accessory uses may be held under
separate ownership from the residential dwellings.
(3) Dimensional standards
(a) The dimensional standards for residential uses shall be as
follows:
§ 184-101 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-101
168:717
Standard
Single-
Family
Detached
Dwellings
Single-Family
Semidetached
Dwelling
Single-
Family
Attached
Dwelling*
Minimum lot
area (square
feet)
9,000 3,000 2,200
Minimum lot
width (at
building
setback line)
(feet)
70 30 26
Minimum
front yard
(feet)
25 25 20
Minimum side
yards (feet)
10 each 10 (one only) 10 (ends only)
Minimum rear
yard (feet)
30 30 25
Maximum
building
coverage (per
lot)
35% 50% 50%
Maximum
building
height (feet)
35 35 35
Ninety percent of dwellings must have a rear or side lot line
that abuts open space.
NOTE:
* A maximum of 30% of the total number of dwelling units
may be single-family attached or semidetached dwellings.
(b) The dimensional standards for all other accessory uses shall be
as follows: [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
[1] Minimum setback from the perimeter tract boundary: 50
feet.
[2] Minimum setback from an internal street: 25 feet.
[3] Minimum setback from a property line: 30 feet.
[4] Parking standards shall be in accordance with Article XI,
Off-Street Parking Standards, contained herein.
[5] Maximum building height: 35 feet.
§ 184-101 LIMERICK CODE § 184-101
168:718
(c) The dimensional standards for a day-care facility shall be as
follows:
[1] The day-care facility shall comply with all lot, area and
dimensional standards established by the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare (DPW) and § 184-73 of this
Zoning Ordinance.
[2] Minimum setback from the perimeter tract boundary: 50
feet.
[3] Minimum building and outdoor play area setback from an
internal street: 25 feet.
[4] Minimum setback from a property line: 30 feet.
(4) Open space standards.
(a) A minimum of 50% of the net acreage of the site shall be
preserved as open space.
(b) The proposed golf course and practice areas may be counted
toward the minimum required open space.
(c) The club house and other accessory uses may be counted
toward the minimum required open space, provided the area
for the club house and accessory uses does not exceed 5% of
the total open space. For purposes of the bonus units, the
accessory uses may not be counted toward the minimum
required open space. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No.
379]
(5) Required buffer yards.
(a) Buffers may contain required yards or land adjacent to golf
fairways, greens or tees, but shall not contain any buildings or
parking areas.
(b) A minimum fifty-foot buffer is required along all tract
boundaries.
(c) A minimum seventy-five-foot buffer is required along the
rights-of-way of abutting arterial or major collector roads. A
minimum fifty-foot buffer is required along the rights-of-way of
all other abutting roads.
(d) All buffers shall be landscaped according to the standards of
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.266
(6) A traffic study shall be required.
266. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 184-101 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-101
168:719
§ 184-102. (Reserved)267
(7) The applicant shall prepare a covenant running with the land, to
the satisfaction of the Township Solicitor, that requires that the
property identified as a golf course in the approved golf course
residential community remain as a golf course or open space in
perpetuity. This covenant shall be recorded in the Montgomery
County Recorder of Deeds office.
267. Editor's Note: Former § 184-102, Agricultural uses, was repealed 6-2-1998 by Ord. No.
196. See now § 184-71A.
§ 184-101 LIMERICK CODE § 184-102
168:720
ARTICLE XIV
R-2 Low Density District
§ 184-103. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-104. Permitted uses.
On any lot in the R-2 District, any one of the following uses, and no other, is
permitted:
§ 184-105. Conditional uses.
On any lot in the R-2 District, any one of those conditional uses permitted
in the R-1 District may be permitted as a conditional use by the Board of
Supervisors, according to the standards of § 184-68 herein and § 184-100
herein.
§ 184-106. Development standards. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No.
196; 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 249]
Development standards shall be as follows:
A. Provide flexible dimensional standards linked to the provisions of
public, common or on-site sewer facilities.
B. Encourage flexible and creative development standards, in order to
preserve open space, protect natural resources and reduce the costs of
provision of centralized sewer/water service and of road construction.
A. Agricultural uses and farm buildings (with the exception of pig farms or
piggeries) according to the development standards of § 184-71A(4)
herein, meeting the requirements of § 184-71A(4). [Amended
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
B. Single-family detached dwellings.
C. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to the
principal use, as specified in § 184-71 herein, and according to the
development standards of § 184-106 herein.
D. Home occupations as specified in § 184-72 herein.
E. Public or private noncommercial open space, parks, playgrounds, totlots
and similar recreational facilities, if ancillary to residential
development.
F. Municipal parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings and
uses deemed appropriate and necessary by the Township Supervisors.
§ 184-103 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-106
168:721
A. For residential dwellings, on-lot sewer, public water. (Any tract or lot
served by private on-site water shall meet the requirements of the R-1
District.) [Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
Standard Traditional Lot Averaging
Minimum tract size (acres) --- ---
Maximum density (dwelling units
per net buildable acre)
0.651 0.65
Minimum lot area (square feet) 60,000 40,000
Minimum average lot area (square
feet)
--- 55,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 125 75
Front yard (feet) 50 30
Rear yard (feet) 50 50
Side yard (feet) 25 each 15/40 aggregate
Minimum common open space
(percent of net acreage)
102 102
Maximum building height (feet) 35 35
Maximum building coverage
(percentage of individual lot)
10 10
NOTES:
1 Any lot of at least three acres that is held in single and separate
ownership at the time this chapter becomes effective may be
subdivided into two building lots, in compliance with all the other
development standards of this article.
2 For traditional lotting or lot averaging, all or a portion of the tenpercent
open space requirement may be waived by the Board of
Supervisors, based on the recommendation of the Planning
Commission and the Township's Open Space and Recreation Plan.
B. For residential dwellings, public sewer and public water: [Amended
12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
Standard Traditional Cluster Lot Averaging
Minimum tract size
(acres)
--- 10 ---
Maximum density
(dwelling units per
net buildable acre)
0.85 0.90 0.85
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
40,000 25,000 15,000
Minimum average
lot area (square feet)
--- --- 35,000
§ 184-106 LIMERICK CODE § 184-106
168:722
Standard Traditional Cluster Lot Averaging
Minimum lot width
(feet)
125 75 75
Front yard (feet) 50 30 30
Rear yard (feet) 50 25 25
Side yard (feet) 25 each 10/25
aggregate
10/25 aggregate
Minimum common
open space
(percentage of net
acreage)
101 20 101
Maximum building
height (feet)
35 35 35
Maximum building
coverage
(percentage of
individual lot)
10 25 25
NOTES:
1 For traditional lotting or lot averaging, all or a portion of the tenpercent
open space requirement may be waived by the Board of
Supervisors, based on the recommendation of the Planning
Commission and the Township's Open Space and Recreation Plan.
C. See § 184-61 of this chapter and Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance concerning flag lots.
§ 184-106 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-106
168:723

ARTICLE XV
R-3 Medium Density District
§ 184-107. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-108. Permitted uses.
On any lot in the R-3 District, any one of the following uses, and no other, is
permitted:
§ 184-109. Conditional uses.
On any lot in the R-3 District, any one of those conditional uses permitted
in the R-1 District may be permitted as a conditional use by the Board of
Supervisors, according to the standards of § 184-100 herein and § 184-68
herein.
A. Encourage medium density development outside of village centers in
areas of the Township where centralized sewer and water systems may
be logically extended, and in proximity to major roads and employment
centers.
B. Permit a broader range of dwelling types at the same base density.
C. Encourage compact and efficient development forms of development;
encourage clustering and lot averaging.
A. Agricultural uses and farm buildings (with the exception of pig farms or
piggeries) according to the standards of § 184-71A(4) herein, meeting
the requirements of § 184-71A(4). [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No.
196]
B. Single-family detached dwellings.
C. Twins or duplexes, provided that public sewer and water service are
available.
D. Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses), provided that public
sewer and water service are available.
E. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to the
principal use, according to the requirements of § 184-71 herein.
F. Home occupations as specified in § 184-72 herein.
G. Public or private noncommercial open space, parks, playgrounds, totlots
and similar recreational facilities, if ancillary to residential
development.
H. Municipal parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings and
uses deemed appropriate and necessary by the Township Supervisors.
§ 184-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-110
168:725
§ 184-110. Development standards.
Development standards shall be as follows:
A. For single-family detached dwellings with on-site sewage disposal and
public water: (Cluster and lot averaging options are not permitted. Any
tract or lot served by private on-site water shall meet the requirements
of the R-1 District.)
Standard Traditional Lotting
Minimum tract size --
Maximum density (dwelling units per
net buildable acre)
0.851
Minimum lot area (square feet) 40,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 125
Front yard (feet) 40
Rear yard (feet) 50
Side yard (feet, each) 25
Minimum common open space
(percentage of net acreage)
102
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum building coverage (percent
of individual lot)
10
NOTES:
1 Any lot of at least two acres that is held in single and separate
ownership at the time this chapter becomes effective may be
subdivided into two building lots, in compliance with all the other
development standards of this article.
2 All or a portion of the ten-percent open space requirement may be
waived by the Board of Supervisors, based on the recommendation
of the Planning Commission and the Township's Open Space and
Recreation Plan.
B. For single-family detached dwellings with public sewer and public
water service: [Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 249; 6-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 251; 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
Standard Traditional Cluster Lot Averaging
Minimum tract size
(acres)
-- 10 --
Maximum density
(dwelling units per net
buildable acre)
1.65 1.80 1.65
§ 184-110 LIMERICK CODE § 184-110
168:726
Standard Traditional Cluster Lot Averaging
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
20,000 15,000 15,000
Minimum lot width
(feet)
100 75 75
Front yard (feet) 40 25 25
Rear yard (feet) 30 25 25
Side yard (feet) 15/40
aggregate
10/25
aggregate
10/25
aggregate
Minimum common
open space
(percentage of net
acreage)
101 30 101
Maximum building
height (feet)
35 35 35
Maximum building
coverage (percentage
of lot area)
20 35 35
NOTES:
1 For traditional lotting or lot averaging, all or a portion of the tenpercent
open space requirement may be waived by the Board of
Supervisors, based on the recommendation of the Planning
Commission and the Township's Open Space and Recreation Plan.
C. For two-family and single-family attached dwellings, public sewer,
public water: [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196; 5-3-2005 by
Ord. No. 249]
Standard
Each Twin
Dwelling Unit
Duplex
Dwellings Townhouse
Minimum tract
size (acres)
10 10 10
Maximum
density
(dwelling units
per net
buildable acre)
1.80 1.80 1.80
Minimum lot
area (square
feet)
4,000 8,000 2,400
Minimum lot
width (feet)
30 60 24
Front yard (feet) 25 25 20
§ 184-110 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-110
168:727
Standard
Each Twin
Dwelling Unit
Duplex
Dwellings Townhouse
Rear yard (feet) 30 30 25
Side yard (feet) 10 (one) 10 (each) --
Minimum
common open
space
(percentage of
net acreage)
60 60 60
Maximum
building height
(feet)
35 35 35
Maximum
building
coverage
(percentage of
lot area)
40 40 40
§ 184-110 LIMERICK CODE § 184-110
168:728
ARTICLE XVI
R-4 Medium-High Density District
§ 184-111. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-112. Permitted uses.
On any lot in the R-4 District, any one of the following uses, and no other, is
permitted, in accordance with the requirements in § 184-114 of this article:
A. Encourage moderately high densities of development around village
centers in areas of the Township served by public, central water and
sewer systems and by major roads.
B. Meet the Township's obligations to provide a diversity of housing types
for a wide range of income levels and age groups.
C. Encourage compact development, thereby reducing the cost of
provision of public services.
D. Provide sufficient open space and recreational facilities to serve the
needs of future residents.
A. Single-family detached dwellings:
(1) Traditional.
(2) Lot line.
B. Two-family dwellings (twins or duplexes).
C. Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses or multiplexes).
D. Multifamily dwellings (garden apartments or flats).
E. Other dwelling types similar to the above may be permitted by the
Board of Supervisors under the development standards of the permitted
use that they most closely resemble.
F. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to the
principal use, as specified in § 184-71 herein.
G. Home occupations as specified in § 184-72 herein.
H. Public or private noncommercial open space, parks, playgrounds, totlots
and similar recreational facilities, if ancillary to residential
development.
I. Municipal parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings and
uses deemed appropriate and necessary by the Township Supervisors.
§ 184-111 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-113
168:729
§ 184-113. Conditional uses.
On any lot in the R-4 District, any one of the following uses, and no
other, may be permitted as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors
according to the requirements of § 184-68 herein:
§ 184-114. Development requirements.
Any tract developed for residential purposes under the development
standards of the R-4 District shall meet the following requirements:
A. Agricultural uses and farm buildings, according to the standards of
§ 184-71A(4) herein, provided that these uses are compatible with
existing neighboring development.
B. Those conditional uses permitted in the R-1 District, according to the
standards of § 184-100 herein.
A. Minimum lot area of 10 acres. Tracts under 10 acres may be developed
according to the requirements of the R-3 District.
B. Public sewer and water service shall be provided.
C. A single overall plan shall be required, although the plan may be
developed in separate phases.
D. Any development containing 100 or more dwelling units shall include at
least two of the permitted dwelling types, with each type constituting
no less than 15% of the total number of dwelling units.
E. A buffer strip at least 50 feet wide shall be provided along the ultimate
right-of-way of all abutting streets and along all tract boundaries. The
buffer strip shall include one of the following:
(1) Common open space, meeting the standards of § 184-82 herein.
(2) A landscaped buffer, meeting the standards of § 155-27.1 of
Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
F. Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses and multiplexes) shall
meet the following additional requirements: [Added 11-4-1998 by
Ord. No. 198]
(1) The maximum density shall be 4.0 dwelling units per net buildable
acre.
(2) Individual fee simple lots shall not be required. However, no one
square acre (208 feet by 208 feet) shall include more than 10
dwelling units.
(3) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum building width of 20 feet;
however, such width shall be increased to 24 feet if a dwelling unit
has garage doors for two or more motor vehicles facing onto and
visible from the front lot line or if more than 60% of the front yard
§ 184-113 LIMERICK CODE § 184-114
168:730
§ 184-115. Development standards.
See the chart at the end of this chapter.
in front of a dwelling unit is covered by paving. [Amended
6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360]
(4) No building shall be placed within the fifty-foot minimum perimeter
buffer area required by Subsection E above.
(5) The minimum front yard shall be 15 feet, which shall be increased
to 20 feet if any vehicle parking is provided in the front yard.
(6) Each principal building shall be separated by 30 feet from any
other principal building.
(7) Each dwelling unit shall have a usable rear yard area that is not
occupied by a garage and that has a minimum depth of 25 feet.
(8) The development tract, at the time of the completion of the
development, shall have a maximum building coverage of 50% and
a maximum impervious coverage of 60%.
(9) A minimum of 40% of the total tract area shall be preserved as
permanent open space.
(10) A maximum of six dwelling units shall be attached.
(11) If mailboxes cannot be placed on the fronts of individual dwelling
units, then they should be clustered in an orderly manner.
§ 184-114 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-115
168:731

ARTICLE XVII
R-5 Village Residential District
§ 184-116. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-117. Permitted uses.
On any lot in the R-5 District, any one of the following uses, and no other, is
permitted:
A. Encourage development of a range of dwelling types and densities that
are compatible with the density, scale and visual character of the
existing village setting.
B. Reinforce the village centers as focal points within the Township by
concentrating residential development around them.
C. Encourage a pedestrian-oriented circulation system within and around
the village centers by locating residential development within walking
distance of commercial and service centers and providing for open
space connectors between them.
D. Meet the Township's obligations to provide a diversity of housing types
for a wide range of income levels and age groups.
A. Single-family detached dwellings:
(1) Traditional.
(2) Lot line.
(3) Village house.
B. Two-family dwellings:
(1) Twins.
(2) Duplexes.
C. Single-family attached:
(1) Townhouses.
(2) Multiplexes.
D. Multifamily apartments.
E. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to the
principal use, as specified in § 184-71 herein.
F. Home occupations as specified in § 184-72 herein.
§ 184-116 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-117
168:733
§ 184-118. Conditional uses.
On any lot in the R-5 District, any one of the following uses, and no
other, may be permitted by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use
according to the requirements of § 184-68 herein:
§ 184-119. Development requirements.
Any tract developed for residential purposes within the R-5 District shall
meet the following requirements:
G. Public or private noncommercial open space, parks, playgrounds, totlots
and similar recreational facilities, if ancillary to residential
development.
H. Municipal parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings and
uses deemed appropriate and necessary by the Township Supervisors.
A. Agricultural uses and farm buildings, according to the standards of
§ 184-102 herein, provided that these uses are compatible with existing
neighboring development.
B. Those conditional uses permitted in the R-1 District, according to the
standards of § 184-100 herein.
A. Minimum tract area size. Developments under the R-5 District shall
have a minimum tract area size of 10 acres. Tracts under 10 acres may
be developed in accordance with the requirements of the R-3 Zoning
District. [Added 7-17-2001 by Ord. No. 230268]
B. Public sewer and water service shall be provided.
C. Where buildings front a public street, no parking shall be permitted
within front yards. The use of alleys is encouraged to provide vehicular
access to rear yards and avoid multiple curb cuts on streets.
D. Where single-family attached units or multifamily apartments abut
single-family or two-family dwellings, a screening buffer at least 20 feet
wide shall be provided along the property line between them, according
to the standards of Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
E. Any development containing 100 or more dwelling units shall include at
least two of the permitted dwelling types, with each type constituting
no less than 15% of the total number of dwelling units.
F. Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses and multiplexes) shall
meet the following additional requirements: [Added 11-4-1998 by
Ord. No. 198]
268. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated original Subsections A through E as
Subsections B through F, respectively.
§ 184-117 LIMERICK CODE § 184-119
168:734
§ 184-120. Development standards.
See the chart at the end of this chapter.
(1) The maximum density shall be 8 dwelling units per net buildable
acre.
(2) Individual fee simple lots shall not be required. However, no one
square acre (208 feet by 208 feet) shall include more than 12
dwelling units.
(3) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum building width of 20 feet,
however, such width shall be increased to 26 feet if a dwelling has
garage doors for two or more motor vehicles facing onto and visible
from the front lot line or if more than 60% of the front yard in front
of a dwelling unit is covered by paving.
(4) The minimum front yard shall be 15 feet, which shall be increased
to 20 feet if vehicle parking is provided in the front yard.
(5) Each principal building shall be separated by 30 feet from any
other principal building.
(6) Each dwelling unit shall have a usable rear yard area that is not
occupied by a garage and that has a minimum depth of 25 feet.
(7) The development tract, at the time of the completion of the
development, shall have a maximum building coverage of 50% and
a maximum impervious coverage of 70%.
(8) A minimum of 30% of the total tract area shall be preserved as
permanent open space.
(9) A maximum of 6 dwelling units shall be attached.
(10) If mailboxes cannot be placed on the fronts of individual dwelling
units, then they should be clustered in an orderly manner.
§ 184-119 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-120
168:735

ARTICLE XVIII
MHP Mobile Home Park District
§ 184-121. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-122. Permitted uses. [Amended 3-2-1993 by Ord. No. 152]
Within the Mobile Home Park District, property may be used for a mobile
home park, which may include the following uses:
A. Establish standards of performance for planned mobile home parks to
ensure their integration into the community.
B. Reflect the changes in the technology of home building and land
development.
C. Provide for a diversity in housing types and prices.
D. Create viable residential neighborhoods by allowing for a mix of
housing types in close proximity to the Main Street District. [Added
6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 367]
E. Promote pedestrian connections between residential and commercial
areas. [Added 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 367]
A. Residential uses. A mobile home park may include single- or doublewidth
mobile homes, single-family detached modular homes,
conventionally built single-family detached homes and lot line homes or
a combination of these, but shall not include travel trailers or motor
homes. No more than 40% of the total number of dwelling units in a
mobile home park may be conventionally built single-family detached or
lot line homes.
B. The following accessory uses for the uses of mobile home park
residents shall be permitted only as part of an approved development
plan for the site:
(1) Laundromat.
(2) Grocery or convenience store, not to exceed 1,500 square feet.
(3) Recreation facilities.
C. Accessory structures shall be permitted on individual lots, as specified
in § 184-71 herein.
D. Nothing in this article shall be considered to prohibit the rental, sale or
resale of a mobile home located on a mobile home stand and connected
to all utilities. Similarly, a model or display area is permissible on a
temporary basis, provided that models are developed in accordance
with all applicable regulations of this article and that use of the models
for sales or rental promotion ceases when the project is fully developed.
§ 184-121 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-122
168:737
E. Age-restricted mobile home park community.
(1) An age-restricted mobile home park community may be permitted
as a conditional use, subject to the standards established herein in
§ 184-127, and elsewhere in the Limerick Township ordinances. An
"age-restricted community" is defined as follows: any mobile home
park in which at least 80% of the residences are occupied by adult
singles or couples at least one of whom is 55 years of age or more.
(2) In the case of an existing mobile home park being converted to an
age-restricted mobile home park community, households who
established residency prior to the granting of the conditional use
may remain regardless of their age. At least 80% of the residences
occupied after the granting of the conditional use must be occupied
by adult singles or couples at least one of whom is 55 years of age
or more.
F. Mixed residential development option. The mixed residential
development option shall be permitted as a conditional use, subject to
the standards established herein in § 184-127.1 and § 184-43. The
mixed-use residential development option by conditional use requires
the following: [Added 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 367]
(1) The landowner must prove at the time of the conditional use
hearing that adequate public water and public sewer is available
for the project and that there is capacity in the existing collection
system and related pump stations, as well as the sewer treatment
plant for the use that is being proposed. This may involve a
commitment from the landowner to pay for an expansion to the
system.
(2) If the conditional use is granted, none of the remaining parcel shall
ever be used for a mobile home park development.
(3) If the official street map of the Township indicates a road to be
placed anywhere on the landowner's property, then at the time of
conditional use, the applicant must file a covenant running with the
land indicating that the applicant will install the road at the
applicant's expense under the specifications approved by the
Township and that the road will be completely installed before any
zoning use permit or certificate of occupancy is issued for any of
the units on the subject property. At the time of the conditional use
hearing, the applicant must show all landscaping for the plan, as
well as the landscaping and streetscape improvements within the
adjacent Main Street District that are required by the Main Street
Zoning District. As a condition of approval, the applicant will be
required to install all landscaping and streetscape improvements
required by the Main Street District before any zoning use permit is
permitted for any construction, except any adjustment agreed to by
the Board of Supervisors. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No.
379]
§ 184-122 LIMERICK CODE § 184-122
168:738
§ 184-123. Development standards.
Development standards shall be as follows:
§ 184-124. Dimensional and density standards. [Amended 3-2-1993
by Ord. No. 152]
Dimensional and density standards shall be as follows:
(4) As part of the conditional use hearing, the applicant must prove
that they have conceptual agreement from PennDOT or the county
for any roads to be built or any roads to be realigned or vacated. It
does not have to be a final HOP permit, but the applicant must
obtain something, in writing, saying that PennDOT is in general
agreement with the concept or, if it is a county road, that the
County is in general agreement with the concept.
A. Minimum tract area. Minimum tract area shall be 10 acres. Parcels less
than 10 acres in size may be developed in accordance with the
standards of the R-3 District.
B. Public sewer service, if available, and centralized water service shall be
provided. If public sewer facilities are not available, the mobile home
park shall be served by a centralized sanitary sewer system. Both water
and sewer systems, as applicable, shall meet the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection. [Amended 6-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 196]
C. Road access. Any tract proposed for a mobile home park shall have
direct access to a collector or higher classification street, as classified
in Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
A. Maximum density: five units per net buildable acre.
B. Minimum lot size:
(1) Single-wide mobile home: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Double-wide mobile home: 6,500 square feet.
(3) Single-family detached: 7,500 square feet (modular or
conventional).
C. Minimum lot width:
(1) Single-wide mobile home: 50 feet.
(2) Double-wide mobile home: 65 feet.
(3) Single-family detached: 75 feet.
(4) Lot line home: 60 feet.
§ 184-122 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-124
168:739
§ 184-125. Design standards.
Design standards shall be as follows:
§ 184-126. Licensing and administration. [Amended 3-2-1993 by
Ord. No. 152]
D. Minimum front yard: 20 feet, measured from equivalent right-of-way
line or private street. No more than six mobile homes in a row shall
have the same setback; when varied setbacks are utilized, the
difference shall be at least four feet.
E. Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
F. Minimum side yards:
(1) Single-wide mobile home: five feet; 25 feet aggregate.
(2) Double-wide mobile home: 10 feet; 30 feet aggregate.
(3) Single-family detached: 10 feet; 25 feet aggregate.
(4) Lot line home: five feet; 25 feet aggregate. A lot line home may
eliminate the five-foot side yard if a five-foot maintenance easement
is provided on the adjacent property.
G. Minimum common open space: 20% of the net acreage of the tract, no
more than 1/3 of which may be in the required buffer area.
H. Maximum building coverage: 25%.
I. Maximum building height: 35 feet or three stories.
A. Buffers. A landscaped buffer at least 50 feet in width shall be provided
along all the boundaries of the mobile home park with external public
streets and adjacent residential districts. Where the mobile home park
abuts nonresidential districts, a twenty-five-foot buffer shall be
provided. Buffers shall be landscaped according to the standards of
Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development. [Amended
5-20-2010 by Ord. No. 314]
B. Streets in the mobile home park shall be developed according to the
standards for private streets in Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land
Development.
C. Unless otherwise specified, the mobile home park shall be designed in
accordance with all mobile home park requirements of Chapter 155,
Subdivision and Land Development, including requirements for utilities
and lot layout.
A. License. It shall be unlawful to operate a mobile home park within the
Township unless a license has been issued by the Board of Supervisors.
Such license shall be annually renewable.
§ 184-124 LIMERICK CODE § 184-126
168:740
§ 184-127. Regulations for an age-restricted mobile home park
community. [Added 3-2-1993 by Ord. No. 152]
B. Transfer of license. Licenses are not transferable. The Board of
Supervisors shall be notified, in writing, within 10 days after the sale,
transfer, lease or other change in the controlling interest of a mobile
home park, and a new application for a license shall be made.
C. Fees. All applications to the Township for a mobile home park shall be
accompanied by the payment of a fee set by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Residential uses. A mobile home park may include single- or
double-width mobile homes, single-family detached modular
homes, conventionally built single-family detached homes and lot
line homes, or a combination of these, but shall not include travel
trailers or motor homes. No more than 40% of the total number of
dwelling units in a mobile home park may be conventionally built
single-family detached or lot line homes.
(2) The following accessory uses for the uses of mobile home park
residents shall be permitted only as part of an approved
development plan for the site:
(a) Those accessory uses permitted in § 184-122B.
(b) A lot for recreational vehicle storage, provided that it is
screened from view of adjacent dwelling units.
(c) A utility shed for the use of individual homeowners.
(3) Accessory structures shall be permitted on individual lots, as
specified in § 184-71 herein.
(4) Nothing in this article shall be considered to prohibit the rental,
sale or resale of a mobile home located on a mobile home stand and
connected to all utilities. Similarly, a model or display is
permissible on a temporary basis, provided that the models are
developed in accordance with all applicable regulations of this
article and that use of the models for sales or rental promotion
ceases when the project is fully developed.
B. Development standards: see § 184-123.
C. Dimensional and density standards shall be as follows:
(1) Maximum density: five units per net buildable acre.
(2) Minimum lot size, mobile home: 5,000 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width, mobile home: 50 feet.
§ 184-126 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-127
168:741
§ 184-127.1. Regulations for mixed residential development option.
[Added 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 367]
(4) Minimum front yard, mobile home: 20 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard, mobile home: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum side yards, mobile home: five feet; 15 feet aggregate.
(7) Minimum common open space: 20% of net tract acreage, no more
than 1/3 of which may be in the required buffer area.
(8) Maximum building coverage: 45% of the lot area.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet or three stories.
(10) Maximum impervious coverage: 70%; includes building coverage.
D. Design standards:
(1) Buffers. A landscaped buffer at least 50 feet in width shall be
provided along all the boundaries of the mobile home park with
external public streets and adjacent residential districts. Where the
mobile home park abuts nonresidential districts, a twenty-five-foot
buffer shall be provided. Buffers shall be landscaped according to
the standards of Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
[Amended 5-20-2010 by Ord. No. 314]
(2) Streets in the age-restricted mobile home park may be developed
according to the following standards, in recognition of their unique
residential mix and the lesser standards required therefor:
(a) Street widths:
Minor Collector
(feet)
Residential
(feet)
Right-of-way 24 20
Cartway 24 20
(b) Sidewalks: not required.
(c) Cul-de-sac turnaround: required when streets exceed 175 feet
and serve 10 or more units.
(d) Curbs: not required except where needed for stormwater
management.
(3) Unless otherwise specified, the mobile home park shall be designed
in accordance with all mobile home park requirements of Chapter
155, Subdivision and Land Development, including requirements
for utilities and lot layout.
§ 184-127 LIMERICK CODE § 184-127.1
168:742
A. For the purposes of this section, the term "senior independent living
unit" shall be defined as follows:
SENIOR INDEPENDENT LIVING UNIT — A single dwelling unit, as
defined by the Fair Housing Act, in a building for senior residents aged
55 years or older who do not require assistance with daily activities or
24/7 skilled nursing. Senior independent living buildings may contain
common facilities, including but not limited to common dining areas,
personal service shops and recreational areas. Such common facilities
shall be open to the residents and their guests, not the general public.
B. Development standards for mixed residential developments:
(1) The minimum tract size shall be 25 gross acres.
(2) The tract shall be adjacent to the MS-Main Street Zoning District.
(3) A mixed residential development shall be designed in accordance
with a master plan for the entire tract, but may be executed in
phases with a phasing plan approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(4) Conceptual landscape design and architectural renderings shall be
submitted and approved as part of the conditional use approval.
(5) In a mixed residential development, all signs permitted in Article
XII of this chapter for residential districts shall be permitted. Signs
for each use provided shall be permitted, provided they comply
with the applicable requirements of Article XII for type, placement,
size, number, and illumination.
(6) Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single or
separate ownership, the use and dimensional standards of either
district may be extended into the other district for a distance of not
more than 20 feet beyond the zoning district boundary provided a
master plan for the entire tract is submitted in accordance with
§ 184-127.1B(3) above.
C. Permitted uses.
(1) Residential uses. The following residential uses are permitted
within a mixed-use neighborhood development.
(a) Single-family detached homes.
(b) Single-family attached homes (townhouses).
(c) Senior independent living units.
(d) Senior assisted living and memory care facilities.
(2) One medical office building that is less than 40,000 square feet and
two stories or less is permitted.
§ 184-127.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-127.1
168:743
(3) Accessory structures shall be permitted on individual lots, as
specified in § 184-71 herein, however, livestock or agricultural
accessory uses are not permitted.
D. Mix requirements. A mixed residential development shall provide a mix
of residential dwelling types as follows:
(1) No more than 40% of the total dwelling units shall be market rate
single-family detached or single-family attached townhouses.
(2) No more than 70% of the total dwelling units shall be any
combination of senior independent living units, senior assisted
living units or memory care units.
E. Dimensional and density standards.
(1) Tract building setbacks. All buildings shall be set back a minimum
of 30 feet from the ultimate rights-of-way of existing and proposed
streets and all other property lines.
(2) Buffers. A landscaped buffer at least 25 feet in width shall be
provided along all boundaries within the tract setback. Buffers
shall be landscaped in accordance with § 155.27.1.
(3) Maximum building coverage: 35% of net buildable site area.
(4) Maximum impervious coverage: 70% of net buildable site area.
(5) Total residential density for all dwelling types shall not exceed 19
units per net buildable acre.
(6) Residential uses. If fee simple lots are not proposed, equivalent lot
areas and dimensional standards shall be used.
(a) Single-family detached:
[1] Maximum density: six units per net buildable acre of land
developed as single-family detached.
[2] Minimum lot size: 6,000 square feet.
[3] Minimum lot width: 60 feet.
[4] Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
[5] Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
[6] Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
(b) Single-family attached (townhouses).
[1] Maximum density: 10 units per net buildable acre of land
developed as single-family attached.
[2] Minimum lot size: 1,700 square feet.
§ 184-127.1 LIMERICK CODE § 184-127.1
168:744
[3] Minimum lot width: 20 feet.
[4] Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
[5] Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
[6] Minimum distance between buildings:
[a] Side to side: 25 feet.
[b] Side to front/rear: 35 feet.
[c] Rear to rear: 45 feet.
[7] Maximum number of townhouses per building: six.
[8] Maximum height: maximum building height shall be 35
feet.
[9] Minimum parking: 2.3 spaces per unit total, which is
inclusive of 2.0 spaces per unit and 0.3 space per unit for
guests.
(c) Senior independent living units.
[1] Maximum density: 36 units per net buildable acre of land
developed as senior independent living.
[2] Minimum building setbacks:
[a] From interior streets or drives: 30 feet.
[b] From parking areas: 10 feet.
[c] From other residential uses: 50 feet.
[d] From nonresidential uses: 30 feet.
[3] Minimum distance between buildings: 40 feet.
[4] Maximum height: The maximum building height shall be
60 feet and a maximum of four stories.
[5] Minimum parking: 1.0 space per senior unit; however, 15%
of the required spaces may be reserved and built at the
direction of the Township.
(d) Senior assisted living and memory care facilities.
[1] Maximum density: 45 units per net buildable acre of land
developed as senior assisted living and memory care
facilities.
[2] Minimum building setbacks:
[a] From interior streets or drives: 30 feet.
§ 184-127.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-127.1
168:745
[b] From parking areas: 10 feet.
[c] From other residential uses: 50 feet.
[d] From nonresidential uses: 30 feet.
[3] Minimum distance between buildings: 45 feet.
[4] Maximum height: The maximum building height shall be
60 feet and a maximum of four stories.
[5] Minimum parking: 0.65 space per unit. This provision shall
supersede § 184-87 for senior assisted living and memory
care facilities.
(7) Nonresidential uses. If fee simple lots are not proposed, equivalent
lot areas and dimensional standards shall be used.
(a) Medical office building.
[1] Maximum building of less than 40,000 square feet and
limited to only one building.
[2] Minimum lot size: 60,000 square feet.
[3] Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
[4] Minimum building setbacks:
[a] From interior streets or drives: 30 feet.
[b] From parking areas: 10 feet.
[c] From other residential uses: 50 feet.
[d] From non-residential uses: 30 feet.
[5] Maximum height: The maximum building height shall be
35 feet and a maximum of two stories.
[6] Minimum parking: five spaces per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
§ 184-127.1 LIMERICK CODE § 184-127.1
168:746
ARTICLE XIX
VC Village Commercial District
§ 184-128. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-129. Permitted uses.
On any lot in the Village Commercial District, one or a combination of the
following uses are permitted:
A. Encourage infill development of retail, office and residential uses that
are compatible with the historic village setting in size, scale and
architectural character.
B. Encourage the retention and restoration of existing buildings, along
with the landscaping and design elements that characterize a village
setting.
C. Provide opportunities for a diversity of housing types and a mix of
compatible uses.
D. Encourage those types of commercial and office uses which do not
cause traffic congestion.
E. Encourage consolidation of driveways, parking and curb cuts to
enhance safety and provide more efficient and economical access and
parking.
F. Encourage creation of service roads parallel to arterial roads, to the
rear of existing development where appropriate, in order to separate
local commercial traffic from regional through traffic.
G. Minimize visual and functional conflicts between residential and
nonresidential uses within and abutting the district.
H. Encourage compact development that is served by public sewer and
water services and encourage extension of such utilities to serve village
areas.
I. Provide for mixed-use development on larger tracts around village
centers, in order to provide a transition between those centers and
more intensive commercial districts.
A. Business or professional offices, including medical, dental and other
health care offices, veterinary offices and similar uses.
B. Public utility facility, municipal or government offices. [Amended
12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 206]
C. Family or group day-care home.
D. Day-care center, in accordance with the standards of § 184-73 herein.
§ 184-128 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-129
168:747
E. Educational, religious or philanthropic institution.
F. Personal service shop, including but not limited to such uses as
hairdresser, tailor, shoe repair, dry-cleaning dropoff and copy center.
G. Specialized retail, as defined herein.
H. Bank, financial institution, with the provision that any drive-in window
shall be located to the rear of the principal building.
I. General retail, including uses such as grocery, bakery, hardware store,
drugstore and similar uses, up to a maximum floor area of 5,000 square
feet per use.
J. Restaurant or tavern. [Amended 4-6-1999 by Ord. No. 202]
K. Undertaking or funeral establishment.
L. Clubs, lodges, fraternal organizations.
M. Municipal and government uses.
N. Outdoor amusement or recreation facility, on a lot at least 80,000
square feet in size, in compliance with the standards of § 184-100A, E
and F herein.
O. Small appliance and equipment repair and/or rental.
P. Bed-and-breakfast establishment, in accordance with the standards of
§ 184-74 herein.
Q. Studio for art, dance, music, exercise or photography.
R. Single-family detached: village house.
S. Two-family: twin or duplex.
T. Townhouse, provided that no townhouse development shall be served
by more than one driveway onto an arterial street.
U. Production of crafts, woodworking or similar uses by artisans, provided
that noise levels do not exceed those typical of permitted uses.
V. A multifamily conversion or a combination of a nonresidential use and
one or more dwelling units in a single building, meeting the following
requirements:
(1) An existing building shall be used, and its front facade and front
porch, if any, shall be preserved. Any building addition shall be
located to the rear and shall be compatible with the existing
building in size, scale and materials. Stairways, fire escapes and
other structural alterations shall be located to the rear or side of
the building.
§ 184-129 LIMERICK CODE § 184-129
168:748
§ 184-130. Nonconforming lots.
The following standards apply to lots that are nonconforming in terms
of area or width. Lots that are rendered nonconforming by the current
absence of public utilities are discussed under § 184-131 below.
(2) A single-family detached dwelling may be converted to a maximum
of four apartments, and a twin to a maximum of two apartments, in
addition to one nonresidential use. One or more nonresidential uses
may be added in place of an equal number of dwelling units.
(3) A minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit shall be
provided.
W. Mixed-use development. Any use permitted in the R-5 Village
Residential District is permitted, in combination with nonresidential
uses, in compliance with all density and dimensional standards of that
district and the following additional requirements:
(1) At least two dwelling types shall be provided, with each type
comprising no less than 30% of the total number of units.
(2) There shall be a maximum of two driveway entrances per street
frontage. No residential lots or units may have direct access to
external arterial roads.
(3) Multifamily apartments must be located above a nonresidential
use, with no more than four apartments per building. Such
apartments shall be exempted from density requirements of the R-5
District.
(4) Each nonresidential building shall be located so as to meet the lot
area, coverage and dimensional standards of the VC District,
although subdivision of a separate lot is not required. The building
footprint of a nonresidential building shall not exceed 7,500 square
feet.
(5) Required open space shall be provided in the form of a central
green, which shall be a minimum of 30,000 square feet in size. The
green shall be located next to the area of highest intensity on the
site and shall be surrounded on all sides by streets or buildings, but
not by parking lots or vacant land.
A. A nonconforming lot may be used for a maximum of one permitted use
and a single dwelling unit.
B. Any new construction on nonconforming lots shall comply with the
required setbacks and building and impervious coverage standards of
§ 184-133 herein.
§ 184-129 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-131
168:749
§ 184-131. Utilities.
Development at village densities normally requires the presence of both
central sewers and public water. In areas where such utilities are not
available, the following alternatives may be employed:
§ 184-132. (Reserved)269
A. For lots without public water service:
(1) Each existing lot may contain a maximum of one permitted use and
one dwelling unit.
(2) Any additional development may occur at a density of one dwelling
unit per additional two acres or one nonresidential use per
additional acre.
(3) Alternatively, the applicant may complete a water resources impact
study that demonstrates to the Township's satisfaction that
development may occur at permitted village densities without any
adverse impacts upon groundwater recharge.
(a) In order to achieve this objective, adjacent or nearby areas of
open space may be deed-restricted as groundwater recharge
areas.
(4) The applicant shall agree to tie in to central water service at such
time as it becomes available.
B. For lots without public sewer service:
(1) Each existing lot may contain a maximum of one permitted use and
one dwelling unit.
(2) Any additional development may occur at a density of one dwelling
unit or one nonresidential use per additional acre.
(3) Alternatively, the applicant may demonstrate to the Township's
satisfaction that an interim individual or community sewage
disposal system meeting all DEP and County Health Department
standards may be utilized. Deed-restricted adjacent open space
may be used for individual disposal fields or land treatment of
effluent, in compliance with the above standards. [Amended
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
(4) The applicant shall agree to tie in to public sewer service at such
time as it becomes available.
269. Editor's Note: Former § 184-132, Planned Commercial Center, was repealed 11-4-1998 by
Ord. No. 198.
§ 184-131 LIMERICK CODE § 184-133
168:750
§ 184-133. Development standards.
The following standards shall apply to all permitted uses, except where
otherwise specified:
A. Minimum lot size:
(1) With public sewer and water:
(a) Single-family detached village house: 6,000 square feet.
(b) Twin or duplex: 5,000 square feet per unit.
(c) Townhouse: 3,000 square feet per unit.
(d) All other uses, including combinations of uses: 10,000 square
feet.
(2) Without public sewer and/or public water: lot area and density shall
be as specified in § 184-131 above. All other dimensional and
coverage standards shall be as specified below.
B. Minimum lot width:
(1) Village house, duplex or any nonresidential use: 60 feet.
(2) Twin: 30 feet per unit.
(3) Townhouse: 25 feet.
C. Front yard: The minimum front yard setback shall be 20 feet, and the
maximum front yard setback shall be 30 feet. [Amended 12-20-2011
by Ord. No. 328]
D. Side yard: 10 feet each, except that only one side yard is required for
twins, and for townhouse end units.
E. Rear yard: 30 feet.
F. Maximum building coverage: [Amended 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360]
(1) Village house, duplex, or any nonresidential use: 20% of net lot
area.
(2) Twin: 35% of net lot area.
(3) Townhouse: 40% of net lot area.
G. Maximum impervious coverage: 70% of net lot area. [Amended
7-13-2006 by Ord. No. 261; 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360]
H. Maximum building dimension facing the street: 75 feet.
I. Minimum separation between buildings on a lot: 25 feet.
J. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
§ 184-133 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-133
168:751
§ 184-134. Design standards; traffic impact analysis.
§ 184-135. Design guidelines.
The following standards are recommended as guidelines for all permitted
uses.
K. Parking setbacks:
(1) From street right-of-way: the setback of the principal building or 25
feet, whichever is greater. No parking shall be permitted between
the front of the principal building and the street line.
(2) From rear property lines: 10 feet.
(3) From side property lines: five feet; however, no setback is required
if shared parking is used.
(4) From buildings: five feet.
L. Property line buffer width: the buffer area required by § 155-27.1C of
Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development, shall equal the width
of the parking setback from rear and side property lines. Driveways
may not encroach into the buffer area unless the lot is too narrow to
permit any other alternative, in which case a waiver of § 155-27.1C will
be required.
A. Parking in side yards shall meet the screening requirements of
§ 155-27.1 of Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
B. Outdoor storage shall only be permitted to the rear of the principal
buildings and shall not extend into the side or rear yard setbacks.
Storage areas shall be screened as specified in § 155-27.1 of Chapter
155, Subdivision and Land Development.
C. Any lot with more than one use or building shall be designed as a
compact, unified development, with common parking and signage and
internalized circulation.
D. A traffic impact analysis, in compliance with the standards of § 184-84
herein, shall be required for any proposed development that is expected
to generate more than 100 peak hour trips, according to the latest trip
generation standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
A. Existing buildings, especially those built prior to 1940 and contributing
to the historic character of the village, should be retained where
possible. Front and side building facades and front porches, if any,
should be preserved.
B. Additions to existing buildings or new buildings on a lot should be
located to the rear or side, where possible, and should be compatible
with the existing building in the following respects:
§ 184-133 LIMERICK CODE § 184-135
168:752
§ 184-136. Bonus provisions.
(1) Height, proportion and scale (relation of building height to width).
(2) Bulk and general massing, i.e., are surrounding buildings simple
and boxlike in shape or articulated by porches, turrets and bay
windows?
(3) Number, spacing and proportion of windows and doors.
(4) Roof shape and treatment, i.e., gable, gambrel, hip, mansard and so
on.
(5) Materials, colors and textures of buildings and signage. In general,
natural materials such as stone, brick, wood siding, shingles, slate,
etc., are preferred to industrial or artificial materials such as raw
concrete, anodized or galvanized metal, tinted glass, plastics,
vinyls, etc.
(6) Stylistic features such as porches, cornices and other architectural
details.
C. The applicant shall submit sufficient information in the form of
architectural elevations or sketches of building additions, restoration or
new buildings in order to determine to what extent the design
guidelines are being followed.
D. In order to facilitate traffic circulation, all parking areas for a proposed
use should be directly connected to nonresidential parking areas on
adjacent lots. If a connection cannot be made when the proposed use is
constructed, a driveway may be provided extending to the adjacent
property line in a location where a future connection can be made.
Cross-easements between properties should be provided where
necessary.
A. For any development that follows the design guidelines of § 184-134A
through C above, the maximum building coverage permitted may be
increased to 30% of lot area, and the maximum impervious coverage
may be increased to 75% of lot area.
B. For developing shared driveway access with an abutting lot, the area of
the shared driveway (but not the surrounding parking area) shall be
exempted from impervious coverage limitations. The bonus shall apply
to each lot. If only one lot is being developed, a cross-easement to an
abutting lot or lots shall be offered and recorded on the plan for the first
lot. To use this bonus, no additional driveways shall be permitted to
access either lot from an arterial street. Additional driveways may be
permitted off a side street or service road.
C. The following elements are encouraged and shall be exempted from
impervious coverage limitations:
(1) Driveway connections between nonresidential parking areas.
§ 184-135 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-136
168:753
(2) For properties fronting arterial streets, construction of a portion of
a rear service road for access to more than one property.
(3) Pedestrian pathways linking neighboring properties and between
the rear of a property and the street frontage.
(4) Plazas and courtyards open to the general public, provided that at
least 30% of their area is landscaped.
§ 184-136 LIMERICK CODE § 184-136
168:754
ARTICLE XX
HC Highway Commercial District
§ 184-137. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-138. Use regulations.
Each lot in the Highway Commercial District (both new and existing lots)
shall be permitted a maximum of one permitted use plus one dwelling
unit. Additional uses or units shall be permitted only as conditional uses.
Permitted uses are grouped into three classes based upon the minimum lot
size required for each classification.
§ 184-139. Permitted uses.
A. Provide regulations for development of a wide range of commercial
uses in the Township.
B. Provide regulations for continued commercial use opportunities in
areas of existing commercial development.
C. Relate specific types of uses to appropriate minimum lot sizes to ensure
adequate land area relative to intensity of use.
D. Minimize the potential for increased traffic congestion, overcrowding of
land, noise, glare and pollution resulting from commercial
development.
E. Ensure that the character of adjacent and nearby neighborhoods is
protected by design controls.
F. Effectively regulate the establishment and maintenance of businesses
requiring outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment or merchandise.
G. Ensure sufficient land area for on-site sewage disposal and
groundwater recharge.
A. Class One lots shall have a minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet and
a minimum lot width of 100 feet. In addition, public water and sewer
service must be utilized. Where either of these utilities are unavailable,
Class Two dimensional standards shall be used.
B. Class Two lots shall have a minimum lot area of 40,000 square feet and
a minimum lot width of 125 feet.
C. Class Three lots shall have a minimum lot area of 80,000 square feet
and a minimum lot width of 150 feet.
A. Class One permitted uses.
(1) Retail establishments for sale of dry goods, variety merchandise,
clothing, food, beverages, flowers, plants, drugs, hardware, books,
§ 184-137 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-139
168:755
furnishings and sale and repair of jewelry, optical goods, cameras
and home appliances and similar uses.
(2) Personal service shops, including but not limited to such uses as
hairdresser, tailor, shoe repair, dry-cleaning dropoff and copy
center.
(3) Sale of small automotive accessories (no automobile service work
permitted).
(4) Job printing.
(5) Business or professional offices, including medical, dental and
other health care offices, veterinary offices and similar uses.
(6) (Reserved)
(7) Bank or financial institutions meeting the following standards:
(a) If a drive-in window is provided, a minimum of eight cars
stacking area shall be provided, including the space at the
window.
(b) These spaces shall not interfere with other parking spaces or
internal circulation on the site.
(8) Restaurants or taverns. [Amended 4-6-1999 by Ord. No. 202]
(9) Studios for art, dance, music, exercise or photography.
(10) Municipal and government uses.
(11) Day-care centers, in accordance with the standards in § 184-73
herein.
(12) Bed-and-breakfast establishments, in accordance with the
standards of § 184-74 herein.
(13) Undertaking or funeral establishments.
(14) Clubs, lodges, fraternal organizations.
(15) Educational, religious or philanthropic uses.
(16) Residential uses: Each lot is permitted one residential use, which
may be either:
(a) An apartment unit in a new or existing building.
(b) A single-family detached unit, developed according to the
dimensional standards of the R-3 District and the following
additional standards:
§ 184-139 LIMERICK CODE § 184-139
168:756
[1] If a single-family detached dwelling and a nonresidential
use share a single lot, the minimum required lot area shall
be provided for each use.
[2] If public water service and/or public sewer service are not
available, the dimensional standards will vary as specified
in § 184-110 herein.
(17) Any combination of Class One uses as a conditional use, meeting
the standards of § 184-145 herein.
(18) Any use of the same general character as those listed above, when
approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
(19) Public utility facility. [Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 206]
B. Class Two permitted uses.
(1) Any Class One use.
(2) Drive-through restaurants meeting the standards of § 184-76.3B.
[Amended 4-6-1999 by Ord. No. 202]
(3) Conversion of a single-family residence into a tourist home,
rooming or boarding house.
(4) Ancillary indoor storage building (for other permitted use).
(5) Motor vehicle garage or repair shop, not to include body repair
work or painting.
(6) Tires, batteries and automotive accessories store, with service bay.
(7) Gasoline service station (not to include car wash) that meets the
following standards:
(a) A minimum lot width of at least 200 feet along each street the
lot abuts.
(b) All activities except those performed at fuel or air pumps shall
be performed within an enclosed building.
(c) Fuel pumps shall be set back at least 25 feet from any ultimate
right-of-way.
(d) All auto parts and other storage shall be stored within an
enclosed building.
(e) No paint spraying or body work shall be permitted.
(8) Any use of the same general character as those listed above, when
approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
(9) Any combination of Class One or Class Two permitted uses as a
conditional use, meeting the standards of § 184-145 herein.
§ 184-139 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-139
168:757
§ 184-140. Nonconforming lots.
The following standards apply to lots that are nonconforming in terms of
area or width. Lots without public utilities are discussed under § 184-138,
Use regulations.
§ 184-141. (Reserved)271
C. Class Three permitted uses.
(1) Any Class One or Class Two use.
(2) Outdoor amusement or recreation facility.
(3) Hotel or motel.
(4) Indoor theater.
(5) Indoor amusement facility, such as a bowling alley, billiard room or
indoor court for racquet sports.
(6) Radio and/or television studios.
(7) Garden supply center; nursery.
(8) Building materials supply center; lumberyard.270 [Added
5-22-2008 by Ord. No. 298]
(9) Motor vehicle or recreational vehicle sales or rental and related
service, excluding motor vehicle body repair and motor vehicle
painting. [Amended 9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 318]
(10) Rental of goods, merchandise or equipment.
(11) Car wash.
(12) Gasoline service station containing car wash and meeting all the
requirements of Subsection B(7) herein.
(13) Any use of the same general character as those listed above, when
approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
(14) Any combination of Class One, Class Two, or Class Three permitted
uses as a conditional use, meeting the standards of § 184-145
herein.
A. A nonconforming lot may be used for a maximum of one permitted use
and one dwelling unit.
B. Any new construction on nonconforming lots shall comply with the
required setbacks and building and impervious coverage standards of
§ 184-142 herein.
270. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(8), Building materials supply center; lumberyard, was
repealed 6-28-2007 by Ord. No. 278 and 10-25-2007 by Ord. No. 284.
§ 184-139 LIMERICK CODE § 184-142
168:758
§ 184-142. Dimensional standards. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No.
196; 7-13-2006 by Ord. No. 261; 6-28-2007 by Ord. No. 277]
The following dimensional standards shall apply to all permitted uses in the
Highway Commercial District:
Type Class 1 Class 2 Class 3
Minimum lot size (square feet) 20,000 40,000 80,000
Lot width (feet) 100 125 150
Minimum front yard (feet)
No parking in front yard 30 30 30
Parking in front yard 75 100 100
Minimum side yard (feet) 15 each 15/40
aggregate
20/60
aggregate
Minimum rear yard (feet) 30* 40* 55*
Maximum building height (feet) 35 35 35
Maximum building coverage1
(percentage of lot area)
15 15 15
Maximum impervious coverage1
(percentage of lot area)
70 70 70
Minimum building setback from
residential district boundary (feet)
50 50 75
Minimum parking, driveway,
loading area setback (feet)
From street line 20 20 20
From property boundary
(residential district)
25 30 50
From property boundary
(nonresidential district)
10 15 20
From building 5 5 5
Minimum distance between
buildings (feet)
25 25 30
Maximum single building size
(square feet)
65,000 65,000 65,000
NOTES:
1 Building and impervious coverage may be increased by use of bonus
provisions listed in § 184-143 herein.
* An additional 20 feet of rear yard setback shall be required where the
rear yard is adjacent to an existing or approved residential lot.
271. Editor’s Note: Former § 184-141, Planned Commercial Center, was repealed 8-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 379.
§ 184-142 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-143
168:759
§ 184-143. Bonus standards.
§ 184-144. Design standards; traffic impact analysis.
The following general design requirements shall apply to all commercial
properties:
A. The minimum building coverage may be increased to 20%, if either of
the following bonus requirements is met: [Amended 7-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 261; 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 327]
(1) No parking is located between the front of the building and the
street line. Parking shall be located to the rear of the principal
building or within the side yard behind the front yard setback line.
(2) A shared driveway access is used for two or more lots. This bonus
shall only apply if no additional driveways are used to access an
arterial street. Additional driveways may access a side street or
service road.
B. Any lot which has the required lot area for a given size class, but which
lacks sufficient street frontage for that class,* may qualify for any use in
that class as a conditional use if one or more of the following conditions
are met:
(1) Access is shared with one or more adjacent properties, resulting in
no more than one driveway entrance per 200 feet for all properties
served. Shared access may be provided along property lines to
serve future land uses.
(2) Access is taken from an intersecting side street, rather than from
the primary arterial street.
[*NOTE: For example, if a lot is 40,000 square feet in size (Class
Two) but has a lot width of only 100 feet (Class One), the lot may
be used for a Class Two use if these conditions are met.]
(3) Access is taken from an intersecting side street, rather than from
the primary arterial street.
(4) The applicant is willing to make additional road improvements
(such as partial construction of a frontage or marginal access road)
which will improve vehicular and pedestrian circulation, as
determined by the Board of Supervisors, with the advice of the
Planning Commission and Township Engineer.
A. Buffer area. For all nonresidential uses, a property line buffer shall be
required, as specified in § 155-27.1C of Chapter 155, Subdivision and
Land Development. The width of the required buffer shall be equal to
the width of the parking, driveway and loading area setback from
property boundaries specified in § 184-142 herein.
B. Outdoor display.
§ 184-143 LIMERICK CODE § 184-144
168:760
(1) The following types of commercial uses, and no others, may display
vehicles, equipment, goods or merchandise within front yards on a
permanent basis:
(a) Garden supply center, nursery and florist.
(b) Produce shop.
(c) Auto dealership.
(d) Building materials and home equipment supplies.
(2) The following regulations shall apply to all outdoor display:
(a) Any outdoor display area shall be considered to be sales floor
area for the purpose of computing parking requirements.
(b) Any display area shall be separated from the ultimate right-ofway
of any street by a twenty-foot landscaped buffer planted in
grass, ground cover or low shrubs.
C. Outdoor storage. Any commercial use which includes outdoor storage
of merchandise shall conform to the following standards:
(1) No vehicles, equipment or merchandise shall be parked, stored or
displayed within the ultimate right-of-way of any street or any other
areas intended for pedestrian use.
(2) Outdoor storage areas may not encroach upon required front or
side yards. Outdoor storage in rear yards shall be setback at least
30 feet from property boundaries.
(3) All storage areas shall be screened from public view by an opaque
fence or wall at least six feet and no more than 12 feet high. Stored
materials may not exceed the height of the fence.
(4) A site element screen, according to the requirements of Chapter
155, Subdivision and Land Development, for Screen Type No. 1,
shall be provided between the storage area and property
boundaries and street rights-of-way.
D. Refuse areas. All refuse collection facilities shall meet the requirements
of § 184-66 herein and the following requirements:
(1) The area shall be located at least 10 feet from any adjacent
nonresidential property boundary and at least 50 feet from any
adjacent residential property line or ultimate right-of-way.
(2) The refuse area shall not interfere with circulation within the
parking lot.
E. Traffic impact analysis. A traffic impact analysis, in compliance with the
standards of § 184-84 herein, shall be required for any proposed
development that is expected to generate more than 100 peak hour
§ 184-144 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-144
168:761
§ 184-145. Conditional use standards for multi-use lots.
More than one nonresidential use and one dwelling unit per lot may be
permitted by the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use, provided that
the proposed land development meets the following standards:
trips, according to the latest trip generation standards of the Institute
of Transportation Engineers.
A. The site shall be designed as a compact, unified development, with
common parking and signage and internalized circulation.
B. The development shall be designed to minimize the appearance of the
parking lot. Parking shall not be located between the primary
building(s) and the street, but may be located to the side and rear of the
building(s) behind the front yard setback line. Applicants are
encouraged to pursue various alternative designs for building
placement, such as placing large buildings perpendicular to the street,
around a central courtyard or in an "L" shape.
C. The number of driveway access points shall be minimized, with no more
than one permitted per street frontage unless the applicant can
demonstrate that traffic safety will be enhanced by additional access
points.
D. Parking for each use shall meet the requirements of Article XI, Off-
Street Parking Standards. The shared parking concept may be utilized
where appropriate.
E. Signs shall meet the requirements of Article XII for multi-tenant lots.
F. Existing residential buildings constructed before 1940 should be
retained where possible, and front and side facades and front porches,
if any, should be preserved. Any building additions or additional
buildings on the same lot should be compatible with the existing
building in size, scale, materials and general appearance. For a detailed
discussion of these elements, see § 184-135, Design guidelines, for the
Village Commercial District.
§ 184-144 LIMERICK CODE § 184-145
168:762
ARTICLE XXI
(Reserved)272
§ 184-146. through § 184-153. (Reserved)
272. Editor's Note: Former Art. XXI, IO Interchange Office District, as amended, was repealed
6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 330.
§ 184-146 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-146
168:763

ARTICLE XXII
O/LI Office/Limited Industrial District
§ 184-154. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to:
A. Provide standards and criteria for office and limited industrial
development in appropriate areas of the Township in accord with the
Township's Comprehensive Plan.
B. Provide sufficient land area to meet the Township's anticipated future
needs for office and limited industrial development, allow for a range of
choices of sites and strengthen the Township's economic base.
C. Provide employment centers with ease of access from interchanges of
the Pottstown Expressway, Route 422, and to encourage
interconnection of office and limited industrial development between
those interchanges.
D. Locate employment centers with convenient access from the
Township's population centers.
E. Protect adjacent residential areas from adverse visual and traffic
impacts of office and limited industrial development.
F. Encourage development of unified, integrated office and limited
industrial parks to accommodate a variety of individual uses.
G. Ensure adequate buffering of adjacent districts and land uses.
H. Protect against development congestion by limiting the bulk of
buildings in relation to each other and to the land area around them.
I. Protect against offensive noise, vibrations, odors and other nuisances
through use of strict performance standards.
J. Provide for ancillary service-oriented and commercial uses which
complement the office and limited industrial development in the
district, without giving the district a predominantly commercial
character.
K. Provide for aviation facilities of importance to the Township and the
region, in such a manner as to ensure safe operations and avoid
conflicts with adjacent uses.
L. Encourage an attractive visual environment along the Route 422,
Pottstown Expressway, corridor.
M. Encourage preservation of areas needed for future interchange
improvements.
N. Encourage development in an efficient, environmentally sensitive,
mutually supportive manner.
§ 184-154 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-155
168:765
§ 184-155. Permitted uses.
In the Office/Limited Industrial District, the following uses shall be
permitted:
A. Offices, corporate headquarters and administrative centers.
B. Scientific or industrial research or engineering facilities.
C. Manufacturing, testing, repair and ancillary storage or distribution of
materials, goods, foodstuffs or products. However, any bulk storage or
bulk manufacture of highly hazardous chemicals or substances shall
require special exception approval, and provided that the following
uses shall be specifically prohibited in the O/LI District: [Amended
11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198]
(1) Manufacture of asphalt.
(2) Slaughterhouse or animal rendering plant.
D. Storage, warehousing and/or distribution of materials, goods,
foodstuffs or products, provided that: [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord.
No. 196]
(1) As a principal use, conditional use approval shall be required if the
total floor area of the building exceeds 100,000 square feet.
Storage, warehousing and/or distribution that is clearly accessory
to a principal permitted by right manufacturing use shall not need
conditional use approval.
(2) A trucking company terminal shall not be permitted.
(3) The following uses shall be specifically prohibited in the O/LI
District: [Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198]
(a) Outdoor storage that occupies more than 20% of the lot area.
(b) Outdoor storage as the principal use of a property.
(c) Junkyards.
(d) Salvage yards.
E. Printing, publishing, lithography and similar processes.
F. Radio and/or television studios and transmission facilities.
G. Public utility facility. [Amended 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 206]
H. Planned office and/or industrial parks in compliance with § 184-158
herein.
I. Accessory uses appropriate to the primary permitted uses. [Amended
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
§ 184-155 LIMERICK CODE § 184-155
168:766
§ 184-156. Conditional uses.
The following are permitted as conditional uses when approved in
compliance with the procedures, standards and criteria contained in this
chapter:
J. Agricultural uses and related buildings meeting the requirements of
§ 184-71A(4). [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
K. Day-care centers not housed in manufacturing buildings, storage
facilities or any other permitted uses as described in Subsections D and
E above.
L. Motor vehicle garage or repair shop, not to include body repair work or
painting. [Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
A. Wholesale, warehouse, storage or distribution center, including
transportation depot, in a building of 100,000 square feet or larger of
floor area, in compliance with the following:
(1) The main road serving the facility shall meet the standards or be
improved by the applicant to meet the standards for at least a
collector street, as established in Chapter 155, Subdivision and
Land Development.
(2) Minimum lot size and lot width shall be 10 acres and 400 feet.
B. Uses as part of planned development.
(1) The following shall be permitted as part of a planned office and/or
industrial park development in compliance with the requirements
of Subsection B(2) below:
(a) Financial institutions.
(b) Retail stores.
(c) Restaurants.
(d) Medical or dental offices.
(e) Hotels.
(f) Large-scale indoor or outdoor commercial recreation facilities
such as bowling alleys, skating rinks, fitness centers, tennis
and/or racquet clubs.
(g) Hospitals. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
(2) Requirements.
(a) The applicant shall provide sufficient evidence to show that the
use will be supportive and complementary to the park
development.
§ 184-155 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-156
168:767
(b) Vehicular access shall be only from roads internal to the office/
industrial park.
(c) Dimensional standards of § 184-157, Class One herein, shall
apply.
(d) The requirements of § 184-158, Planned office and/or
industrial parks, shall apply.
C. Uses independent of planned developments.
(1) The following uses shall be permitted on individual lots,
independent of office/industrial park development, in compliance
with the requirements of Subsection C(2) below:
(a) Vehicular sales and ancillary repairs, excluding vehicle body
repair and motor vehicle painting. [Amended 9-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 318]
(b) Lumberyards; sales of building materials and other home
supplies.
(c) Nurseries; sales of agricultural and garden supplies.
(d) Veterinarians; animal boarding facilities.
(e) Hotels; motels.
(f) Large-scale indoor or outdoor commercial recreation facilities,
such as bowling alleys, skating rinks, fitness centers, tennis
and/or racquet clubs.
(2) Requirements.
(a) The lot used shall front on and provide direct vehicular access
to an arterial street, as established in Chapter 155, Subdivision
and Land Development.
(b) The dimensional standards for Class Two in § 184-157 shall
apply. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
(c) Vehicular access.
[1] Not more than one access point per 500 feet to an arterial
street is permitted, unless a traffic study provides
convincing evidence otherwise and upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer.273
(d) No display of merchandise is permitted within the ultimate
right-of-way. Any outdoor display area must be separated from
the ultimate right-of-way by a buffer strip at least 15 feet wide,
273. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2)(c)[2], regarding use of shared access drives and
marginal access streets, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
5-1-2001 by Ord. No. 225.
§ 184-156 LIMERICK CODE § 184-156
168:768
planted in grass, low-growing shrubs or other landscape
material, in compliance with the Township's landscaping
standards.
D. (Reserved)274
E. Airport, in compliance with the following:
(1) Tract size and boundary requirements:
(a) Minimum tract size shall be 100 acres.
(b) Maximum tract size shall be 250 acres.
(c) Airport boundaries shall be as shown on the official airport
layout plan as approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and the Federal Aviation Administration.
(2) Any airport operation shall be conducted under and subject to all
licensing, safety and applicable airport design criteria and
regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation.
(3) The operation of all aircraft shall be subject to all applicable state
and federal regulations, including control of noise, vibration and
emissions.
(4) Any building to be constructed within an airport shall be set back at
least 200 feet from any runway and shall conform to all other
dimensional standards of this article.
(5) Airport uses. In an airport operation, structures, buildings or
improvements may be erected or used and the lot area may be used
or occupied for any of the following purposes:
(a) Aircraft runways.
(b) Aircraft taxiways.
(c) Aircraft parking and tie-down areas.
(d) Hangars.
(e) The sale, storage, repair, development, installation, fabrication
and maintenance of aircraft, aircraft accessories and aircraft
parts.
(f) Training for repair and maintenance of aircraft and aircraft
accessories.
(g) Flight training facilities.
274. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, which provided for planned commercial centers as a
conditional use, was repealed 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198.
§ 184-156 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-156
168:769
§ 184-157. Dimensional standards.
The following dimensional standards apply within the Office/Limited
Industrial District:
(h) The sale and storage of fuels and lubricants for aircraft and
support equipment, in compliance with § 184-83G herein and
all applicable state and federal regulations.
(i) Facilities for aircraft painting and washing.
(j) Terminal facilities.
(k) Aircraft rental.
(l) Navigational and/or guidance systems.
(m) Automobile rental.
(n) Restaurant facilities.
(o) Administrative offices related to other permitted uses.
A. On tracts of at least 15 acres, a planned office and/or industrial park
may be developed, in compliance with the Class One standards in
Subsection D below and § 184-158 of this chapter.
B. Tracts of land to be developed independent of a planned office and/or
industrial park for uses permitted in § 184-155 herein shall comply with
the Class Two standards in Subsection D below.
C. Tracts of land to be developed independent of a planned office and/or
industrial park for conditional uses permitted in § 184-156 herein shall
comply with the lot size and width standards specified for those uses
and the other dimensional standards for Class Two in Subsection D
below.
D. Table of Dimensional Standards. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No.
196; 7-13-2006 by Ord. No. 261; 6-14-2007 by Ord. No. 276;
5-20-2010 by Ord. No. 314; 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
Standard Class One Class Two
Minimum lot area (acres) 1, with minimum
average lot area of
2
3
Minimum lot width (feet) 200 300
Maximum impervious
coverage for all uses
70% of net lot area 70% of net lot
area
Maximum building coverage
(percentage of net buildable
acreage)
§ 184-156 LIMERICK CODE § 184-157
168:770
Standard Class One Class Two
Warehouse, storage as a
primary use
35% 35%
All other uses 35% 35%
Maximum floor area ratio 0.40 0.40
Building setbacks (feet)
From ultimate right-ofway
of a street
50 50
From a lot boundary
abutting a residential
district
100 100
From any other lot line 30 30
Parking, service area or
internal driveway setbacks
(feet)
From ultimate right-ofway
of a street
30 30
From a lot boundary
abutting a residential
district
30 50
From a lot boundary
abutting a
nonresidential district
10, unless shared 12, unless shared
From a building (except
loading docks)
10 10
Maximum building height
(feet)
351 351
Maximum number of stories 3 3
NOTES:
1 The thirty-five-foot height may be increased to 45 feet or three
stories, whichever is less, if such additional height would be located a
minimum of 200 feet from a residential district. If any building involves
three or more stories, it shall be fully sprinklered, in accordance with
the current Building Code of Limerick Township, as amended.
E. Compatibility with residential districts. Where a portion of a building or
land area used for manufacturing or for loading, unloading or parking
of three or more tractor-trailer trucks at one time is proposed within
400 feet of a residential district, the following additional requirements
shall apply: [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
(1) In no case shall a required buffer yard be less than 50 feet in width.
A required buffer yard shall include a landscaped earth berm with a
§ 184-157 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-157
168:771
§ 184-158. Planned office and/or industrial parks.
Development of planned office and/or industrial parks shall comply with the
following:
minimum height of five feet and a maximum slope on the
residential side of three to one. All required buffer plantings shall
be on the residential side of the berm, and all security fencing shall
be on the industrial side of the berm. [Amended 12-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 327]
(2) Any such building area and truck area shall be set back a minimum
of 200 feet from a residential district boundary.
F. Outdoor storage. All outdoor storage shall comply with the following
setbacks: 30 feet from a lot boundary abutting an ultimate right-of-way
of a street; 30 feet from a lot boundary abutting a nonresidential
district; 50 feet from a lot boundary abutting a residential district. All
outdoor storage shall be enclosed by an opaque fence or hedge to
screen from abutting streets or properties adjacent to a residential
district and meet minimum screening requirements provided in
§ 155-27.1 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
[Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198; amended 4-23-2019 by Ord.
No. 395]
A. The tract must have direct access to an arterial or major collector
street, or the applicant shall upgrade the connecting local street to
meet those street standards.
B. Although building lots within a tract may be individually sold and
developed, the development shall be designed with unified standards
for building design, landscaping, lighting and access to interior roads.
These standards shall be submitted in the form of protective covenants
which shall be binding upon developers of individual lots.
C. A development agreement shall be executed between the applicant and
the Township for development of the entire park, to include:
(1) Generalized internal road layout and access points to surrounding
roads, on-site and off-site road improvements.
(2) Stormwater management facilities.
(3) Existing landscape material and other natural amenities to be
protected.
(4) Standards for building design, landscaping, lighting and access to
interior roads, in the form of protective covenants.
D. As each building lot is developed, a land development plan as required
by Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development, shall be submitted
for Township review.
§ 184-157 LIMERICK CODE § 184-158
168:772
§ 184-159. Traffic impact analysis. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No.
379]
A traffic impact analysis, as defined and regulated in this chapter, shall be
submitted by the applicant for the following types of development in the
Office/Limited Industrial District:
§ 184-160. Community impact analysis. [Amended 8-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 379]
A community impact analysis, as defined and regulated in this chapter, shall
be submitted by the applicant for the following types of development in the
Office/Limited Industrial District.
E. All building lots shall have direct access to interior roads, rather than to
exterior streets, although emergency access to exterior streets may be
permitted where no other alternatives are feasible.
A. All subdivisions or land developments involving a gross tract area of 15
acres or more, including planned office and/or limited industrial parks.
B. Individual uses listed in § 184-156, Conditional uses, and § 184-155,
Permitted uses, herein, under both of the following conditions:
(1) When proposed independent of a planned office and/or limited
industrial park.
(2) When expected to generate 50 or more vehicular trips per peak
hour using the latest Institute of Transportation Engineers tripgeneration
standards.
A. All subdivisions or land developments involving a gross tract area of 15
acres or more, including planned office and/or limited industrial parks.
B. Individual uses listed in § 184-156, Conditional uses, when proposed
independent of a planned office and/or limited industrial park.
C. Individual uses listed in § 184-155, Permitted uses, when proposed
independent of a planned office and/or limited industrial park, when
located on a lot of 10 or more acres in gross area.
§ 184-158 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-160
168:773

ARTICLE XXIII
LLI Limited Light Industrial District
§ 184-161. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to:
§ 184-162. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted:
A. Permit a reasonable amount of limited industrial development in those
areas of the Township that are not suitable for development under
Office/Limited Industrial District standards by reason of road access,
environmental constraints or available infrastructure.
B. Permit low density residential development to continue in such areas,
while ensuring adequate buffering from adjacent industrial or office
development.
C. Provide for compatible low intensity recreational uses as a means of
preserving open land and environmentally sensitive areas.
D. Provide sufficient land area to meet the Township's anticipated future
needs for industrial development, while allowing for a range of choices
of sites.
E. Provide for industrial development that is free from offensive noise,
vibrations, odors and other nuisances through use of strict performance
standards.
F. Protect industrial uses against congestion by limiting the bulk of
buildings in relation to each other and to the land area around them.
G. Encourage the development of unified and physically integrated
industrial parks to accommodate a variety of individual uses.
H. Provide expanded development opportunities on qualifying tracts to
take advantage of the unique opportunities afforded by interchanges of
the Route 422 Expressway. [Added 11-7-2001 by Ord. No. 235]
A. Scientific or industrial research or engineering facilities.
B. Manufacturing, testing, repair and ancillary storage or distribution of
materials, goods, foodstuffs or products. Such uses shall not include
any of the uses listed as special exceptions in the Heavy Industrial
District (§ 184-169).
C. Wholesale, warehouse, storage and/or distribution of materials, goods,
foodstuffs or products as a primary use, within a roofed structure. Such
uses include but are not limited to transportation depot, truck terminal,
mini warehouse and self-storage operations. [Amended 4-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 257]
§ 184-161 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-162
168:775
D. Outdoor storage as an accessory use, which shall be limited to
occupying a maximum of 20% of the lot area, and provided that outdoor
storage areas occupying a higher percentage of the lot area and
junkyards and salvage yards shall be specifically prohibited in the LLI
District. All outdoor storage shall meet the screening requirements in
§ 155-27.1 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, or the
successor section. Under this chapter, such screening shall be provided
regardless of the distance between the outdoor storage and any
adjacent street or lot line, if the storage will be visible from such street
or lot line. [Amended 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198]
E. Administrative, business or professional offices not providing services
to the general public, if ancillary to another permitted use.
F. Printing, publishing, lithography and similar processes, up to 100,000
square feet in size.
G. Radio and/or television studios and transmission facilities.
H. Motor vehicle storage and maintenance, not including auto wrecking
yards.
I. Commercial, public or private recreation facilities, primarily for
nonmotorized, low-impact recreation, including the following:
(1) Golf course (not including miniature golf).
(2) Swim club.
(3) Equestrian facility; boarding stable for horses.
(4) Country club.
(5) Ballfield.
J. Accessory uses appropriate to the primary permitted uses, including
but not limited to a cafeteria or snack bar for employees or recreation
facility for employees. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
K. Residential development, in accordance with the area requirements
and density and dimensional standards of the R-1 Residential District.
L. Agricultural uses and related buildings or structures meeting the
requirements of § 184-71A(4). [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
M. Outdoor plant nursery or similar use and related buildings or
structures.
N. Game farm, fish hatchery or hunting and fishing reserve for protection
and propagation of wildlife.
O. Veterinarian; animal boarding facility.275
P. Public utility facility. [Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 206]
§ 184-162 LIMERICK CODE § 184-163
168:776
§ 184-163. Planned industrial park as conditional use.
A planned industrial park may be permitted as a conditional use meeting
the following standards:
§ 184-163.1. Interchange overlay option. [Added 11-7-2001 by Ord.
No. 235]
An interchange overlay may be permitted as a development option pursuant
to the requirements of this chapter as a conditional use, and meeting the
following standards:
A. The tract shall be a minimum of 15 acres in size, with minimum road
frontage of 300 feet.
B. The tract shall have direct access to an arterial or major collector
street, or the applicant shall agree to upgrade the street in question to
the standards of a major collector street. Such improvements shall
extend as far as the nearest intersection with an arterial or major
collector street.
C. A traffic impact study shall be required, meeting the requirements of
§ 184-84 herein. The applicant may be required to make off-site
improvements to ensure that the surrounding road system is adequate
to serve the proposed development.
D. The development shall be designed in accordance with the standards of
§ 184-158, Planned office and/or industrial parks, regarding design and
site plan requirements.
A. The tract shall be a minimum of 60 acres of contiguous land area.
Tracts divided by a public roadway but owned in common or otherwise
developed as a unified development are deemed to be contiguous for
the purpose of all area and land mass calculations. [Amended
4-10-2008 by Ord. No. 295]
B. The tract shall have at least one boundary along the right-of-way of
Route 422 Expressway and/or its interchange ramps for a minimum
distance of 1,000 feet. [Amended 4-10-2008 by Ord. No. 295]
C. At least a portion of the tract is within 1,800 feet of any portion of a
state-owned ramp of a limited access expressway.
275. Editor's Note: Former Subsection P, Private electrical utility facility, added 12-21-1999 by
Ord. No. 206, was repealed 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 238. This ordinance also redesignated
former Subsection Q as Subsection P.
§ 184-163 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-164
168:777
§ 184-164. Dimensional standards. [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No.
196; 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 206; 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 238;
7-13-2006 by Ord. No. 261; 5-20-2010 by Ord. No. 314; 8-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 379]
Two categories of dimensional standards are provided. Class One applies to
the industrial park; Class Two applies to the freestanding use.
Standard Class One Class Two
Minimum lot size (acres) 2 4
Minimum average lot size (acres) 3 —
Minimum lot width at building line
(feet)
200 350
Maximum impervious coverage 70% of net lot area 70% of net lot
area
Maximum building coverage
(percentage of NBA)
Warehouse/storage uses1 40% 30%
All other uses 30% 25%
Maximum floor area ratio 0.40 0.35
Building setbacks (feet)3
From ultimate right-of-way 50 50
From residential district 100 100
From any other zoning district
line
30 50
Parking, loading, driveway setbacks
(feet)
From ultimate right-of-way 30 30
From residential district 30 50
From any other zoning district
line (no setback required if
parking is shared)
15 25
Maximum building height (feet) 35 or 3 stories2 35 or 3 stories2
NOTES:
1 If the nature of the proposed use is subject to change (i.e., "flex space"
uses), then the more restrictive standard shall be used.
2 The thirty-five-foot height may be increased to 45 feet or three stories,
whichever is less, if such additional height would be located a minimum of
200 feet from a residential district. If any building involves three or more
stories, it shall be fully sprinklered, in accordance with the current adopted
Building Code of Limerick Township, as amended.
§ 184-164 LIMERICK CODE § 184-164
168:778
NOTES:
3 A portion of a building or a land area used for manufacturing and/or for
tractor-trailer loading and unloading on a daily basis shall be set back a
minimum of 200 feet from any lot line of a dwelling in a residential district.
Such setback may be reduced to 120 feet if a landscaped earth berm is
placed between such activity and the dwelling, with a minimum average
height of six feet and maximum side slopes of 3 to 1.
§ 184-165. Development standards.
§ 184-165.1. Age-qualified residential community as conditional
use. [Added 11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 236]
A. The industrial performance standards of § 184-83 herein shall apply to
all uses in the district.
B. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored
in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting
with energy devices, heating devices or appliances located and
operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel.
C. All outdoor storage areas ancillary to a permitted use shall comply with
the setback requirements for parking, driveways and loading areas and
shall be enclosed by an opaque fence or hedge of sufficient height to
shield it from view from abutting roads or adjacent properties.
D. Landscaping. All uses shall provide landscaped buffers and site element
screens as required by the landscaping standards of § 155-27.1 of
Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
E. The requirements of § 184-157E shall also apply to the LLI District.276
[Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
A. An age-qualified residential community may be permitted as a
conditional use which may consist of any of the following and no other:
(1) Single-family detached, single-family semidetached, and/or singlefamily
attached dwellings shall be permitted with a maximum of
four attached dwelling units per building. Any combination of
authorized dwelling types shall be permitted.
(2) A minimum tract size of 100 acres shall be required.
Noncontiguous land which may be separated by only physical
rights-of-way but still be under common ownership may be
included in minimum tract calculation provided said area(s) shall
be included in calculation for required open space and density and
subject to preservation for permanent open space.
276. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Development standards for private electrical utility
facilities, added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 206, was repealed 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 238.
§ 184-164 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-165.1
168:779
(3) The overall permitted density shall be 1 1/2 dwelling units per net
buildable acre. For each acre of open space in excess of the 50%
required by Subsection D(1), one additional dwelling unit (bonus
unit) shall be permitted. For purposes of calculating the number of
bonus units, lands utilized for stormwater management facilities
such as retention basins (wet ponds) or wetland basins may be
utilized for purposes of calculating density and open space
requirements, but lands used as detention basins may not be
included. Overall permitted density including the bonus units shall
not exceed 1 1/2 dwelling units per gross acre.
(4) Common open space which may consist of both active and passive
recreation features, which shall include a public or private
eighteen-hole regulation golf course and golf course accessory uses
permitted in the golf course residential community [§ 184-99J(4)].
(5) Accessory uses may include a club house, pool and recreation
center, tennis courts, gate house, walking trails, similar types of
uses and home occupations which do not involve regular customer
visits or delivery of merchandise to the home.
B. Density and declaration of age restriction criteria for age-qualified
residential community and accessory uses. [Amended 8-15-2017 by
Ord. No. 379]
(1) The overall permitted density shall be 1 1/2 dwelling units per net
buildable acre plus density bonus when applicable.
(2) All residential uses within the age-qualified residential community
shall be served by public water and public sewage disposal
facilities, in compliance with § 184-55 herein. Well water may be
used for the golf course irrigation subject to approval by
appropriate regulatory agency.
(3) Declaration of age restriction. At the time of subdivision and land
development, as a prerequisite to any final plan approved, the
developer shall record a declaration against the entire tract, in a
form acceptable to the Township Solicitor, binding all properties
and owners to the restriction which shall require that at least one
principal occupant of an individual dwelling unit within the agequalified
residential community shall be age 55 or older.
C. Development standards for golf course facilities, if provided.
(1) A proposed golf course if proposed shall have a minimum of 18
holes.
(2) A golf course shall be a minimum length of 6,000 yards, measured
from the center of the rearmost tee to the center of the green of
each hole.
§ 184-165.1 LIMERICK CODE § 184-165.1
168:780
(3) The golf course and accessory uses may be held under separate
ownership from the residential dwellings. [Amended 8-15-2017
by Ord. No. 379]
D. Dimensional standards.
(1) The dimensional standards for residential uses shall be as follows:
Standard
Single-Family
Detached
Dwelling
Single-
Family
Semidetached
Dwelling
Single-
Family
Attached
Dwelling
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
9,000 3,000 2,200
Minimum lot width
(at building
setback line) (feet)
70 30 26
Minimum front
yard (feet)
25* 25* 20*
Minimum side
yards (feet)
10 each 10 (one only) 10 (ends only)
Minimum rear
yard (feet)
30 30 N.A.
Maximum building
coverage (per lot)
35% 50% 60%
Maximum building
height (feet)
35 35 35
NOTE:
*For private streets, measured from face of curb to nearest point
of dwelling.
(2) The dimensional standards for all other accessory uses and
facilities shall be as follows:
(a) Minimum setback from the perimeter tract boundary: 50 feet.
(b) Minimum setback from an internal street: 25 feet.
(c) Parking standards shall be in accordance with Article XI, Off-
Street Parking Standards, contained herein.
(d) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
E. Open space standards.
(1) A minimum of 50% of the net acreage of the site shall be preserved
as open space.
§ 184-165.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-165.1
168:781
(2) A golf course, if proposed, and practice areas shall be counted
toward the minimum required open space.
(3) Open space standards shall comply with requirements of § 184-82,
as amended, of the Limerick Township Zoning Ordinance.
F. Required buffer yards.
(1) Buffers may contain required yards or land adjacent to golf
fairways, greens or tees, walking trails or cart paths, but shall not
contain any buildings or parking areas.
(2) A minimum fifty-foot buffer is required along all tract boundaries.
(3) A minimum seventy-five-foot buffer is required along the rights-ofway
of abutting arterial or major collector roads. A minimum fiftyfoot
buffer is required along the rights-of-way of all other abutting
roads.
(4) All buffers shall be landscaped according to the standards of the
Limerick Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.277
G. The applicant shall prepare a covenant running with the land, to the
satisfaction of the Township Solicitor, that requires those areas of
property identified as common open space in the approved agequalified
residential community shall remain as open space in
perpetuity. The covenant shall be recorded in the office of the
Montgomery County Recorder of Deeds.
277. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 184-165.1 LIMERICK CODE § 184-165.1
168:782
ARTICLE XXIV
HI Heavy Industrial District
§ 184-166. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-167. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted:
A. Provide for a reasonable amount of industrial development in areas of
the Township already developed for such uses.
B. Provide for industrial development that is free from offensive noise,
vibrations, odors and other nuisances through use of strict performance
standards.
C. Protect industrial uses against congestion by limiting the bulk of
buildings in relation to each other and to the land area around them.
D. Encourage the development of unified and physically integrated
industrial parks to accommodate a variety of individual uses.
E. Permit solid waste disposal facilities subject to additional criteria
intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare from any
adverse effects of such facilities and operations.
F. Effectively regulate the establishment and maintenance of outdoor
storage buildings as defined herein.
A. Scientific or industrial research or engineering facilities.
B. Manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, processing, packaging, testing,
repair and ancillary storage or distribution of materials, goods,
foodstuffs and other organic or inorganic products.
C. (Reserved)278
D. Administrative, business or professional offices not providing services
to the general public, if ancillary to another permitted use.
E. Printing, publishing, lithography and similar processes.
F. Radio and/or television studios and transmission facilities.
G. Motor vehicle repair, storage and maintenance, including motor vehicle
body repair and motor vehicle painting. [Amended 9-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 318]
H. (Reserved)279
278. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, allowing storage and/or distribution of materials and
goods as a permitted use, was repealed 4-13-2006 by Ord. No. 257.
§ 184-166 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-167
168:783
I. (Reserved)280
J. Rail freight station or other necessary public service or transportation
uses.
K. Accessory uses appropriate to the primary permitted uses, including
but not limited to a cafeteria or snack bar for employees or recreation
facility for employees. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
L. Agricultural uses and related buildings or structures meeting the
requirements of § 184-71A(4). [Amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
M. Veterinarian; animal boarding facility.
N. Outdoor plant nursery or similar use and related buildings or
structures.
O. Game farm, fish hatchery or hunting and fishing reserve for protection
and propagation of wildlife.
P. (Reserved)281
Q. The following uses shall require a minimum lot area of one acre instead
of the minimum lot area that would be required under § 184-170, and
shall not include any adult use: [Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198]
(1) Contractor's headquarter and storage.
(2) Retail stores involving a maximum floor area of 20,000 square feet
per lot.
(3) Exercise clubs.
(4) Indoor or outdoor recreation, not including a firearms target range
unless it is completely enclosed within a sound-resistant building.
(5) Meeting and recreational facilities for membership clubs, not
including a firearms target range unless it is completely enclosed
within a sound-resistant building.
(6) Offices serving the general public.
(7) Human or animal cemetery.
(8) Place of worship.
279. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, pertaining to junkyards or auto salvage yards, and
Subsection I, pertaining to landfills, sanitary and/or industrial landfills or solid waste
facilities, as amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196, were made special exception uses. See
§ 184-169G and H.
280. Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, pertaining to junkyards or auto salvage yards, and
Subsection I, pertaining to landfills, sanitary and/or industrial landfills or solid waste
facilities, as amended 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196, were made special exception uses. See
§ 184-169G and H.
281. Editor's Note: Former Subsection P, regarding public utility facilities, as amended
12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 206, was repealed 1-24-2008 by Ord. No. 289.
§ 184-167 LIMERICK CODE § 184-167
168:784
§ 184-168. (Reserved)283
§ 184-168.1. (Reserved)284
§ 184-168.2. Planned industrial park as conditional use.
A planned industrial park may be permitted as a conditional use meeting
the following standards.
§ 184-169. Special exceptions.
The following uses may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board as
special exceptions:
(9) Car wash.
(10) Funeral home.
(11) Personal service use.
(12) Greenhouse, garden center or plant nursery.
(13) Appliance and small equipment repair.282
A. The tract shall be a minimum of 15 acres in size, with minimum road
frontage of 300 feet.
B. The tract shall have direct access to an arterial or major collector
street, or the applicant shall agree to upgrade the street in question to
the standards of a major collector street. Such improvements shall
extend as far as the nearest intersection with an arterial or major
collector street.
C. A traffic impact study shall be required, meeting the requirements of
§ 184-84 herein. The applicant may be required to make off-site
improvements to ensure that the surrounding road system is adequate
to serve the proposed development.
D. The development shall be designed in accordance with the standards of
§ 184-158, Planned office and/or industrial parks, herein.
A. Adult uses, in compliance with the requirements of § 184-76 herein.
B. Manufacture, processing or storage of explosives, paint, petroleum or
gas.
282. Editor's Note: Former Subsection R, Private utility facility, added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No.
206, was repealed 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 238.
283. Editor's Note: Former § 184-168, Planned industrial park as conditional use, was
renumbered as § 184-168.2 on 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 238.
284. Editor's Note: Former § 184-168.1, Private electrical and private utility facilities as a
conditional use, added 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 238, was repealed 1-24-2008 by Ord. No.
289.
§ 184-167 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-169
168:785
C. Abattoirs, meat packing, tanning, curing or storage of leather, rawhides
or skins, manufacture or processing of fertilizer, wood pulp,
disinfectants or soap.
D. Limekilns, flour mills or manufacture of cement.
E. Any other use of the same general character as the above permitted
uses, provided that the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Hearing Board that provision will be made to adequately
reduce or minimize any noxious, offensive or hazardous features of such
use.
F. Treatment centers. [Added 6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 196]
G. Junkyard or auto salvage yard, provided that any such use shall be
enclosed with a solid fence not less than six feet in height, in addition to
required landscaping. [Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198]
H. Landfill, sanitary and/or industrial landfill or solid waste facility, when
operated solely by the Township or municipal authority, subject to the
following provisions: [Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198]
(1) These regulations shall pertain in conjunction with and in addition
to controls and restrictions imposed for other uses in this zone by
this chapter or any other regulatory agency or body.
(2) The construction and operation of a sanitary landfill shall not be
permitted unless a permit for such landfill has been issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and the landfill is
constructed and operated in accordance with Pennsylvania Act 241
of 1968, as amended,285 and the rules and regulations of DEP.
(3) In addition to the aforementioned, the following restrictions shall
apply:
(a) Minimum lot size shall be at least 25 acres and no more than
50 acres.
(b) No more than one access road shall constructed to the
entrance of the landfill. The access road shall be an all-weather
paved-surface road negotiable and capable of supporting
loaded solid waste collection vehicles.
(c) All-weather access road negotiable by loaded collection
vehicles shall be provided from the entrance of the landfill to
the dumping area.
(d) Maximum active dumping area shall be three acres. Continued
operation of the landfill shall be subject to compliance with all
state an d municipal regulations pertaining to landfills.
285. Editor's Note: See now 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 184-169 LIMERICK CODE § 184-169
168:786
§ 184-170. Dimensional standards. [Amended 12-21-1999 by Ord.
No. 206; 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 238; 7-13-2006 by Ord. No. 261;
5-20-2010 by Ord. No. 314; 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
Two categories of dimensional standards are provided. Class One applies to
the industrial park; Class Two applies to the freestanding use.
Standard Class One Class Two
Minimum lot size (acres) 2 3
Average lot size (acres) 3 —
Minimum lot width at building line
(feet)
150 250
Maximum impervious coverage 70% of net lot
area
70% of net lot
area
(e) No operations shall be carried on within 100 feet of any
property line of the landfill or within 100 feet of any street
right-of-way.
(f) No dumping shall be permitted on Sundays or legal holidays.
Dumping is permitted only between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and
5:30 p.m.
(g) The storage of fuel to be used on the landfill site shall be in
accordance with all applicable federal, state and municipal
regulations.
(h) Gaseous and particulate emissions from the landfill site shall
conform to the prevailing federal, state and local air pollution
control codes and regulations.
(i) A chain link fence of a minimum height of 12 feet shall be
erected along all boundary lines of the area which is approved
for use as a sanitary landfill by PADEP. The fence shall not
contain openings greater than nine square inches and shall
contain, at all entrances, gates which are locked, except during
operating hours. A dense evergreen screen of a minimum
height of 12 feet shall be maintained along all boundary lines of
the landfill, except at the entrances.
(j) A plan for the reuse of the land shall be submitted, in writing,
to the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors at the time of
securing a permit for a landfill, if operated by the municipal
authority. The plan shall be in compliance with the prevailing
zoning at time of reuse.
I. Crematorium, provided that there is a minimum setback for the use of
300 feet from any residential district. [Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No.
198]
§ 184-169 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-170
168:787
Standard Class One Class Two
Maximum building coverage
(percentage of NBA)
Warehouse/storage uses*1 45% 40%
All other uses 40% 35%
Maximum floor area ratio 0.50 0.45
Building setbacks (feet)
From ultimate right-of-way 50 50
From residential district 100 100
From any other zoning district
line1
30 50
Parking, loading and driveway
setbacks (feet)
From ultimate right-of-way 30 30
From residential district 30 50
From any other zoning district
line (no setback required if
parking is shared)2
15 25
Maximum building height (feet) 35 or 3 stories
NOTES:
1 If the nature of the proposed use is subject to change (i.e., flex space
uses), then the more restrictive standard shall be used.
2 Where a property abuts an existing railroad right-of-way, the setback may
be reduced to five feet and loading docks may extend into this setback
area.
§ 184-171. Development standards.
A. The industrial performance standards of § 184-83 of this chapter shall
apply to all uses in this district.
B. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored
in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting
with energy devices, heating devices or appliances located and
operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel.
C. All outdoor storage areas shall comply with the setback requirements
for parking, driveways and loading areas.
D. All uses shall provide landscaped buffers and site element screens as
required by the landscaping standards of § 155-27.1 of Chapter 155,
Subdivision and Land Development.286
§ 184-170 LIMERICK CODE § 184-171
168:788
286. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Development standards for private utility facilities,
added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 206, was repealed 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 238.
§ 184-171 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-171
168:789

ARTICLE XXV
(Reserved)287
§ 184-172. through § 184-181. (Reserved)
287. Editor’s Note: Former Art. XXV, PCC Planned Commercial Center Regulations, as
amended, was repealed 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379.
§ 184-172 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-172
168:791

ARTICLE XXVI
Institutional Regulations
§ 184-182. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-183. Where permitted. [Amended 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 330]
The institutional uses listed under § 184-184 below will be permitted as
conditional uses in all residential districts, all commercial districts, and the
Office/Limited Industrial District in compliance with the requirements listed
below:
A. Ensure that institutions are suitably designed and sited so as to protect
the character of adjacent neighborhoods.
B. Ensure that institutional development will be adequately served by
public facilities and services.
C. Govern the expansion of existing institutional uses in the Township.
D. Promote the development of safe and affordable housing for elderly
persons and to ensure that such housing provides accessibility to
essential community facilities and services.
E. Provide the elderly individual with a variety of structural housing
options within a single development, including the opportunity to
transfer from an independent living situation to a semidependent or
dependent care environment, should the need arise.
A. The tract shall be at least 10 acres in size and have direct access to an
arterial or collector street.
B. The proposed use shall be served by public sewer and water service.
C. A traffic study shall be performed in compliance with § 184-84 herein.
Mitigation of traffic impacts on surrounding roads may be required by
the Board of Supervisors.
D. For uses listed under § 184-184C below, the applicant shall guarantee
occupancy only by persons 55 years or older, if the housing meets the
criteria of federal and state law: [Amended 6-16-2015 by Ord. No.
360]
(1) The guaranty shall be in a form acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors, upon recommendation by the Township Solicitor.
(2) The guaranty shall be a covenant running with the land, applicable
to the applicant and his heirs, successors and assigns.
(3) If, at any time, elderly residents cannot he guaranteed, the
property may be converted to another permitted institutional use
or a use permitted in the underlying district.
§ 184-182 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-183
168:793
§ 184-184. Conditional uses.
On any tract that meets the requirements of § 184-183 above, one or more
of the following uses may be permitted:
§ 184-185. Development standards.
The following standards shall apply to any permitted institutional use listed
above:
E. Although the tract may be subdivided for financial purposes, the
development shall be designed with unified standards for building
design, landscaping, lighting and access to interior roads. These
standards shall be submitted in the form of protective covenants which
shall be binding upon developers of individual lots.
A. Medical and surgical hospitals or clinics, convalescent homes and other
health care facilities of a similar nature.
B. Retirement communities, nursing homes, personal or intermediate care
facilities and similar uses providing elderly care.
C. Individual dwelling units may be developed only when permitted in the
underlying districts and shall be restricted to the types of dwellings
permitted in the district where they are to be located. [Amended
11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198; 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 249]
D. Customary accessory uses, including cafeterias, gift shops, newsstands
and other small retail operations intended primarily for the occupants,
visitors and employees of the institution.
A. Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
B. Minimum lot width: 300 feet.
C. Minimum front yard: 100 feet.
D. Building setback from side or rear lot lines: 100 feet.
E. Maximum impervious coverage: 50% of net area or NBA, whichever is
less.
F. Maximum building coverage: 20% of net area.
G. Maximum building height: 35 feet.
H. Minimum separation between buildings: 25 feet, or the height of the
taller building, whichever is greater.
I. The maximum density of any dwelling units developed under this article
shall be equal to the density that would otherwise be permitted for such
dwellings in the applicable zoning district, plus a bonus of 20% for
dwelling units that are permanently restricted to persons age 55 or
older. This bonus is intended to recognize the fact that senior citizen
§ 184-183 LIMERICK CODE § 184-185
168:794
households typically generate less community impacts than other types
of households. [Amended 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198]
(1) Land areas occupied by uses other than dwelling units (such as
hospitals) shall not count towards the land area used to calculate
permitted dwelling density.
(2) For any facilities housing persons overnight that do not involve
dwelling units (such as a personal care center), each two beds shall
be considered equal to one dwelling unit.
J. Institutional uses shall meet the property line buffer requirements of
§ 155-27.1C of Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land Development, as
well as all other applicable landscaping requirements.
§ 184-185 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-185
168:795

ARTICLE XXVII
Floodplain Conservation District
§ 184-186. General provisions.
§ 184-187. through § 184-190. (Reserved)290
A. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of
property and life, the creation of health and safety hazards, the
disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary
and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and
relief and the impairment of the tax base by:
(1) Regulating uses, activities and developments which, acting alone
or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities and
developments, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights,
velocities and frequencies.
(2) Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and developments
from locating within areas subject to flooding.
(3) Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur
in flood-prone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against
flooding and flood damage.
(4) Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
B. Territorial applicability. The Floodplain Conservation District shall be
an overlay district on the Limerick Township Zoning Map and shall be
the identified floodplain area. [Amended 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 364]
C. Compliance. No person, partnership, business or corporation shall
undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction, development,
or conduct any activity anywhere within the identified floodplain area
unless a permit has been obtained from the floodplain Administrator
per the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.288 [Amended 3-1-2016
by Ord. No. 364]
D. (Reserved)289
288. Editor’s Note: See Ch. 89, Flood Damage Prevention.
289. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, Warning and disclaimer of liability, was repealed
3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 364.
290. Editor’s Note: Former § 184-187, Establishment of floodplain districts, as amended, §
184-188, District regulations, § 184-189, Special exceptions and variances, as amended,
and § 184-190, Zoning permit required, were repealed 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 364.
§ 184-186 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-187
168:797

ARTICLE XXVIII
Pottstown-Limerick Airport Zoning District
§ 184-191. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to regulate and restrict the height of structures
and objects of natural growth and otherwise regulate the use of property
in the vicinity of the Pottstown-Limerick Airport by creating the appropriate
zones and establishing the boundaries thereof; providing for changes in
the restrictions and boundaries of such zones; defining certain terms used
herein; referring to the Pottstown-Limerick Airport Zoning Map, which
is incorporated in and made a part of this article;291 providing for
enforcement; establishing an appeals process; and imposing penalties.
§ 184-192. Purpose.
This article, which may be cited as the "Pottstown-Limerick Airport Zoning
District," is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Airport
Zoning Act of 1984, P.L. 164, 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5911 et seq., as amended, and
Act 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code of 1968, P.L. 805,
53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended.
A. It is hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for endangering
the lives and property of users of the Pottstown-Limerick Airport and
property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an obstruction may
affect existing and future instrument approach minimums of the
Pottstown-Limerick Airport; and that an obstruction may reduce the
size of areas available for the landing, takeoff and maneuvering of
aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the Pottstown-
Limerick Airport and any public investment therein. Accordingly, it is
declared that:
(1) The creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of
being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by the
Pottstown-Limerick Airport;
(2) It is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety and
general welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions
that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and
(3) The prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to
the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power
without compensation.
B. It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or
establishment of hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal,
alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation or marking and
lighting of obstructions are public purposes for which a municipality
may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land.
291. Editor's Note: The Pottstown-Limerick Airport Zoning Map is on file in the office of the
Township Secretary.
§ 184-191 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-193
168:799
§ 184-193. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AIRPORT — The Pottstown-Limerick Airport in Limerick Township.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of the airport's usable landing
area measured in feet from sea level, which is 311 feet above mean sea
level.
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the
primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height
limitation slope set forth in this article. In plan, the perimeter of the
approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL ZONES —
These zones are set forth in § 184-194 of this article.
CONICAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION — An obstruction determined to have a
substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the
navigable airspace.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be the
mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with
the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — Any runway that is constructed for
and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth or use of land covered by this airport district which is inconsistent
with the provisions of this article or an amendment thereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance or area-type navigation equipment for which a straightin
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or
planned.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in this article.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association or government entity; including a
trustee, receiver, assignee or a similar representative of any of them.
§ 184-193 LIMERICK CODE § 184-193
168:800
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System
(ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which
a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved
airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specifically prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or
when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard
surface the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of
the primary surface is set forth in § 184-194 of this article. The elevation of
any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest
point on the runway center line.
RUNWAY — A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff
of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES — These surfaces extend outward at the
horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of
the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the
limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured
horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at ninety-degree
angles to the extended runway center line.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller-driven aircraft of up to 12,500 pounds maximum gross
weight.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
§ 184-194. Airport zones.
In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there is hereby created
and established an airport overlay district made up of the following zones
which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces,
transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical surfaces as they apply
to the Pottstown-Limerick Airport. Such zones are shown on the Pottstown-
Limerick Airport Zoning Map consisting of one sheet, which is hereby made
a part of this chapter.292 An area located in more than one of the following
zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height
limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows:
A. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone. The inner
edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary
292. Editor's Note: The Airport Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 184-193 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-194
168:801
§ 184-195. Airport zone height limitations.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected,
altered or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height herein
established for such zone.
surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward
uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet
from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the
center line of the runway.
B. Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum Greater Than 3/
4 Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone. The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is
500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the
primary surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of
the runway.
C. Transitional Zones. The Transitional Zones are the areas beneath the
transitional surfaces.
D. Horizontal Zone. The Horizontal Zone is established by swinging arcs of
5,000 feet radii for all runway designated utility or visual and 10,000
feet for all others from the center of each end of the primary surface of
each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent
to those arcs. The Horizontal Zone does not include the approach and
Transitional Zones.
E. Conical Zone. The Conical Zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends
outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
A. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of
the zones in question as follows:
(1) Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone: slopes 20
feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center
line.
(2) Runway Larger Than Utility With A Visibility Minimum Greater
Than 3/4 Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone: slopes 34
feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway
center line.
(3) Transitional Zone: slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the elevation of the primary surface
§ 184-194 LIMERICK CODE § 184-195
168:802
§ 184-196. Use restrictions.
The following use restrictions shall apply:
§ 184-197. Nonconforming uses.
Nonconforming uses shall be governed by the following:
and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet
above the airport elevation, which is 311 feet above mean sea
level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height
limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning
at the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and
extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the
precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the
conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and the
same elevation as the approach surface and extending a horizontal
distance of 5,000 feet measured at ninety-degree angles to the
extended runway center line.
(4) Horizontal Zone: established at 150 feet above the airport elevation
or at a height of 461 feet above mean sea level.
(5) Conical Zone: slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet
above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet
above the airport elevation.
B. Exceptions to height limitations. Nothing in this article shall be
construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any
structure or growth of any tree up to the height limits established by
other applicable Township zoning district limits or this article,
whichever is lower.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be
made of land or water within any zone established by this article in such
a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals
or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it
difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lights,
result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in
the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or otherwise in any
way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of
aircraft intending to use the airport.
A. Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed in this article
shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change
or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations
as of the effective date of this article or otherwise interfere with the
continuance of a use made nonconforming by the adoption of this
article. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the
§ 184-195 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-197
168:803
§ 184-198. Permits.
Applications for permits shall be governed by the following:
construction, alteration or intended use of any structure the
construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date
of this article and which is diligently executed.
B. Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this
section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is
hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance
thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the
FAA to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport
the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall
be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the Pottstown-
Limerick Airport.
A. Future uses. Except as specifically provided in Subsection A(1), (2) and
(3) hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no
structure shall be erected or otherwise established and no tree shall be
planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit thereof shall have
been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall
indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient
detail to determine whether the resulting use, structure or tree would
conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is
in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted subject to the other
requirements and conditions of this section. No permit for a use
inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall be granted unless a
variance has been granted in accordance with Subsection D.
(1) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical
zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than
75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because
of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such tree or
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such
zones.
(2) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the
runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less
than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such
tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such approach zones.
(3) In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond
the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required
for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above
the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain,
land contour or topographic features, would extend above the
height limit prescribed for such transition zones.
§ 184-197 LIMERICK CODE § 184-198
168:804
(4) Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or
alteration of any structure or growth of any tree in excess of any of
the height limits established by this article, except as set forth in
§ 184-195.
B. Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming
use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than
it was on the effective date of this article or any amendments thereto or
when the application for a permit is made.
C. Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the Zoning
Officer determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been
abandoned or more than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated or
decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or
tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the
zoning regulations.
D. Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure or permit the growth of any tree or use property not in
accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article may apply to
the Zoning Hearing Board for a variance from such regulations. Prior to
submitting an application to the Zoning Hearing Board, the applicant
shall be required to submit FAA Form 7460-1 to the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Form AV-57 to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. The
application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation as to the effect of the proposal on the
operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of
navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly
found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will
result in unnecessary hardship and that the relief granted will not be
contrary to the public interest or create a hazard to air navigation.
[Amended 4-10-2008 by Ord. No. 294]
E. Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may,
if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this
article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to
require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate
and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may
be necessary. If deemed proper by the Zoning Hearing Board, this
condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the airport, at
its own expense, to install, operate and maintain the necessary
markings and lights.
F. FAA regulation update. In the event that any existing or future
regulation of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), its successor
agency or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation is
inconsistent with any provision of this article, then such FAA or state
§ 184-198 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-198
168:805
§ 184-199. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to administer and enforce the
regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall
be made to the Township Zoning Officer on a form published for that
purpose. Applications required by this article are to be submitted to the
Zoning Hearing Board and shall be transmitted by the Zoning Officer.
§ 184-200. Conflicting regulations.
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees and the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent limitation
or requirement shall govern and prevail.
regulation shall prevail and such provision of this article shall
automatically be modified thereby.
§ 184-198 LIMERICK CODE § 184-200
168:806
ARTICLE XXIX
HI/E Heavy Industrial and Energy District
[Added 1-24-2008 by Ord. No. 290]
§ 184-201. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-202. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted:
A. Provide for a reasonable amount of industrial development in areas of
the Township already developed for such uses.
B. Provide for industrial development that is free from offensive noise,
vibrations, odors and other nuisances through use of strict performance
standards.
C. Protect industrial uses against congestion by limiting the bulk of
buildings in relation to each other and to the land area around them.
D. Encourage the development of unified and physically integrated
industrial parks to accommodate a variety of individual uses.
E. Permit solid waste disposal facilities subject to additional criteria
intended to protect the public health, safety and welfare from any
adverse effects of such facilities and operations.
F. Effectively regulate the establishment and maintenance of outdoor
storage buildings as defined herein.
A. Scientific or industrial research or engineering facilities.
B. Manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, processing, packaging, testing,
repair and ancillary storage or distribution of materials, goods,
foodstuffs and other organic or inorganic products.
C. Administrative, business or professional offices not providing services
to the general public, if ancillary to another permitted use.
D. Printing, publishing, lithography and similar processes.
E. Radio and/or television studios and transmission facilities.
F. Motor vehicle repair, storage and maintenance.
G. Rail freight station or other necessary public service or transportation
uses.
H. Accessory uses appropriate to the primary permitted uses, including
but not limited to a cafeteria or snack bar for employees or recreation
facility for employees. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
§ 184-201 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-202
168:807
§ 184-203. Private electrical and private utility facilities as
conditional use.
A private electrical utility facility and a private utility facility may be
permitted as a conditional use, subject to defined standards.
I. Agricultural uses and related buildings or structures meeting the
requirements of § 184-71A(4).
J. Veterinarian; animal boarding facility.
K. Outdoor plant nursery or similar use and related buildings or
structures.
L. Game farm, fish hatchery or hunting and fishing reserve for protection
and propagation of wildlife.
M. Public utility facilities and public utility.
N. The following uses shall require a minimum lot area of one acre instead
of the minimum lot area that would be required under § 184-170, and
shall not include any adult use:
(1) Contractor's headquarters and storage.
(2) Retail stores involving a maximum floor area of 20,000 square feet
per lot.
(3) Exercise clubs.
(4) Indoor or outdoor recreation, not including a firearms target range
unless it is completely enclosed within a sound-resistant building.
(5) Meeting and recreational facilities for membership clubs, not
including a firearms target range unless it is completely enclosed
within a sound-resistant building.
(6) Offices serving the general public.
(7) Human or animal cemetery.
(8) Place of worship.
(9) Car wash.
(10) Funeral home.
(11) Personal service use.
(12) Greenhouse, garden center or plant nursery.
(13) Appliance and small equipment repair.
A. Standards of approval.
(1) There shall be a minimum lot size of 50 acres.
§ 184-202 LIMERICK CODE § 184-203
168:808
(2) There shall be a minimum road frontage of 300 feet on each of two
separate public roads.
(3) Impervious coverage shall not exceed 30% of the lot area or the net
buildable acreage, whichever is less.
(4) Building coverage shall not exceed 10% of the net buildable
acreage.
(5) (Reserved)293
(6) Maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.10.
(7) Building setbacks shall be: [Amended 5-20-2010 by Ord. No.
314]
(a) From any property line that is adjacent to a commercial district
or industrial district: 50 feet.
(b) From any property line that is adjacent to a residential district:
250 feet.
(c) From the ultimate right-of-way of any abutting street on the
opposite side of which is located in a commercial or industrial
district 100 feet.
(d) From the ultimate tight-of-way of any abutting street on the
opposite side of which is located in a residential zoning district:
250 feet.
(8) There shall be no parking or loading, or any driveways, except for
those required for ingress and egress, in the building setback
areas.
(9) The maximum height of any structure shall be 90 feet. Chimneys,
spires, towers and similar structures may be increased in height,
up to a limit of 160 feet; however, for each foot of height in excess
of 90 feet there shall be an increase in perimeter setbacks of three
additional feet.
(10) The facility shall be served by public sewer and public water
systems.
(11) All applicants for these facilities shall be required to demonstrate
that the proposed use will have no adverse effect on the
surrounding area. The applicant shall have an analysis prepared to
show compliance with the legislative intent of this article as well as
compliance with standards of appropriate state and federal
regulatory agencies.
293. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(5), regarding minimum green area, was repealed
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379.
§ 184-203 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-203
168:809
§ 184-204. Planned industrial park as conditional use.
A planned industrial park may be permitted as a conditional use meeting
the following standards.
§ 184-205. Special exceptions.
The following uses may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board as
special exceptions:
(12) Landscaped buffers, either natural or man-made, and site element
screens shall be provided and shall comply with the provisions of
§ 155-27.1 relating to subdivision and land development, as well as
§ 184-157E of this chapter.
(13) A traffic impact analysis shall be provided and shall address all
aspects of traffic safety and improvements which will be
necessitated by the traffic generation of the facility.
(14) All facilities shall have a maximum sound level of 60 dBA between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and a level of 55 dBA at all
other times. The standard shall be measured at all lot lines adjacent
to a residential use or district. The noise levels shall be measured in
accordance with the standards set forth in § 184-83. There shall be
no prominent discrete tones that are above normal sound levels offpremises.
Silencers must be utilized during steam blow activities.
(15) All other requirements of this code shall be met by the applicant.
All standards in this section shall be in addition to and not in
replacement of any other requirements of the Zoning Code.
A. The tract shall be a minimum of 15 acres in size, with minimum road
frontage of 300 feet.
B. The tract shall have direct access to an arterial or major collector
street, or the applicant shall agree to upgrade the street in question to
the standards of a major collector street. Such improvements shall
extend as far as the nearest intersection with an arterial or major
collector street.
C. A traffic impact study shall be required, meeting the requirements of
§ 184-84 herein. The applicant may be required to make off-site
improvements to ensure that the surrounding road system is adequate
to serve the proposed development.
D. The development shall be designed in accordance with the standards of
§ 184-158, Planned office and/or industrial parks, herein.
A. Adult uses, in compliance with the requirements of § 184-76 herein.
B. Manufacture, processing or storage of explosives, paint, petroleum or
gas.
§ 184-203 LIMERICK CODE § 184-205
168:810
C. Abattoirs, meatpacking, tanning, curing or storage of leather, rawhides
or skins, manufacture or processing of fertilizer, wood pulp,
disinfectants or soap.
D. Limekilns, flour mills or manufacture of cement.
E. Any other use of the same general character as the above permitted
uses, provided that the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Hearing Board that provision will be made to adequately
reduce or minimize any noxious, offensive or hazardous features of such
use.
F. Treatment centers.
G. Junkyard or auto salvage yard, provided that any such use shall be
enclosed with a solid fence not less than six feet in height, in addition to
required landscaping.
H. Landfill, sanitary and/or industrial landfill or solid waste facility, when
operated solely by the Township or municipal authority, subject to the
following provisions:
(1) These regulations shall pertain in conjunction with and in addition
to controls and restrictions imposed for other uses in this zone by
this chapter or any other regulatory agency or body.
(2) The construction and operation of a sanitary landfill shall not be
permitted unless a permit for such landfill has been issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and the landfill is
constructed and operated in accordance with Pennsylvania Act 241
of 1968,294 as amended, and the rules and regulations of DEP.
(3) In addition to the aforementioned, the following restrictions shall
apply:
(a) Minimum lot size shall be at least 25 acres and no more than
50 acres.
(b) No more than one access road shall be constructed to the
entrance of the landfill. The access road shall be an all-weather
paved-surface road negotiable and capable of supporting
loaded solid waste collection vehicles.
(c) An all-weather access road negotiable by loaded collection
vehicles shall be provided from the entrance of the landfill to
the dumping area.
(d) Maximum active dumping area shall be three acres. Continued
operation of the landfill shall be subject to compliance with all
state and municipal regulations pertaining to landfills.
294. Editor's Note: The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act; see 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et
seq.
§ 184-205 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-205
168:811
§ 184-206. Dimensional standards. [Amended 5-20-2010 by Ord. No.
314; 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
Two categories of dimensional standards are provided. Class One applies to
the industrial park; Class Two applies to the freestanding use.
Standard Class One Class Two
Minimum lot size (acres) 2 3
Average lot size (acres) 3 —
Minimum lot width at building line (feet) 150 250
Maximum impervious coverage 70% of net lot
area
70% of net lot
area
Maximum building coverage (percentage
of NBA)
Warehouse/storage uses1 45% 40%
(e) No operations shall be carried on within 100 feet of any
property line of the landfill or within 100 feet of any street
right-of-way.
(f) No dumping shall be permitted on Sundays or legal holidays.
Dumping is permitted only between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and
5:30 p.m.
(g) The storage of fuel to be used on the landfill site shall be in
accordance with all applicable federal, state and municipal
regulations.
(h) Gaseous and particulate emissions from the landfill site shall
conform to the prevailing federal, state and local air pollution
control codes and regulations.
(i) A chain link fence of a minimum height of 12 feet shall be
erected along all boundary lines of the area which is approved
for use as a sanitary landfill by PADEP. The fence shall not
contain openings greater than nine square inches and shall
contain, at all entrances, gates which are locked, except during
operating hours. A dense evergreen screen of a minimum
height of 12 feet shall be maintained along all boundary lines of
the landfill, except at the entrances.
(j) A plan for the reuse of the land shall be submitted, in writing,
to the Limerick Township Board of Supervisors at the time of
securing a permit for a landfill, if operated by the municipal
authority. The plan shall be in compliance with the prevailing
zoning at time of reuse.
I. Crematorium, provided that there is a minimum setback for the use of
300 feet from any residential district.
§ 184-205 LIMERICK CODE § 184-206
168:812
Standard Class One Class Two
All other uses 40% 35%
Maximum floor area ratio 0.50 0.45
Building setbacks (feet)
From ultimate right-of-way 50 50
From residential district 100 100
From any other zoning district line1 30 50
Parking, loading and driveway setbacks
(feet)
From ultimate right-of-way 30 30
From residential district 30 50
From any other zoning district line (no
setback required if parking is shared)2
15 25
Maximum building height (feet) 35 or 3 stories
NOTES:
1 If the nature of the proposed use is subject to change (i.e., flex space
uses), then the more restrictive standard shall be used.
2 Where a property abuts an existing railroad right-of-way, the setback
may be reduced to five feet and loading docks may extend into this
setback area.
§ 184-207. Development standards.
§ 184-208. through § 184-211. (Reserved)
A. The industrial performance standards of § 184-83 of this chapter shall
apply to all uses in this district.
B. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored
in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting
with energy devices, heating devices or appliances located and
operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel.
C. All outdoor storage areas shall comply with the setback requirements
for parking, driveways and loading areas.
D. All uses shall provide landscaped buffers and site element screens as
required by the landscaping standards of § 155-27.1 of Chapter 155,
Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 184-206 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-208
168:813

ARTICLE XXX
RB Retail Business District
[Added 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 198]
§ 184-212. Intent.
The RB District is intended to serve the following purposes:
§ 184-213. Permitted by right uses.
The following uses shall be permitted by right within the RB District,
provided that adult uses shall be prohibited within the RB District:
A. To serve as an intermediate commercial zoning district that is less
restrictive than the VC District, but not as permissive as the HC
District.
B. To provide for an appropriate distribution of business development
throughout the Township that will avoid the need for long trips for
everyday needs.
C. To direct the most intense commercial uses that are most likely to
attract persons from outside of the Township to areas close to
expressway interchanges.
D. To carefully control traffic access from business development to avoid
increased traffic congestion and safety problems; to encourage the
consolidation of driveways, interconnections of parking areas and/or
provision of service roads to provide efficient traffic flow.
E. To make sure that business development occurs in a manner that is
highly compatible with nearby residential development, including
homes in neighboring municipalities.
F. To increase employment opportunities and generate additional tax
revenue for the Township and the school district.
G. To minimize and mitigate impacts to wetlands, lakes, streams, steep
slopes and other sensitive environmental features.
A. Retail sales and/or rental, provided that:
(1) Motor vehicle/boat/trailer/mobile home sales and rental and motor
vehicle repair shall be prohibited within the RB District.
(2) If any lot involves 65,000 square feet or more of total retail floor
area, such development shall only be permitted under the
requirements of § 184-214A.
B. Offices, which shall include, but not be limited to, business, medical,
dental, administrative, corporate, governmental and veterinary offices.
C. Scientific, medical or industrial research facilities.
§ 184-212 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-213
168:815
D. Bank or other financial institution, provided that any financial
institution drive-through facilities shall have stacking capacity for the
following vehicles without interfering with parking spaces or traffic
circulation: a minimum of eight total vehicles for all of the lanes or two
vehicles per lane, whichever is higher, including the space(s) at the
window(s).
E. Restaurants and taverns, including drive-through restaurants, in
accordance with § 184-76.3B. [Amended 4-6-1999 by Ord. No. 202;
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
F. Studios for art, crafts, dance, music, exercise or photography.
G. Exercise club.
H. Municipal and government uses.
I. Adult or child day-care centers, in accordance with § 184-73.
J. Funeral home.
K. Meeting and recreational facilities for clubs, lodges or other fraternal
organizations.
L. Public or private primary or secondary school or place of worship, not
involving any residential facilities, except for a single accessory
dwelling unit.
M. Frozen dessert sales and related manufacturing of frozen desserts
(such as ice cream).
N. Hotel or motel.
O. Indoor theater.
P. Indoor amusement or recreation facility, such as a bowling alley,
billiards or racquetball courts.
Q. Radio and/or television studios.
R. Personal service uses, including, but not limited to, shoe repair,
haircutting and dressmaking.
S. Fire or ambulance station.
T. Community center, library or museum.
U. Golf course.
V. Swimming pool.
W. United States Postal Service facility.
X. Crop farming and keeping of livestock or poultry as accessory to crop
farming.
§ 184-213 LIMERICK CODE § 184-213
168:816
§ 184-214. Conditional uses.
The following uses shall be permitted as conditional uses within the RB
District:
Y. Bakery.
Z. Greenhouse, garden center or plant nursery.
AA. Appliance and small equipment repair.
BB. Custom printing, photocopying and similar business services.
CC. Bed-and-breakfast establishments meeting § 184-74.
DD. Customary accessory uses to permitted uses, including, but not limited
to, storage. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
EE. Gasoline service station and/or car wash, provided that:
(1) The minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet.
(2) If the lot will involve its own vehicle access onto an arterial street,
then the minimum lot frontage along that arterial street shall be
200 feet.
(3) All activities shall be performed within an enclosed building, except
those activities performed at fuel or air pumps.
(4) All auto parts and other storage shall be kept within an enclosed
building.
(5) All gasoline pumps and aboveground fuel tanks shall be setback a
minimum of 25 feet from the ultimate/future street right-of-way.
(6) No paint spraying or body or frame work shall be permitted.
(7) The use shall provide for coordinated traffic access with abutting
existing and future development. If it is not possible to provide
coordinated traffic access at the present time, provisions shall still
be made for future coordinated access.
FF. Public utility facility. [Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 206]
A. Planned retail business center.
(1) A planned retail business center may include any use listed as
permitted by right in the RB District. In addition, a planned retail
business center may include the following uses:
(a) Retail sales uses with the only numeric limit on floor area being
the following:
[1] If any of the following involve 65,000 square feet or more
of total floor area, such development shall only be
§ 184-213 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-214
168:817
permitted if at least a portion of the contiguous tract is
within 1,800 feet of any portion of a state-owned ramp of a
limited access expressway:
[a] One retail establishment;
[b] Adjacent retail establishments in common business
ownership (regardless of real estate ownership); or
[c] A set of retail establishments that are not completely
separated from each other by vertical floor to ceiling
walls (except for pedestrian doorways).
(b) (Reserved)295
(2) A planned retail business center shall have a minimum tract area of
10 acres in single ownership or single equitable ownership that is
not separated by an existing public street at the time of the
conditional use application.
(a) This ten-acre minimum tract size shall not include existing and
future/ultimate rights-of-way along existing streets, but may
include rights-of-way of proposed streets.
(b) Owners of two abutting lots may submit one coordinated plan
involving a total of 10 acres that is not separated by an existing
public street, provided that the approval will bind the two
owners to develop according to the coordinated plan.
(3) A planned retail business center shall abut at least one arterial
street.
(4) Public central water and sewage facilities shall be utilized.
(5) A planned retail business center shall be developed following a
single unified development plan, with a fully coordinated system of
interior traffic access. Within the overall development plan,
individual lots meeting the minimum lot area requirements of the
RB District may be created, provided that each lot utilizes the
interior access system, as opposed to an individual driveway(s)
onto an exterior street(s).
(6) The use shall comply with the parking and landscaping provisions
in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.296
(7) A detailed landscaping plan prepared and sealed by a registered
landscape architect shall be submitted to the Township for review
and approval to determine compliance with Township ordinances.
Such landscaping plan shall also show that substantial landscaping
295. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1)(b), Drive-through restaurants meeting the
standards of § 184-76.3, as amended, was repealed 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379.
296. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 184-214 LIMERICK CODE § 184-214
168:818
§ 184-215. Special exception uses.
The following uses shall be permitted as special exception uses within the
RB District:
will provide an effective buffer to protect nearby homes from
significant nuisances.
(8) A preliminary architectural sketch, prepared by a registered
architect, shall be submitted of all proposed principal buildings,
together with a list of range of types of exterior building materials
that will be visible from a public street. A principal commercial
building shall not have the appearance of a flat roof as viewed from
a public street. Variations in rooflines and facades are strongly
encouraged. See bonus provisions in § 184-218.
(9) A statement shall be provided describing the methods that will be
used to control litter. Such statement shall commit the current and
future owners of the property to a centralized system of collecting
litter within the parking areas and around the perimeter of the site
on a regular schedule and the placement of trash containers that
are convenient to customers and that are emptied on a frequent
regular schedule.
(10) Transit stop. Where the Township anticipates that public
transportation will be available, an appropriate bus stop location
shall be provided. Such bus stop shall be located and designed in
consultation with the transit provider. The stop shall include an
appropriate and sturdy shelter. Exterior walls of a shelter shall be
mostly clear for security purposes. A sitting area shall be provided
for riders.
(11) Once conditional use approval is granted to the planned retail
business center, then individual allowed uses may be permitted by
right, provided that the development complies with the conditional
use approval and provided that all other requirements of this
chapter are met. Minor variations in the sizes and types of
individual uses shall be permitted, provided that the intensity of the
development is not increased. If the Zoning Officer determines that
an application will represent a substantive change from the
approved conditional use application, then a revised conditional
use application shall be required.
(12) Where a traffic impact study will be required under the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance,297 it shall be submitted with the
conditional use application.
(13) A unified stormwater management plan shall be provided.
297. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 184-214 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-215
168:819
§ 184-216. Dimensional standards.
Within the RB District, the following dimensional requirements shall apply,
unless a more restrictive provision is established by another section of this
chapter.
A. A use that the applicant proves to the clear satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board:
(1) Is not specifically prohibited in the RB District;
(2) Meets all other requirements of this chapter;
(3) Is closely similar in character to uses listed as permitted by right in
the RB District;
(4) Is not more intense in external impacts and nuisances than most
uses listed as permitted by right in the RB District; and
(5) Is not a threat to public health and safety.
A. Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet, except that the minimum lot
area may be reduced (for uses other than a gasoline service station and/
or car wash) to 20,000 square feet if:
(1) The lot is served by public water and public sewage service; and
(2) The lot does not have its own vehicle access onto an arterial street.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet, except the minimum lot width shall be
increased to 200 feet (measured at the street right-of-way line) for each
residual and new lot established after the adoption date of this section
that will have its own vehicle access onto an arterial street.
C. Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
D. Minimum side yard: 15 feet, unless a larger setback is required by
Subsection I below.
E. Minimum rear yard: 30 feet, unless a larger setback is required by
Subsection I below.
F. Maximum building height: 35 feet or three stories, whichever is more
restrictive.
G. Maximum building coverage: 20% of the net acreage of each lot, after
deleting existing and ultimate street rights-of-ways. See bonus below.
H. Maximum impervious coverage: 70% of the net acreage of each lot,
after deleting existing and ultimate street rights-of-way. [Amended
7-13-2006 by Ord. No. 261]
(1) All areas that are not approved as impervious shall be maintained
in attractive landscaping and vegetation.
§ 184-215 LIMERICK CODE § 184-216
168:820
(2) See bonus below.
(3) If a deed restriction permanently limits an area of landscaped land
separated by a street or that extends into an adjacent municipality
from being developed, then such land area may be used to meet the
nonimpervious requirements of one adjacent lot.
I. Minimum setback for buildings and truck loading/unloading spaces
from a residential district: 100 feet. [Amended 5-20-2010 by Ord.
No. 314]
(1) If a deed restriction permanently limits an area of landscaped land
separated by a street or in an adjacent municipality from being
developed, and such land area is between the business
development and a residential area, then such land area may be
counted towards meeting this setback.
(2) A loading/unloading dock routinely used by tractor-trailer trucks or
refrigerated trucks on a daily basis shall be separated from any
public street or residential district by a landscaped earth berm with
a minimum average height of 5 feet and maximum side slopes of
2.5:1.
(3) The setbacks from dwellings and residential districts shall apply
regardless of whether the dwelling or residential district is within
Limerick Township or another municipality.
J. Minimum building setback from right-of-way of a limited access
expressway: 50 feet.
K. Minimum setbacks for all outdoor storage, vehicle parking areas,
driveways and parking areas (except for necessary approximately
perpendicular crossings):
(1) Thirty feet from the curbline of a street, except 30 feet from the
legal right-of-way of a street where no curb will exist;
(2) Ten feet from an exterior lot line unless a coordinated interior
access system is provided between such lots; and
(3) Fifty feet from a residential district boundary, unless a wider width
is required for a buffer yard.
L. Minimum landscaped buffer yard width adjacent to a residential district
boundary: 50 feet, except 75 feet for a planned retail business center
from a residential district boundary. [Amended 5-20-2010 by Ord.
No. 314]
(1) Such buffer yard shall be required regardless of whether the
residential district or dwelling is within Limerick Township or an
adjacent municipality.
§ 184-216 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-216
168:821
§ 184-217. Multi-use lots.
The following additional requirements shall apply for any lot that includes
more than one principal use:
§ 184-218. Bonus provisions. [Amended 7-13-2006 by Ord. No. 261]
(2) If the residential district is separated from the business district by
an alley or a local street, then the buffer yard shall be required
along such alley or local street, measured from the legal right-ofway
line. However, if a developer places a deed restriction that
permanently limits an area of landscaped land separated by a
street or in an adjacent municipality from being developed, and
such land area is between the business development and a
residential district, then the width of such land area may be
counted towards meeting this buffer yard.
(3) Any areas of substantial mature trees within a required buffer yard
shall be retained and preserved. The Township may require the
establishment of a conservation easement or deed restriction.
(4) Any fencing or walls in a buffer yard shall be on the inside of any
required landscaping.
M. Minimum setback for vehicle parking spaces from buildings: five feet.
N. Minimum separation distance between principal buildings: 20 feet.
A. The lot shall be designed in a unified manner, with common parking,
consistent signs, coordinated traffic access, coordinated internal
circulation and coordinated stormwater management.
B. If two different uses require two different dimensional standards, then
the lot shall meet the most restrictive standard.
C. The lot shall include the cumulative total of the minimum number of
parking spaces required for each use, unless a reduction of parking is
approved under another provision of this chapter.
D. The development is encouraged to be designed to minimize the visual
prominence of the parking lot and long unbroken building facades as
viewed from exterior streets. Applicants are encouraged to place
parking to the rear and side of buildings. See bonus provisions in
§ 184-218 below.
A. If Subsection A(1) below is met and at least two of the other three
following standards are met, in the determination of the Township, then
the maximum building coverage provided above shall be increased to
30% and the maximum impervious coverage provided above shall be
increased to 70%. Such standards shall be met in a manner that is
legally binding regardless of ownership of the land, such as through
deed restrictions.
§ 184-216 LIMERICK CODE § 184-218
168:822
§ 184-219. Additional requirements.
(1) The applicant commits to complete or fund substantial vehicle,
bicycle and pedestrian improvements and dedicate substantial
right-of-way for major road improvements. A bonus shall not be
approved for improvements and right-of-way dedications that
would be otherwise required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation or otherwise required by Limerick Township.
(2) No vehicle parking spaces and no truck loading/unloading spaces
are located between the principal building and the abutting street.
Instead, parking and loading spaces are located to the rear or side
of the principal building.
(3) A park-and-ride parking area is paved and open to the general
public, at a minimum, from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Such parking
area shall include security lighting and signs identifying it as being
available for public carpool/park-and-ride parking and shall include
a minimum of 25 parking spaces. Such parking area shall be
coordinated with any available public transit service.
(4) A preliminary architectural sketch is submitted of all proposed
principal buildings, together with a list of range of types of exterior
building materials that will be visible from a public street. The
applicant shall agree to prohibit the use of metal panels and
smooth-faced concrete block as the majority of exterior building
sides visible from a public street. Buildings over 300 feet in length
shall have the architectural appearance of being more than one
building as viewed from the front ground level, although the actual
roof may structurally be a single continuous line. Such variation
may be accomplished through variations in appearance of
rooflines, pillars, sloped roof extensions, canopies, variations of
appearance of materials and similar architectural features. Such
features shall be designed to avoid a long monotonous big-box
appearance.
B. If the bonus is approved under this § 184-218, and if so provided on an
approved subdivision and/or land development plan, then the applicant
may vary the maximum building coverage of 35% and a maximum
impervious coverage of 70%, provided that deed restrictions on other
lot(s) within the subdivision are created with more restrictive maximum
building and impervious coverage limits, so that an average maximum
building coverage of 30% and maximum impervious coverage of 70% is
maintained across the entire subdivision.
A. If a use, lot, tract, subdivision and/or land development can reasonably
be expected to result in entrance and exits by a total of more than 100
vehicles during a peak hour, then a traffic impact study meeting
§ 184-84 shall be required.
§ 184-218 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-219
168:823
B. Cross-reference. See the applicable landscaping and screening
requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.298
(NOTE: As of the adoption date of this article, these included but were
not limited to the following:
(1) Street tree requirements within § 155-27.
(2) Property line buffer requirements within § 155-27.1
(3) Site element screening requirements within § 155-27.1 (including
but not limited to dumpster screening).
(4) Stormwater basin landscaping requirements within § 155-27.3.
(5) Parking lot landscaping requirements within § 155-16.
C. All refuse collection areas shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet from
any residential district boundary or street ultimate right-of-way line and
10 from any other lot line. The refuse area shall be shown on
development plans and shall not interfere with circulation within
parking areas.
D. Outdoor storage shall only be permitted to the rear of principal
buildings and shall not extend into side or rear yard setbacks.
E. Vehicle access. See the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.299
F. Pedestrian access. Pedestrian circulation shall be incorporated into the
site design. A pedestrian walkway shall connect uses within the site.
Also, walkways shall be designed to link with existing or future
sidewalks and/or trails so as to interconnect residential areas and other
pedestrian destinations. See the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
G. Lighting. The development shall comply with the Township Outdoor
Lighting Ordinance (Ordinance No. 180), as amended.300
H. Adequate provisions shall be included for loading and unloading and
refuse collection in a manner that minimizes the visibility of these
features from the exterior of the property. Adequate provisions shall be
made for fire truck access.
298. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
299. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
300. Editor's Note: See now §§ 155-17 and 155-17.1.
§ 184-219 LIMERICK CODE § 184-219
168:824
ARTICLE XXXI
LLI Interchange Overlay District
[Added 11-7-2001 by Ord. No. 235]
§ 184-220. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to:
§ 184-221. Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted upon approval of the LLI Interchange
Overlay District as a conditional use:
§ 184-222. Dimensional standards. [Amended 7-13-2006 by Ord. No.
261; 5-20-2010 by Ord. No. 314; 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
The following dimensional standards apply within the Interchange Overlay
District:
Standard Interchange Overlay District
Maximum impervious coverage 70% of net lot area
Maximum building coverage
(percentage of NBA)
40% for warehouse/storage uses;
30% for all other uses
Maximum floor area ratio 0.35
Building setbacks (feet):
A. Encourage development of employment centers at interchanges of the
Route 422 Expressway.
B. Provide for appropriate development flexibility to respond to changes in
market demand.
C. Provide a tax base that will have minimum impact on municipal
services.
D. Reduce traffic conflicts and congestion by minimizing travel outside the
interchange areas.
E. Provide opportunities for commercial development sufficient to meet
the needs for not only the local, but also of the regional, market.
F. Provide convenient locations for services needed by the traveling
public.
A. All permitted, special exception, and conditional uses in the LLI and RB
Districts.
B. Conference center.
C. Any use of the same general character as any of the other uses
permitted in this district.
§ 184-220 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-222
168:825
Standard Interchange Overlay District
From ultimate right-of-way 50
From residential district 100
From commercial or industrial
district
30
Parking, loading, driveway setbacks
(feet) from ultimate right-of-way of:
Limited access highway 15
Other roadways 25
From residential district 30
From commercial district 15
Maximum building height (feet),
subject to any FAA requirements:
Radio, television, or transmission
towers
200; setback shall be equal to the
height
Office and hotel uses 75
Other buildings 35 feet or 3 stories
The thirty-five-foot height may be
increased to 45 feet or three
stories, whichever is less, if such
additional height would be located
a minimum of 200 feet from a
residential district. If any building
involves three or more stories, it
shall be fully sprinklered, in
accordance with the current
adopted Building Code of Limerick
Township, as amended.301
Minimum separation between
principal buildings
20 feet or spacing required by the
Building Code, whichever is
greater
§ 184-223. (Reserved)302
301. Editor's Note: See Ch. 60, Building Construction, and Ch. 73, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
302. Editor's Note: Former § 184-223, Signs permitted in Interchange Overlay District, was
repealed 6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 330. See now § 184-94.1, Signs permitted in LLI
Interchange Overlay District.
§ 184-222 LIMERICK CODE § 184-224
168:826
§ 184-224. Standards of approval. [Amended 4-16-2002 by Ord. No.
237]
An applicant for conditional use permission pursuant to this section shall
have the burden of presenting evidence to the Board of Supervisors of
compliance with the following development standards:
A. Conveyance of parcels. Individual parcels or lots which may be created
in a development in this district may be transferred, provided that any
transferee shall have an economic interest in the operation of the entire
development as an integrated unit in accordance with the approved
plan.
(1) Documentary evidence shall be filed with the Township which shall
affirm to the satisfaction of the Township that the developer, its
successors and assigns or any duly created condominium
association or similar entity shall remain responsible for the
construction, control and maintenance of all common areas.
(2) All provisions of this district shall apply on a development-wide
basis in accordance with an approved plan.
B. Landscaping.
(1) Applicant shall comply with all landscaping requirements of this
zoning code and the provisions of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance303 requirements except that, recognizing
the unique nature of the development in this district, the following
standards shall be maintained:
(a) Planting islands in parking lots shall be provided for every 20
spaces instead of every 10 spaces as required by
§ 155-16C(2)(a).
(b) Parking lots may be divided into smaller parking areas of not
more than 260 spaces instead of 100 spaces required by
§ 155-16C(2)(d).
(c) No screening shall be required along the right-of-way of a
limited access highway.
(d) Substantial landscaping shall provide an effective buffer and/or
screening to protect neighboring residential uses or
residentially zoned areas.
(2) The applicant shall prepare a detailed landscaping plan, prepared
and sealed by a registered landscape architect, to show compliance
with these regulations.
303. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 184-224 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-224
168:827
§ 184-225. Mixed-use provisions. [Added 4-10-2008 by Ord. No.
295]
If a proposed development within the Interchange Overlay District includes
a combination of either three or more nonresidential uses identified in
§ 184-213, 184-214 or 184-215 or residential use plus two or more
nonresidential uses identified in § 184-213, 184-214 or 184-215, the
following standards shall apply:
C. Lighting. Lighting shall comply with the requirements of § 184-62
herein as well as the provisions of §§ 155-17 and 155-17.1 of the
Limerick Township Code. [Amended 5-3-2005 by Ord. No. 249]
D. Utilities. The property shall be served by public sewer and public water
systems.
E. Traffic impact study. A traffic impact analysis shall be provided and
shall address all aspects of traffic safety and improvements which will
be necessitated by the traffic generation of the facility.
F. Public transportation. Where the Township anticipates that public
transportation will be available, appropriate facilities for bus stop shall
be shown and provided, or set aside for future use. Where necessary,
the area shall include an appropriate and sturdy shelter for passengers.
Freestanding shelters shall have clear exterior walls for security
purposes and may be provided with a sitting area.
G. Loading and unloading. All loading and unloading facilities shall be
confined to the rear of the buildings to be constructed.
H. Stormwater management. A unified stormwater management plan shall
be provided.
A. Residential townhouses, multiplex and multifamily residential buildings
shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:
(1) No more than five residential dwelling units per acre of total tract
area shall be permitted.
(2) Residential dwelling units shall require one parking space per
bedroom.
B. The following dimensional standards shall apply:
(1) The calculation of site capacity required by § 184-78 shall be
inapplicable to developments proposed under this section.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage shall be 80%.
(3) Maximum building coverage shall be 40%.
(4) (Reserved)304
(5) Building setbacks (feet):
§ 184-224 LIMERICK CODE § 184-225
168:828
(a) From ultimate right of way: 15.
(b) From residential or institutional districts: 50.
C. Parking, loading, driveway setbacks (feet) from ultimate right-of-way.
(1) All roadways: 15.
D. Height (feet) (subject to FAA regulations):
(1) Office and hotel uses: 100.
(2) Multifamily residential:
(a) Sixty-five, if over a level of parking.
(b) Fifty-five, if not over a level of parking.
(3) Other buildings/uses: 65.
E. FAR: 0.65.
F. (Reserved)
G. Nursing homes, skilled-care residential facilities, continuing car
retirement communities, hospital, surgical center or other similar
medical facilities shall be permitted.
H. Drive-through services for commercial operation of financial
institutions, drug stores, retail and restaurants shall be permitted.
I. Pharmaceutical manufacturing shall be permitted.
J. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 184-81C, 100% of all slopes in
excess of 15% may be disturbed within the LLI Overlay Zoning District.
K. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 184-81D, 100% of all woodlands
may be disturbed in the LLI Overlay Zoning District.
L. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article XI, the Township may,
pursuant to conditional use, permit a reduction of the nonresidential
parking requirements for developments within the LLI Overlay Zoning
District of up to 25% of the parking requirements for all uses proposed
within a development. Such conditional use shall be granted upon a
demonstration by the applicant, and concurrence by the Township
Engineer, of either of the following:
(1) That the aggregate parking requirements imposed by the chapter
are in excess of the actual anticipated parking demand.
(2) That the parking demands created by the proposed uses will result
in parking demands at different times, therefore reducing the
number of overall parking spaces required.
304. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(4), regarding minimum green area, was repealed
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379.
§ 184-225 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-225
168:829
M. Architectural design standards.
(1) The developer shall incorporate a street-level and ground-level
architectural treatment where various mixed uses meet the ongrade
streets or the pedestrian level. Such architectural treatment
shall include roof overhangs, canopies, building recesses, or similar
treatments designed to add architectural interest to the building.
(2) Window sizes and architectural treatments of all exterior walls
shall be scaled to reflect a welcoming and inviting aesthetic
consistent with a gateway or entrance to a commercial center. The
developer shall utilize the following building materials in
development: brick, precast concrete, dry-vit, aluminum, glass,
stucco, polished or architecturally treated concrete block, vinyl,
hardi-board stucco, stone or wood.
(3) Where possible, exterior walls of all buildings shall incorporate
articulations, setbacks, recesses, various patterns and designs of
materials, joints, or similar architectural features to avoid large
masses of unbroken building materials and to add architectural
interest.
(4) The developer shall utilize low parapet walls to hide and screen all
rooftop equipment to the extent feasible.
(5) Walkways and pedestrian areas shall include streetlights,
coordinated site furniture (e.g., benches, trash receptacles, tree
grates, bicycle racks, etc.), sign kiosks, banners, gazebos, or
similar features.
(6) The developer shall provide a coordinated sign program
throughout the entire development, particularly in the retail areas.
(7) All trash disposal areas shall be screened with enclosures
(matching, consistent with or complementing the materials of the
buildings) and complementary landscaping.
(8) On-grade parking areas shall be extensively landscaped (for visual
enhancement purposes) at the minimum required by this chapter
and shall be connected with a pedestrian walkway system within
the development.
(9) All areas of the development shall be landscaped with varieties of
evergreen, deciduous and flowering ornamental trees and shrubs.
§ 184-225 LIMERICK CODE § 184-225
168:830
ARTICLE XXXII
Lewis Road Conditional Use Overlay District
[Added 12-21-2010 by Ord. No. 319]
§ 184-226. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to provide a consistent regulatory approach to
encourage cohesive and high quality site and architectural design for the
purpose of responding to market demands while furthering the planning
goals of the Township. In addition, it is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-227. Conditional uses.
A. Encourage the adaptive reuse of single-family residential buildings.
B. Encourage the assemblage of property.
C. Provide a mixed use office, retail, and appropriate residential
development in accordance with the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
D. Foster cohesive land use patterns and attractive building and site
development along the Lewis Road Corridor.
E. Create an attractive visual environment and cohesive streetscape that
also provides a safe environment for pedestrians and vehicles.
F. Limit curb cuts along Lewis Road and encourage shared and crossaccess
easements between properties to promote the free flow of
traffic.
G. Create employment opportunities for Township residents.
H. Protect against development congestion by limiting the bulk and mass
of buildings in relation to each other and to their contextual setting.
A. Class I. On any lot eight acres or larger in the Lewis Road Conditional
Overlay District, any of the following uses, and no other, may be
permitted as a conditional use as approved by the Board of Supervisors,
according to the requirements of § 184-68, Conditional use
applications, herein:
(1) Banks;
(2) Restaurants up to 20,000 square feet (two restaurants per Class I
parcel);
(3) Specialized retail up to 20,000 square feet in a single structure. No
more than 15,000 square feet of specialized retail shall be allowed
for every five acres of gross tract area;
(4) Adult day-care centers;
(5) Age-qualified residential uses are limited to condominiums and
apartments including community center, assisted-living or
§ 184-226 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-227
168:831
intermediate-care dwelling units and skilled nursing home
facilities. "Age-qualified" shall mean that any such use complies
with the standards for "housing for older persons" exemption of 24
CFR Part 100, Subpart E, of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968
as amended by the Fair Housing Amendment Act of 1988 and the
Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995. This use is permitted only
when the entire frontage of the tract on Lewis Road is developed
with nonresidential uses;
(6) Child day-care center up to 10,000 square feet per structure;
(7) Health-care facility up to 20,000 square feet per structure;
(8) Health and athletic clubs up to 20,000 square feet per structure;
(9) Professional services, up to 20,000 square feet per structure, which
shall consist of accountants, actuaries, appraisers, architects,
attorneys, brokerage firms, business consultants, copywriters,
engineers, landscape architects, law firms, physicians, planners,
public relations professionals, recruiters, researchers, real estate
brokers, software engineers and web designers, and no others; and
(10) Professional office up to 20,000 square feet per structure;
(11) Scientific or industrial research or engineering facilities up to
20,000 square feet per structure; and
(12) Mixed uses including two or more of the above-referenced uses on
the same lot or in the same building. For mixed use Class I parcels
containing residential uses, 200 square feet of nonresidential uses
must be constructed for ever one residential unit at the same time
as the residential uses are constructed.
B. Class II.
(1) On any lot one acre or greater and less than eight acres in the
Lewis Road Conditional Overlay District, any one of the following
uses, and no other, may be permitted as a conditional use as
approved by the Board of Supervisors, according to the
requirements of § 184-68, Conditional use applications, herein:
(a) Banks;
(b) Restaurants up to 20,000 square feet (one restaurant per Class
II parcel);
(c) Professional services, up to 20,000 square feet per structure,
which shall consist of accountants, actuaries, appraisers,
architects, attorneys, brokerage firms, business consultants,
copywriters, engineers, landscape architects, law firms,
physicians, planners, public relations professionals, recruiters,
researchers, real estate brokers, software engineers and web
designers, and no others; and
§ 184-227 LIMERICK CODE § 184-227
168:832
§ 184-228. Conditional use requirements.305
(d) Professional office up to 20,000 square feet per structure;
(e) Child day-care center up to 10,000 square feet per structure;
(f) Scientific or industrial research or engineering facilities up to
20,000 square feet per structure; and
(g) Mixed uses including two or more of the above-referenced uses
on the same lot or in the same building;
(2) Residential uses are prohibited.
C. Class III. On a lot or premises greater than 15,000 square feet and less
than one acre, a building may be erected, altered or used as a
conditional use for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Home occupation;
(2) Professional services, up to 5,000 square feet per structure, which
shall consist of accountants, actuaries, appraisers, architects,
attorneys, brokerage firms, business consultants, copywriters,
engineers, landscape architects, law firms, physicians, planners,
public relations professionals, recruiters, researchers, real estate
brokers, software engineers and web designers, and no others; and
(3) Professional offices, up to 5,000 square feet per structure, for
doctors, dentists, chiropractors, realtors, insurance sales, financial
consulting and no other professional offices. Massage therapy is
specifically prohibited unless performed in a doctor's or
chiropractor's office;
(4) Studios for instruction of music and other arts;
(5) Banks;
(6) Child day-care center up to 5,000 square feet per structure.
A. The proposed development must be within the Lewis Road Corridor
Overlay District that is located to the south of the intersection of Lewis
Road and Linfield-Trappe Road and extending approximately to the
intersection of Lewis Road and Abbey Road, as shown on the illustrative
map in Exhibit "A"306 which is attached hereto and incorporated herein
by reference ("Lewis Road Corridor Overlay District"). The current
specific parcels contained in the Lewis Road Overlay District are as
follows: 370000151001; 370000616004; 370000619001;
370000622007; 370000625004; 370000639908; 370000640007;
370000641006; 370000643004; 370000646001; 370000648008;
305. Editor's Note: See also 184 Attachment 3, Lewis Road Conditional Use Overlay District
Development Standards, included at the end of this chapter.
306. Editor's Note: The exhibit with the map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 184-227 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-228
168:833
370000649007; 370000650006; 370001241423; 370001241441;
370001241468; 370001531007; 370001534004; 370001537001;
370001540007; 370001543004; 370001545002; 370001546001;
370001548908; 370001549007; 370001549106; 370001549205;
370001552004; 370001555001; 370001558007; 370001561004;
370001564001; 370001567007; 370001570004; 370001573001;
370001576007; 370001579004; 370001582001; 370001585007;
370001587005; 370001591001; 370001593008; 370001594007;
370001600001; 370001601009; 370001603007; 370001606004;
370001606508; 370001608002; 370001687004; 370001690001;
370001693007; 370001696004; 370001699001; 370001702007;
370001705004; 370001708001; 370001711016; 370001714004;
370001714409; 370001717001; 370001720007; 370001721006;
370001723004; 370001723004; 370001726001; 370001729007;
370001732004; 370001735001; 370002163005; 370002284001;
370002287007; 370004724567; 370004775336 (End of List of Parcel
Numbers).
B. Public central water and sewage facilities shall be utilized.
C. Pedestrian and bicycle facilities shall be provided for within the lot and
along public rights-of-way unless otherwise authorized by the Board of
Supervisors.
D. In between the Lewis Road right-of-way and any building, parking lots
may not exceed one double-loaded parking aisle in accordance with
§ 155-16B of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
E. Any proposed development shall be developed following a single unified
phased development plan, with a fully coordinated system of interior
traffic access. Within the overall development plan, individual lots
meeting the minimum lot area requirements may be created, provided
that each lot utilizes a shared interior access system, as opposed to an
individual driveway(s) onto dedicated or private street(s).
F. A detailed landscaping plan prepared in accordance with § 155-34C of
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and sealed by a
registered landscape architect shall be submitted to the Township for
review and approval to determine compliance with Township
ordinances. The following standards shall apply and supersede
requirements stated in § 155.27.1, Buffers and screens, of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(1) Developments designed under Class III shall use the following
standards:
(a) The buffer yard width shall be reduced to 15 feet.
(b) For nonresidential uses adjacent to residential land uses:
[1] Plantings within the buffer shall be two times (double) the
required plantings specified in § 155-27.1C(5)(b), Medium
§ 184-228 LIMERICK CODE § 184-228
168:834
intensity buffer, of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance. [Added 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360]
G. (Reserved)307
H. The site element screens, as specified in § 155-27.1D of the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, shall not be required, except as
noted:
(1) For any use adjacent to nonresidential land uses, the buffer
requirement shall not be required for parking areas. Site Element
Screen Type 1 as specified in § 155-27.1D(6)(a) of the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance is required around all parking
areas.
(2) More rigorous landscaping requirements may be added to address
Township design concerns by the Board of Supervisors.
(3) All required streetscape improvements shall be installed before a
certificate of occupancy is issued by the Township for any building
on the tract. If plant materials cannot be planted during cold
weather winter months, a temporary certificate of occupancy will
be issued. Plant materials must be installed as soon as weather
permits, but in no case later than April 30.
I. Architectural design guidelines.
(1) All proposed buildings and renovations and additions to existing
buildings, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the architectural design guidelines.
(2) As the first step in the review of proposed architecture, the
applicant shall submit information, including but not limited to
photographic examples of the proposed type and character of
proposed architecture for preliminary review by the Board of
Supervisors.
(3) Once the preliminary architectural type is reviewed by the Board of
Supervisors, additional and more detailed architectural, color
renderings, prepared by a registered architect, shall be submitted
for all proposed buildings, together with a list and samples of types
of exterior building materials that will be visible from a public
street.
(4) Horizontal articulation of a building, using elements such as pent
eaves, pediments, and sills and lintels above and below windows
and doors is required. Similarly, roofline offsets, cross gables, and
dormers shall be used to vary the massing of a building and relieve
the effect of a single, long roof. The massing of any one building
307. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding plantings within the buffer, was repealed
6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 360.
§ 184-228 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-228
168:835
should generally not exceed 50 feet (horizontal dimension) without
a change of facade plane or materials.
(5) Vertical articulation of a building is likewise required. Elements
such as pilasters, columns (freestanding or integral to walls), slight
variations in the wall plane to break up continuous facades and
other architectural elements and changes in materials shall be
used. Blank facades, without windows or architectural elements to
create interest, are prohibited.
(6) Proportions of walls to openings. For building facades facing
streets, a wall-to-window ratio of between two to one and four to
one is required. For commercial and retail uses, a wall-to-window
ratio of between one to one and two to one is required.
(7) All buildings three stories or less shall have a pitched roof. All
buildings more than three stories shall have roofs that appear to be
pitched and meet the approval of the Board of Supervisors. All
visibly exposed walls shall have an articulated cornice that projects
horizontally from the vertical building wall. All air-conditioning
units, HVAC systems, exhaust pipes or stacks, satellite dishes and
other telecommunications devices shall be thoroughly screened
from view from both the public right-of-way and adjacent
properties by using parapets, walls or roof elements. Such
screening devices should be compatible with the proposed building
materials. [Amended 8-16-2011 by Ord. No. 325]
(8) Fixed or retractable awnings are permitted at ground floor level
and on upper levels where appropriate, if they complement a
building's architectural features. Metal or internally lit awnings are
prohibited. In buildings with multiple storefronts, or on adjacent
buildings, compatible awnings may be used as a means of unifying
the structures.
(9) Building materials. Materials proposed for buildings in the Lewis
Road Overlay District should reflect the architectural influences of
the region.
(a) Preferred facade materials include:
[1] Brick.
[2] Stone native to the region.
[3] Wood clapboard, trim and detailing.
[4] Simulated wood clapboard (cementicious or vinyl).
[5] Stucco, provided it is not more than 50% of the wall
facade.
[6] Split-face cement block, provided that it is highly textured.
§ 184-228 LIMERICK CODE § 184-228
168:836
(b) Other possibly acceptable building facade materials (subject to
approval of the Board of Supervisors) include:
[1] Simulated brick.
[2] Simulated stone.
(10) Chain-store architecture. If a use is proposed that is a part of a
chain-store franchise that has standard architectural styles,
materials and motifs, the proposed architecture must still comply
with the architectural design guidelines.
(11) All structures proposed under the same application or development
parcel shall consist of a unified and/or compatible architectural
theme.
(12) Signage. Signage for any proposed use in the Lewis Road Overlay
District shall be an integral part of the architectural design for the
building(s). Signage materials shall utilize the same, similar or
complementary materials as utilized for the buildings and are
subject to the review and approval of the Board of Supervisors.
Maximum sizes for signs shall be regulated in accordance with use
and with Article XII, Signs, of this chapter, except to the extent
specifically modified or limited by § 184-93K(2). Sign text, content,
and changes and maintenance of same shall not be subject to
conditional use approval. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
J. The following standards shall apply for Class 1 age-qualified residential
uses:
(1) No residential building shall be located within 200 feet of the Lewis
Road ultimate right-of-way.
(2) Individual fee simple lots shall not be required.
(3) Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one off-street
parking space per residential dwelling unit. An additional 0.2 offstreet
parking space per residential dwelling unit shall be provided
as designated guest parking. If required guest parking calculated
in accordance with this subsection results in a fraction of 0.4 or
less, the required guest parking shall be rounded down to the
nearest whole number.
(4) (Reserved)308
(5) A pedestrian circulation system shall be developed that provides
logical and safe connections to residences, buildings, destinations,
and off-site uses, as approved by the Board of Supervisors.
308. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J(4), regarding residential building facades and covered
walkways connecting buildings, was repealed 8-16-2011 by Ord. No. 325.
§ 184-228 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-228
168:837
(6) At least 10% of a Class I tract containing an age-qualified
residential use shall consist of usable open space(s) that can be
used by residents for passive recreation. Amenities in this area
shall include shade trees and other extensive plant materials, lawn
areas, benches, and other sitting areas, gazebos, ornamental
gardens and other similar features. At least 5% of the tract shall be
contiguous usable open space.
K. No structure constructed within 200 feet of the legal right-of-way of
Lewis Road shall consist of more than 20,000 square feet of gross floor
area;
L. A comprehensive traffic study considering all traffic impacts, expected
at full build-out of all phases within the proposed development, shall be
prepared and shall address all aspects of traffic safety and
improvements which will be necessitated by the traffic generation of
the facility.
M. The streetscape for all properties within the Lewis Road Conditional
Use District shall be designed in accordance with § 155-27 of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
N. Shared driveway and vehicular access between lots.
(1) The Board of Supervisors, as a condition of the conditional use
approval, may require, when practical, that Class II and Class III
lots developed for nonresidential uses under the Lewis Road
Conditional Use Overlay District shall share access with an
adjacent nonresidential lot when the lot cannot attain the twohundred-
foot separation between driveways on adjacent lots as
required under § 155-16A(3)(b) of the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance.
(2) Shared access for Class II and Class III lots may be entirely located
on one lot or split along a common lot line.
(3) Each Class II and Class III property with a nonresidential use shall
provide an access easement providing internal vehicular access to
the abutting lot(s).
(4) The shared access for Class II and Class III lots shall be the sole
access to the site unless a second driveway is permitted consistent
with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
§ 155-16A(3)(b).
(5) Shared access for Class II and Class III lots shall not be required
when all possible interconnections between the two lots would
cross wetlands, floodplains or slopes of 15% or more.
§ 184-228 LIMERICK CODE § 184-228
168:838
ARTICLE XXXIII
MS Main Street District
[Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 334]
§ 184-229. Intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-230. Permitted uses.
A. Create a consistent zoning district along the Ridge Pike corridor.
B. Encourage mixed-use commercial such as retail, office and other
compatible uses that will help to create a vital mixed-use district along
the length of the corridor.
C. Encourage a high level of architectural detail, aesthetically pleasing
signage and functional site design through the utilization of design
guidelines.
D. Encourage cross-access easements, shared driveways and the creation
of service roads between parcels to minimize the number of driveways
onto Ridge Pike in order to enhance safety and provide more efficient
and economical access and parking.
E. Encourage shared parking between compatible uses on the same lot or
on adjacent lots.
F. Encourage the development of Ridge Pike as a complete street that
safety accommodates bus, automobile, bicycle and pedestrian
transportation modes.
A. One or more of the following principal uses allowed by right:
(1) Home occupation in accordance with § 184-72.
(2) No-impact home-based business, as defined, and subject to the
provisions of the definition of "no-impact home-based business" in
§ 184-10.
(3) Retail sales. This use does not include the sale of gasoline or the
sale, repair or servicing of vehicles, such as automobiles, trucks,
motorcycles, farm equipment, boats, motorized and nonmotorized
recreational vehicles, trailers, construction equipment and related
accessories and attachments, mobile homes, or other vehicles.
(4) Retail garden center.
(5) Bank.
(6) Restaurant/tavern/cafe.
(7) Drive-through restaurant in accordance with § 184-76.3.
§ 184-229 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-230
168:839
(8) Hotel or motel.
(9) Personal services.
(10) Professional and business offices.
(11) Cultural use.
(12) Health services. This use excludes outpatient care facilities with a
gross floor area greater than 1,500 square feet unless this use is
part of an outpatient surgical center with a minimum gross floor
area of 50,000 square feet.
(13) Health care facility. This use excludes outpatient clinics or
dispensaries with a gross floor area greater than 1,500 square feet
unless this use is part of a hospital with a minimum gross floor area
of 100,000 square feet.
(14) Indoor commercial recreation. This use excludes outdoor
commercial recreation.
(15) Day care in accordance with § 184-73.
(16) Undertaking or funeral establishment.
(17) Small appliance or electronics repair.
(a) This use shall be totally contained indoors.
(b) This use shall not include the repair and/or servicing of
vehicles or tools powered by an internal combustion engine.
(18) Rental of goods, merchandise and equipment. This use shall be
totally contained indoors.
(19) Conversion, as defined. Residential conversions shall be subject to
the provisions of § 184-70.
(20) Municipal/government.
(21) Educational use.
(22) Place of worship.
(23) Fire/ambulance station.
(24) Open space.
(25) Clubs, lodges, fraternal organizations.
(26) Public utilities facility. [Amended 4-22-2014 by Ord. No. 347]
(27) Veterinarians, not including animal boarding facilities or kennels,
§ 184-75 does not apply.
(28) Agriculture.
§ 184-230 LIMERICK CODE § 184-230
168:840
§ 184-231. Conditional uses.
(29) Bed-and-breakfasts in accordance with § 184-74.
(30) Customary accessory uses to permitted uses.
A. One or more of the following uses are permitted by conditional use,
provided that all standards in this chapter for conditional uses are met,
as well as the standards required in this section.
(1) Two-family in accordance with the following conditions:
(a) One residential dwelling unit is permitted for every 1,200
square feet of nonresidential gross floor area constructed,
provided that bulk and area requirements herein are met. The
nonresidential gross floor area cannot be used to permit this
use if it is used to meet requirements for single-family
detached, apartments or single-family attached uses.
(b) The residential area must be subdivided separately from the
commercial area for the purposes of calculating stormwater
management, area and bulk requirements.
(c) The entire area subdivided for residential uses shall be set
back 300 feet from Ridge Pike ultimate right-of-way. This
setback shall not apply to stormwater management facilities
that are shared between residential and nonresidential uses.
(d) The perimeter of the area subdivided for residential uses shall
contain a twenty-five-foot wide buffer in accordance with
§ 155.27.1 along all property lines and adjacent to
nonresidential uses.
(e) Two-family uses shall establish the applicable front yard
setbacks from an internal roadway or roadway other than
Ridge Pike.
(f) For developments with 30 or more dwelling units: 400 square
feet of common use area shall be provided for each dwelling
unit in accordance with the following:
[1] The common use area shall not overlap the required buffer
area except to connect to open space on contiguous
parcels.
[2] The common use area shall be accessible to residential
units and consist of a contiguous area of at least 11,000
square feet. The perimeter of the common use area shall
not have a dimension less than 50 feet on any one side.
[3] The common use area shall connect to adjacent open space
parcels.
§ 184-230 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-231
168:841
[4] Residential buildings located adjacent to a common use
area or residential buildings located along a street
adjacent to a common use area shall be oriented so that at
least 60% of the buildings provide frontage on the common
use area.
[5] Buildings with frontage on the common use area shall
provide side or rear loaded garages.
(g) Horizontal articulation: all dwelling units shall contain a
minimum one-foot horizontal roof offset from roofs of
neighboring dwelling units to vary the massing of a building
and relieve the effect of a single, long roof.
(h) Vertical articulation: all dwelling units shall contain a minimum
two-foot vertical front facade offset from front facades of
neighboring dwelling units to vary the massing of a building
and relieve the effect of a single, long wall.
(i) All residential buildings shall have pitched roofs.
(2) Single-family attached in accordance with the following conditions:
(a) One residential dwelling unit is permitted for every 1,200
square feet of nonresidential gross floor area constructed,
provided that bulk and area requirements herein are met. The
nonresidential gross floor area cannot be used to permit this
use if it is used to meet requirements for single-family
detached, apartments or two-family uses.
(b) The residential area must be subdivided separately from the
commercial area for the purposes of calculating stormwater
management, area and bulk requirements.
(c) The entire area subdivided for residential uses shall be set
back 300 feet from Ridge Pike ultimate right-of-way. This
setback shall not apply to stormwater management facilities
that are shared between residential and nonresidential uses.
(d) The perimeter of the area subdivided for residential uses shall
contain a twenty-five-foot wide buffer in accordance with
§ 155.27.1 along all property lines and adjacent to
nonresidential uses.
(e) Two-family uses shall establish the applicable front yard
setbacks from an internal roadway or existing roadways other
than Ridge Pike.
(f) For developments with 30 or more dwelling units: 400 square
feet of common use area shall be provided for each dwelling
unit in accordance with the following:
§ 184-231 LIMERICK CODE § 184-231
168:842
[1] The common use area shall not overlap the required buffer
area except to connect to open space on contiguous
parcels.
[2] The common use area shall be accessible to residential
units and consist of a contiguous area of at least 11,000
square feet. The perimeter of the common use area shall
not have a dimension less than 50 feet on any one side.
[3] The common use area shall connect to adjacent open space
parcels.
[4] Residential buildings located adjacent to a common use
area or residential buildings located along a street
adjacent to a common use area shall be oriented so that at
least 60% of the buildings provide frontage on the common
use area.
[5] Buildings with frontage on the common use area shall
provide side or rear loaded garages.
(g) Single-family attached uses shall establish the applicable front
yard setbacks from an internal roadway or existing roadways
other than Ridge Pike.
(h) No one building may consist of more than eight dwelling units.
(i) Horizontal articulation: all dwelling units shall contain a
minimum one-foot horizontal roof offset from roofs of
neighboring dwelling units to vary the massing of a building
and relieve the effect of a single, long roof.
(j) Vertical articulation: all dwelling units shall contain a minimum
two-foot vertical front facade offset from front facades of
neighboring dwelling units to vary the massing of a building
and relieve the effect of a single, long wall.
(k) All residential buildings shall have pitched roofs.
(3) Small lot single-family detached in accordance with the following
conditions:
(a) One residential dwelling unit is permitted for every 1,200
square feet of nonresidential gross floor area constructed,
provided that bulk and area requirements herein are met. The
nonresidential gross floor area cannot be used to permit this
use if it is used to meet requirements for two-family,
apartments or single-family attached uses.
(b) The residential area must be subdivided separately from the
commercial area for the purposes of calculating stormwater
management, area and bulk requirements.
§ 184-231 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-231
168:843
(c) The entire area subdivided for residential uses shall be set
back 300 feet from Ridge Pike ultimate right-of-way. This
setback shall not apply to stormwater management facilities
that are shared between residential and nonresidential uses.
(d) The perimeter of the area subdivided for residential uses shall
contain a twenty-five-foot wide buffer in accordance with
§ 155.27.1 along all property lines and adjacent to
nonresidential uses.
(e) Small lot single-family detached uses shall establish the
applicable front yard setbacks from an internal roadway or
existing roadways other than Ridge Pike.
(f) For developments with 30 or more dwelling units: 400 square
feet of common use area shall be provided for each dwelling
unit in accordance with the following:
[1] The common use area shall not overlap the required buffer
area except to connect to open space on contiguous
parcels.
[2] The common use area shall be accessible to residential
units and consist of a contiguous area of at least 11,000
square feet. The perimeter of the common use area shall
not have a dimension less than 50 feet on any one side.
[3] The common use area shall connect to adjacent open space
parcels.
[4] Residential buildings located adjacent to a common use
area or residential buildings located along a street
adjacent to a common use area shall be oriented so that at
least 60% of the buildings provide frontage on the common
use area.
[5] Buildings with frontage on the common use area shall
provide side or rear loaded garages.
(g) All residential buildings shall have pitched roofs.
(4) Apartments in accordance with the following conditions:
(a) Shall only be located in second and third floors of buildings
with nonresidential uses located on the first floor, provided that
the nonresidential gross floor area is at least 2,500 square feet.
(b) No more than 20,000 square feet in any one building may be
allocated for residential uses.
(c) Such buildings must front on Ridge Pike with a maximum front
yard setback of 30 feet.
§ 184-231 LIMERICK CODE § 184-231
168:844
(d) One residential dwelling unit is permitted for every 600 square
feet of nonresidential gross floor area constructed, provided
that bulk and area requirements herein are met. The
nonresidential gross floor area cannot be used to permit this
use if it is used to meet requirements for single-family
detached, two-family or single-family attached uses.
(5) Scientific or industrial research or engineering facilities in
accordance with the following conditions:
(a) Must be set back 300 feet from Ridge Pike ultimate right-ofway.
Maximum front yard setback provisions established
herein shall not apply to this use.
(b) The total quantity of plant material shall be doubled for
required property line buffers established in § 155-27.1C(5)
and street trees and other landscaping established in § 155-27.
(c) A seventy-five-foot wide buffer shall be provided along all
property lines adjacent to residential districts.
(d) The building facade, architectural parapets or other opaque
screens shall be used to screen from view of public roadways
all industrial appurtenances such as pipes, stacks,
telecommunications, exhaust, satellite dishes, tanks, air
handling or HVAC units, and similar structures.
(6) Planned office and/or industrial parks in compliance with § 184-158
and in accordance with the following conditions:
(a) If retail, office, financial institutions, restaurants, hotels,
hospitals or other commercial uses are included in the planned
development then these uses shall be located in buildings
fronting on Ridge Pike. All other uses shall be set back 300 feet
from Ridge Pike.
(b) The total quantity of plant material shall be doubled for
required property line buffers established in § 155-27.1C(5)
and street trees and other landscaping established in § 155-27.
(c) A seventy-five-foot wide buffer shall be provided along
property lines adjacent to residential uses or districts.
(d) Shall meet building and streetscape design standards in
accordance with Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(7) Any use or combination of uses permitted in Article XXXIII, MS
Main Street District, in a building larger than 65,000 square feet
gross floor area in accordance with the following conditions:
(a) Implementation of at least three tier A, and two tier B
sustainable building practices as established herein.
§ 184-231 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-231
168:845
(b) The total quantity of plant material shall be doubled for
required property line buffers established in § 155-27.1C(5)
and street trees and other landscaping established in § 155-27.
(c) Earth berms shall be required to meet the requirements of
§ 155-27.1C(5)(c).
(d) A seventy-five-foot wide buffer shall be provided along
property lines adjacent to residential districts.
(e) Shall meet any other conditional use requirements specific to
the proposed use.
(f) Shall meet building and streetscape design standards in
accordance with Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(8) Health care facilities, hotels, business or professional office uses
and no other are permitted in buildings not to exceed 65 feet in
height in accordance with the following conditions:
(a) One or more of these uses comprise at least 80% of the total
gross floor area.
(b) Implementation of at least three tier A, and two tier B
sustainable building practices as established herein.
(c) The total quantity of plant material shall be doubled for
required property line buffers established in § 155-27.1C(5)
and street trees and other landscaping established in § 155-27.
(d) A seventy-five-foot wide buffer shall be provided along
property lines adjacent to residential districts.
(e) Shall meet any other conditional use requirements specific to
the proposed use.
(f) Shall meet building and streetscape design standards in
accordance with Chapter 155, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(g) Minimum side and rear yard building setbacks established
herein shall be increased one foot for each foot of building
height exceeding 35 feet.
(9) Gasoline service station with convenience retail or retail sales with
gas station in accordance with the following conditions: [Amended
8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 80,000 square feet.
(b) If the lot will involve its own vehicle access onto an arterial
street, then the minimum lot frontage along that arterial street
shall be 300 feet.
§ 184-231 LIMERICK CODE § 184-231
168:846
§ 184-232. Dimensional standards.
The following dimensional standards shall apply to all permitted uses in
the MS Main Street District unless otherwise required or permitted by
conditional use:
Type
Uses Other
Than Single-
Family
Attached/
Detached and
Two-Family
Single-Family
Attached and
Two-Family
Uses
Small Lot
Single-Family
Detached Uses
Minimum gross lot
area (square feet)
20,000 1,800 per unit 5,000
Minimum lot width
(feet)
100 24 per unit 50
(c) All activities shall be performed within an enclosed building,
except those activities performed at fuel or air pumps.
(d) All auto parts and other storage shall be kept within an
enclosed building.
(e) All gasoline pumps and fuel tanks shall be set back a minimum
of 35 feet from the ultimate street right-of-way and all property
lines.
(f) No paint spraying, body or frame work shall be permitted.
(g) The use shall provide for coordinated traffic access with
abutting existing and future development. If it is not possible to
provide coordinated traffic access at the present time,
provisions shall still be made for future coordinated access.
(h) The total quantity of plant material shall be doubled for
required property line buffers established in § 155-27.1C(5)
and street trees and other landscaping established in § 155-27.
(i) A seventy-five-foot wide buffer shall be provided along
property lines adjacent to residential districts.
(j) Maximum permitted front yard setbacks established herein
shall not apply to this use.
(k) This use must include a convenience retail sale or grocery
store with a gross floor area of more than 1,500 square feet.
§ 184-231 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-232
168:847
Type
Uses Other
Than Single-
Family
Attached/
Detached and
Two-Family
Single-Family
Attached and
Two-Family
Uses
Small Lot
Single-Family
Detached Uses
Maximum front yard
(feet) (This
requirement shall
not apply if one or
more building's
frontage comprise at
least 50% of the
site's roadway
frontage and is
located between the
minimum and
maximum front yard
setbacks)
100 25 from
roadways other
than Ridge Pike
25 from
roadways other
than Ridge Pike
Minimum front yard
(feet) building
setback
30 15 from
roadways other
than Ridge Pike;
300 from Ridge
Pike
15 from
roadways other
than Ridge Pike;
300 from Ridge
Pike
Minimum side yard
(feet) for buildings
with heights of 35
feet or less
15 each 7.5 each 7.5 each
Minimum rear yard
(feet) for buildings
with heights of 35
feet or less
30 20 each 20 each
Maximum building
height (feet)
35 35 35
Maximum building
height (feet) for
health-care facilities,
hotels, business or
professional office
uses and no other
65 N/A N/A
Maximum building
gross floor area
(square feet)
65,000 N/A N/A
§ 184-232 LIMERICK CODE § 184-232
168:848
Type
Uses Other
Than Single-
Family
Attached/
Detached and
Two-Family
Single-Family
Attached and
Two-Family
Uses
Small Lot
Single-Family
Detached Uses
Maximum building
coverage
(percentage of net
lot area) for small lot
single-family
detached, singlefamily
attached and
two-family uses
except as allowed
with the use of
sustainable building
practices as
provided herein
N/A 65 65
Maximum building
coverage
(percentage of net
lot area) except as
allowed with the use
of sustainable
building practices as
provided in this
article
20 N/A N/A
Maximum
impervious coverage
(percentage of net
lot area) for small lot
single-family
detached, singlefamily
attached and
two-family uses
except as allowed
with the use of
sustainable building
practices as
provided in this
article
N/A 65 65
§ 184-232 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-232
168:849
Type
Uses Other
Than Single-
Family
Attached/
Detached and
Two-Family
Single-Family
Attached and
Two-Family
Uses
Small Lot
Single-Family
Detached Uses
Maximum
impervious coverage
(percentage of net
lot area) except as
allowed with the use
of sustainable
building practices as
provided in this
article
65 N/A N/A
Minimum building
setback (feet) where
the rear yard or side
yard is adjacent to a
residential district.
This requirement
shall only apply to
buildings with uses
other than singlefamily
attached/
detached or twofamily
75 N/A N/A
Minimum parking,
loading area setback
(feet)
Front lot line 20 N/A N/A
Side or rear lot
line (residential
district)
25 N/A N/A
Side or rear lot
line
(nonresidential
district)
10 N/A N/A
From building 10 N/A N/A
Minimum distance
between buildings
(feet)
25 15 15
Minimum size of
common use area
(square feet)
N/A 11,000 11,000
§ 184-232 LIMERICK CODE § 184-232
168:850
Type
Uses Other
Than Single-
Family
Attached/
Detached and
Two-Family
Single-Family
Attached and
Two-Family
Uses
Small Lot
Single-Family
Detached Uses
Minimum perimeter
dimension (any one
side) of common use
area (feet)
N/A 50 50
§ 184-233. Bonus standards.
A. Sustainable building practices. The utilization of sustainable building
practices to conserve energy and water is encouraged in the MS
District. Utilization of sustainable building practices will be used as
incentives to allow for increased percentage of building coverage and
lot coverage.
(1) The following Tier A sustainable building practices are encouraged:
(a) Installation of waterless urinals in all mens rooms.
(b) Greywater reuse for site irrigation or toilet flushing.
(c) Roof rainwater harvesting for site irrigation or toilet flushing.
(d) Operable windows in all office, residential and hotel/motel
spaces (including ancillary offices in commercial and retail
buildings).
(e) Implementation of one or more passive solar building design
techniques that maximize the thermal benefits of the sun's
daily and annual cycles. These passive solar design techniques
include but are not limited to large expanses of south-facing
walls, sky lights, window awnings, solar heat sinks, trees
positioned to shade the building and reduce air-conditioning
loads, extraordinary insulation levels, and similar techniques.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to prove to the
Board of Supervisors that there will be substantial annual
energy savings through the use of the method(s) selected by
the applicant. Use of one or more passive solar techniques
counts as one sustainable building practice.
(f) Passive solar hot water heating for each residential/
commercial unit.
(g) Photovoltaic solar panels to generate at least 10% of the
electrical power provided to the building.
§ 184-232 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-233
168:851
(h) Installation of a "cool roof" by applying a reflective color or
material endorsed by the Cool Roof Rating Council to reflect
the sun's heat away from the building.
(i) Shared parking: a reduction in the required number of parking
spaces is permitted in accordance with the requirements
herein.
(j) Shared driveways with one or more abutting lots.
(2) The following Tier B sustainable building practices are encouraged:
(a) Vegetated roof (must cover at least 80% of individual building
roof surface).
(b) On-site use of geothermal heating and cooling systems for the
entire building.
(c) Use of all-weather porous or permeable paving in at least 75%
of all paved areas on the tract.
(d) Photovoltaic solar panels to generate at least 20% of the
electrical power provided to the building.
Maximum
Allowed
without the
Implementation
of
Sustainable
Practices
Maximum
Allowed
with 5 of
the Tier A
Sustainable
Practices
Maximum
Allowed
with 5 of
the Tier A
Sustainable
Practices
and 2 of
Tier B
Sustainable
Practices
Uses Other Than Small Lot Single-Family Detached,
Single-Family Attached and Two-Family:
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percentage of
lot area)
20 25 30
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
(percentage of
lot area)
65 70 75
Small Lot Single-Family Detached, Single-Family
Attached and Two-Family Uses:
§ 184-233 LIMERICK CODE § 184-233
168:852
§ 184-234. General design standards.
The following general design requirements shall apply to all properties:
Maximum
Allowed
without the
Implementation
of
Sustainable
Practices
Maximum
Allowed
with 5 of
the Tier A
Sustainable
Practices
Maximum
Allowed
with 5 of
the Tier A
Sustainable
Practices
and 2 of
Tier B
Sustainable
Practices
Uses Other Than Small Lot Single-Family Detached,
Single-Family Attached and Two-Family:
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percentage of
lot area)
65 70 75
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
(percentage of
lot area)
65 70 75
(3) Failure to continue and maintain standards for sustainable building
practices shall result in a zoning violation unless the development
complies with zoning before the sustainable building bonus.
B. Shared Driveways. For developing shared driveway access or marginal
access with abutting lots, the area of the shared driveway (but not the
surrounding parking area) shall be exempted from impervious coverage
limitations. If only one lot is being developed, a cross-access easement
to an abutting lot or lots shall be offered and recorded on the plan for
the first lot. To use this bonus no additional driveways shall be
permitted to access either lot from an arterial street. The following
elements are encouraged and shall be exempted from impervious
coverage limitations:
(1) Driveway and pedestrian connections between nonresidential
parking areas.
(2) For properties fronting arterial streets, construction of a portion of
a rear service road or marginal access road for access to more than
one property.
A. Buffer area. For all nonresidential uses a property line buffer shall be
required, as specified in § 155-27.1C of Chapter 155, Subdivision and
§ 184-233 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-234
168:853
Land Development. The width of the required buffer shall be equal
to the width of the parking, driveway or loading area setback from
property boundaries specified in § 184-142 herein.
(1) For all nonresidential uses abutting a residential district, a seventyfive-
foot wide buffer shall be provided along property lines adjacent
to residential districts.
B. Outdoor display and outdoor storage.
(1) For this section only, outdoor display shall be defined as the area
displaying individual items for sale. Outdoor display that displays
more than one piece of each item for sale, stacked items, or
stockpiled material shall be considered outdoor storage and not
outdoor display.
(2) Outdoor display and outdoor storage shall be prohibited between
any street and a building, regardless of whether access is provided
from the street, except that outdoor display, and not outdoor
storage, shall be permitted within 15 feet from the facade of the
principal structure facing the street. Multiple pieces of any one
item, stacked items or stockpiled material shall be considered
storage and limited to the side or rear of the principal structure.
(3) Any outdoor display regardless of whether it is to the rear, side or
within 15 feet of a facade facing a street shall be considered sales
floor area for the purpose of computing parking requirements.
(4) Any outdoor display area shall be separated from the ultimate
right-of-way of any street by a minimum of 20 feet and planted in
grass, ground cover or low shrubs.
(5) All outdoor display areas and outdoor storage areas shall not
occupy areas for vehicle parking spaces or drive aisles.
(6) Outdoor display that is not between the street and the facade of the
principal building facing a street and all outdoor storage shall be
totally screened from view from all streets and all property
boundaries as well as comply with Chapter 155, Subdivision and
Land Development, for screen type No. 1.
(7) Outdoor display and outdoor storage shall not occupy any areas
intended for pedestrian use.
(8) Outdoor display and outdoor storage may not encroach upon the
required front, side or rear setback areas that apply to locations of
principal buildings.
(9) All outdoor display within 15 feet of a facade of a principal building
facing a street shall not exceed 10 feet in height. Outdoor display to
the side or rear may be 12 feet in height.
§ 184-234 LIMERICK CODE § 184-234
168:854
(10) All outdoor storage cannot exceed 12 feet in height even if items
are stacked or materials are stockpiled.
(11) Both outdoor display and outdoor storage cumulatively shall not
exceed 20% of the total net lot area.
C. Refuse areas. All refuse collection facilities shall meet the requirements
of § 184-66 herein.
D. Driveways. Driveways shall be prohibited in the buffer area unless it
crosses the buffer at a perpendicular angle to connect to adjacent
parcels, driveways or streets.
§ 184-234 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-234
168:855

ARTICLE XXXIV
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
[Added 4-22-2014 by Ord. No. 347]
§ 184-235. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Limerick Township
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Ordinance."
§ 184-236. Legislative intent.
In recognition of the quasi-public nature of wireless telecommunications
facilities, it is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 184-237. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this article, the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the health, safety and general welfare
of the inhabitants of Limerick Township shall be followed. Where the
provisions of this article impose greater restrictions than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this article shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions than this article, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 184-238. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
A. Accommodate the need for wireless telecommunications facilities while
regulating their location and number in Limerick Township;
B. Minimize the adverse visual impact and effects of antennas and
wireless support structures through proper design, siting and
vegetative screening;
C. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from wireless support
structure failure and falling ice or debris, through engineering and
proper siting of wireless support structures;
D. Encourage the joint use of any new and existing wireless support
structures to reduce the number of such structures needed in the
future;
E. Ensure that the location and number of antennas are in the best
interests of the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of
Limerick Township in their person and property; and
F. Minimize any adverse effects attributable to the location and design of
wireless telecommunications facilities on residential property values.
§ 184-235 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-238
168:857
ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT — Any equipment serving or being used in
conjunction with a wireless telecommunications facility or wireless support
structure. The term includes utility or transmission equipment, power
supplies, generators, batteries, cables, equipment buildings, cabinets and
storage sheds, shelters or similar structures.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers, tall
steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas on towers.
ANTENNA — Any structure or device used to collect or radiate
electromagnetic waves, including both directional antennas (such as
panels) and omnidirectional antennas (such as Whips), but not including
satellite earth stations.
ANTENNA HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the base of
the wireless support structure at existing grade to the highest point of the
structure, including the antenna(s). If the wireless support structure is on a
sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall
be used in calculating the antenna height.
APPLICATION (OR APPLICANT) — A formal request submitted to the
Township to erect, construct, replace, collocate or modify a wireless support
structure, equipment compound or a wireless telecommunications facility.
BASE STATION — A station at a specified site authorized to communicate
with mobile stations, generally consisting of radio transceivers, antennas,
coaxial cables, power supplies and other associated electronics.
COLLOCATION — The placement or installation of new wireless
telecommunications facilities on previously approved and constructed
wireless support structures, including self-supporting or guyed monopoles
and towers, electrical transmission towers, water towers or any other
structure not classified as a wireless support structure that can support
the placement or installation of wireless telecommunications facilities if
approved by the Township. The term includes the placement, replacement
or modification of accessory equipment within a previously approved
equipment compound.
ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION TOWER — An electrical transmission
structure used to support overhead power lines consisting of sixty-ninekilovolt
or greater conducting lines, generally of steel construction and
having a height of at least 75 feet. The term does not include any utility pole
having a height of less than 75 feet.
EQUIPMENT COMPOUND — An area surrounding or adjacent to a wireless
support structure within which base stations, power supplies or accessory
equipment are located.
MODIFICATION (OR MODIFY) — The improvement, upgrade or expansion
of existing wireless telecommunications facilities or base stations on an
existing wireless support structure or the improvement, upgrade or
expansion of the wireless telecommunications facilities located within an
existing equipment compound, if the improvement, upgrade, expansion or
§ 184-238 LIMERICK CODE § 184-238
168:858
replacement does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the
wireless support structure.
MONOPOLE — A wireless support structure consisting of a single pole or
spire constructed without guywires or ground anchor.
REPLACEMENT (OR REPLACE) — The replacement of existing wireless
telecommunications facilities on an existing wireless support structure or
within an existing equipment compound due to maintenance, repair or
technological advancement with equipment composed of the same wind
loading and structural loading that is substantially similar in size, weight
and height as the wireless telecommunications facilities initially installed
and that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the
existing wireless support structure.
SUBSTANTIAL (OR SUBSTANTIALLY) CHANGE —
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like, as well as the
structure and any support thereto.
WATER TOWER — A standpipe or an elevated tank situated on a wireless
support structure, both of which shall be constructed of steel, have a height
of at least 75 feet and be used as a reservoir or facility to deliver water.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such as a
guyed or self-supporting monopole or tower, electrical transmission tower,
water tower or other structure not classified as a wireless support structure
that could support the placement or installation of wireless
telecommunications facilities if approved by the Township.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — The set of equipment
and network components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base
stations, cabling and accessory equipment, used to provide wireless data
and telecommunications services. The term shall not include the wireless
support structure.
Any increase in the height of the wireless support structure by more
than 10%, or by the height of one additional antenna array with
separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet,
whichever is greater, except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility may exceed the size limits set forth in this
definition if necessary to avoid interference with existing antennas.
A.
Any further increase in the height of a wireless support structure which
has already been extended by more than 10% of its originally approved
height or by the height of one additional antenna array in accordance
with the provisions of this act shall not be permitted.
B.
§ 184-238 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-238
168:859
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Includes, but are not
limited to:
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES SITE — A tract or parcel
of land or a portion thereof containing as its principal use a wireless
telecommunications facility, wireless support structure, building(s), parking
and may also include other uses ancillary to the telecommunication signal
transmission or processing and associated equipment (a business office,
maintenance depot, vehicle storage, etc.).[Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 379]
§ 184-239. Use regulations.
Commercial mobile services, meaning any mobile service, as defined
by Section 153 of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C.
§ 151, et seq., as amended, making interconnected service available to
public or to eligible classes constituting a substantial portion of the
public, including personal communications, cellular radiotelephone and
paging services.
A.
Common carrier wireless exchange access services, meaning the
offering of access to telephone exchange services or facilities to the
originator or terminator of telephone toll services by any common
carrier for hire, in interstate or foreign communications by wire, radio
or radio transmission of energy, excluding a person engaged in radio
broadcasting to the extent of such engagement.
B.
Unlicensed wireless telecommunications services, meaning the offering
of telecommunication services using duly authorized devices not
requiring individual licenses, excluding the provision of direct
exchange satellite services.
C.
A. Prohibited in residential zones. No wireless telecommunications facility
shall be located in a district zoned residential or within 500 feet of a lot
in residential use or a residential district boundary. Wireless
telecommunications facilities are permitted only in such districts as
specified in this article. Residential districts are defined as R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4 and R-5 only.
B. Ancillary uses. All other uses ancillary to a wireless telecommunications
facility and its support structure, including a business office,
maintenance depot, vehicle storage, etc., are prohibited from the
wireless telecommunications services site unless otherwise permitted
in the zoning district in which the wireless telecommunications services
site is located.
C. Permitted uses.
(1) Public property. A wireless telecommunications facility with
antennas and assorted equipment that is to be situated on land
owned or controlled by Limerick Township is permitted without the
need for a conditional use, subject to the zoning restrictions herein,
§ 184-238 LIMERICK CODE § 184-239
168:860
provided that the applicant submits a written agreement with the
Township authorizing such antenna and/or wireless support
structure.
(2) Existing support structure. A wireless telecommunications facility
with antennas and assorted equipment that is to be attached to an
existing wireless telecommunications facility, smokestack, water
tower, or any other tall structure is permitted in all zoning districts
without the need for a conditional use, provided that the applicant
submits a written agreement with the owner of the wireless
support structure allowing the shared use.
(3) New tower construction. A wireless telecommunications facility
with antennas and assorted necessary equipment that is not to be
mounted on an existing wireless support structure is permitted
without the need for a conditional use in a district zoned Office/
Limited Industrial (O/LI), Limited Light Industrial (LLI), Heavy
Industrial (HI), Heavy Industrial and Energy (HI/E), and Retail
Business (RB), provided that the applicant demonstrates that it
contacted the owners of tall structures within a two-mile radius of
the proposed site. Such tall structures include, but are not limited
to, smokestacks, water towers, tall buildings, existing towers
owned by other wireless telecommunications service providers and
other communications towers (fire, police, etc.).
(a) The Zoning Officer may deny any application to construct a
new tower if a determination is made that the applicant did not
make a good-faith effort to mount the antenna on an existing
structure. For the purposes of this section, a good-faith effort
requires that the applicant contact all owners of potentially
suitable structures within a two-mile radius of the proposed
site and one or more of the following reasons for not selecting
an existing tall structure applies:
[1] The proposed antennas and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing structure
and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost;
[2] The proposed antennas and related equipment would
cause radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that structure and the interference cannot
be prevented at a reasonable cost;
[3] Existing structures do not have adequate location, space,
access or height to accommodate the proposed equipment
or to allow it to perform its function;
[4] The addition of the proposed antennas and related
equipment would result in electromagnetic radiation from
such structure exceeding applicable standards established
§ 184-239 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-239
168:861
by the Federal Communication Commission governing
human exposure to electromagnetic radiation; and/or
[5] A commercially reasonable agreement could not be
reached with the owner(s) of any existing structure(s).
D. Conditional uses. A wireless telecommunications facility with antennas
and assorted necessary equipment that is not to be mounted on an
existing wireless support structure or other potentially suitable existing
structure is permitted as a conditional use in a district other than O/LI,
LLI, HI, HI/E, and RB, excluding residential districts. The Board of
Supervisors may grant a conditional use after review of the Planning
Commission and a public hearing before the Board of Supervisors. All
adjacent parcel owners, regardless of municipality of the parcel, must
be notified in writing at least two weeks prior to the public hearing. In
addition, the applicant must:
(1) Establish that there is not suitable space on potentially suitable
existing structures or other wireless telecommunications services
sites where the proposed wireless telecommunications facility can
be accommodated and function as required by its construction
permit or license without unreasonable modification;
(2) Establish that technological evidence conclusively demonstrates
that the intended location of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility is necessary to satisfy its function in
the grid system and the providing of the quality of service required
by law;
(3) Provide a full site plan, which shall include:
(a) Written authorization from the property owner of the proposed
wireless support structure site;
(b) A site plan drawn to scale of not smaller than 100 feet to one
inch, depicting or providing the following:
[1] Property boundaries;
[2] Any tower, guywire, anchors and other apparatus;
[3] Existing and proposed structures;
[4] Scaled elevation view of proposed structures;
[5] Access road(s), location and design standard set forth in
the Limerick Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance;309
[6] Parking area;
[7] Fences as provided herein;
309. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 184-239 LIMERICK CODE § 184-239
168:862
[8] Location and content of any informational, warning or
other signs;
[9] Exterior lighting specifications as provided herein;
[10] Landscaping plan as provided herein;
[11] Land elevation contours not greater than intervals of five
feet;
[12] Existing land uses and zoning districts surrounding the
site;
[13] Proposed transmission building and/or other accessory
uses; and
[14] Proposed use.
(c) Provide a written report, which shall include:
[1] Information describing the tower height and design;
[2] A cross-section of the structure;
[3] Engineering specifications detailing construction of the
tower, base and guywire anchorage;
[4] Information describing the proposed painting and lighting
schemes;
[5] Information describing the tower's capacity, including the
number and type of antennas that it can accommodate;
[6] Radio frequency coverage;
[7] All tower structure information is to be certified by a
licensed professional engineer;
[8] Certification of all wireless telecommunications facilities
data by an engineer experienced in wireless
telecommunications service facilities; and
[9] An inventory of potentially suitable existing structures
within a two-mile radius of the proposed site and
information discussing unavailability of such sites for one
or more of the following reasons:
[a] Refusal by current tower owner;
[b] Topographic limitations;
[c] Adjacent impediments blocking transmission;
[d] Site limitations to tower construction;
[e] Technical limitations of the system;
§ 184-239 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-239
168:863
[f] Equipment exceeds structural capacity of facility or
wireless support structure;
[g] No space on existing facility or wireless support
structure;
[h] Other limiting factors rendering existing facilities or
wireless support structures unusable; and/or
[i] An update of capacity on an existing wireless support
structure.
E. Replacement, collocation or modification of antennas.
(1) Applicability. The replacement, collocation or modification of an
antenna located on an existing wireless support structure, as those
terms are defined by this article, is permitted and shall be subject
to the application and review requirements below, provided the
proposed replacement, collocation or modification:
(a) Complies with the applicable conditions of approval for the
initial antennas and support structure;
(b) Does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the
wireless support structure to which the antennas are to be
attached;
(c) Does not further increase the height of a wireless support
structure which had already been extended by more than 10%
of its originally approved height or by the height of one
additional antenna array, unless the Township permits and
approves such an increase; and
(d) Does not exceed the applicable wind loading and structural
loading requirements for the wireless support structure.
(2) Application and review. The Township shall approve an application
for the replacement, collocation or modification of any antenna on
an existing wireless support structure if the application conforms
to all applicable building permit requirements, including those
pertaining to the added structural loading of the proposed
antennas and related equipment.
(a) An application shall be complete when all documents,
information and fees specifically enumerated in the Township's
regulations, ordinances and forms pertaining to the location,
modification or operation of antennas are submitted by the
applicant to the Township.
(b) Within 30 business days of the filing date of an application, the
Township shall notify the applicant in writing of any
information required to complete an application. If additional
information is required to complete the application, the time
§ 184-239 LIMERICK CODE § 184-239
168:864
§ 184-240. General requirements for all wireless
telecommunications facilities.
required by the applicant to provide the information shall not
be counted toward the ninety-day review period in which the
Township must render a final decision on the application.
(c) Within 90 calendar days of the filing date of an application,
unless another date is specified in a written agreement
between the Township and the applicant, the Township shall:
[1] Make its final decision to approve the application; and
[2] Advise the applicant in writing of its final decision.
(d) If the Township fails to act upon an application under this
section within the ninety-day review period, the application
shall be deemed approved. If the Township has advised the
applicant in writing that additional information is required to
complete the application pursuant to Subsection E(2)(a), the
time required by the applicant to provide the information shall
not be counted toward the ninety-day period within which the
Township must act on the application.
(e) The rights of any person adversely affected by any final action
or failure to act by the Township with respect to an application
for the replacement, collocation or modification of any antenna
on an existing wireless support structure, including the right to
appeal, shall be governed by the Wireless Broadband
Collocation Act, Act 191 of 2012, P.L. 1501.
A. Antenna height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the wireless
support structure and antenna are the lowest height required to
function satisfactorily. In no case shall any wireless support structure,
including antennas, exceed a maximum height of 199 feet.
B. Setbacks from base of wireless support structure. If a new tower is
constructed (as opposed to mounting the antenna on an existing
structure), the minimum distances between the base of the wireless
support structure or any guywire anchors and any property line or
right-of-way line shall be the largest of the following:
(1) Thirty percent of antenna height;
(2) The minimum front yard setback in the underlying zoning district;
or
(3) Forty feet.
C. New towers. Except as hereinafter provided, a monopole wireless
support structure shall be required in all cases. The Board of
Supervisors may grant use of guywire, freestanding or any other type of
wireless support structure as a conditional use after review by the
§ 184-239 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-240
168:865
Planning Commission and a public hearing before the Board of
Supervisors. The applicant must establish the following for approval of
conditional use:
(1) The cost of erecting a monopole would preclude the provision of
adequate service to the public, or erection of a safe wireless
support structure;
(2) The proposed tower would have the least practical adverse visual
impact on the environment and closely resembles a monopole; and
(3) The proposed tower is architecturally compatible with surrounding
buildings and land use through location and design and blends in
with the existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical.
D. Wireless support structure safety. The applicant shall demonstrate that
the proposed antenna and wireless support structure are safe and the
surrounding areas will not be negatively affected by wireless support
structure failure, falling ice, or other debris. The applicant shall also
demonstrate compliance with guidelines recommended by the
American National Standard Institute (ANSI) (ANSI/IEEEC95-1-1992)
with respect to radio frequency emissions. All wireless support
structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as approved by the
manufacturers.
E. Fencing. A fence shall be required around the wireless support
structure, building(s), and other equipment unless the antenna is
mounted on an existing structure. The fence shall be six feet in height
and shall completely enclose the antenna, wireless support structure,
and related facilities, shall not contain openings greater than nine
square inches and shall contain, at all entrances, gates which shall be
locked except during such times as the site is manned by authorized
operations or maintenance personnel. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 379]
F. Landscaping. The following landscaping shall be required to screen as
much of the wireless support structure as possible, the fence
surrounding the wireless support structure, and any other ground-level
features (such as a building), and in general soften the appearance of
the wireless telecommunications services site. The Township may
permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls,
decorative fences, or other features instead of landscaping if they
achieve the same degree of screening as the required landscaping. If
the antenna is mounted on an existing structure and other equipment is
housed inside an existing structure, landscaping shall not be required.
(1) An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the site. The
screen can be either a hedge (planted three feet on center
maximum) or a row of evergreen trees (planted 10 feet on center
maximum). The evergreen screen shall be a minimum height of six
feet at planting and shall grow to a minimum of 15 feet at maturity.
§ 184-240 LIMERICK CODE § 184-240
168:866
(2) In addition, existing vegetation on and around the site shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible.
G. FCC licensing. The applicant company must demonstrate that it is
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
H. Required parking. If the wireless telecommunications services site is
fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for maintenance
workers. If the site is not automated, two parking spaces shall be
required.
I. Painting and artificial lighting. Wireless support structures shall be
painted in a color that best allows it to blend into the surroundings
unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
regulations. No wireless support structure may be artificially lighted
except when required by the FAA.
J. Aesthetics. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall result in a
minimal visual impact for those residents in the immediate area and for
those in the larger community who view these facilities from a distance.
Minimal visual impact shall include the following:
(1) For facilities located in highly developed portions of the Township,
buildings may be used to accomplish the screening noted above.
(2) It is acknowledged that large, multi-use wireless support structures
located within major use transmission areas cannot be effectively
screened. In order to minimize the visual impact, such new
facilities should be located in close proximity to other comparable
structures. Accompanying buildings, ground-mounted antennas,
and other equipment and structures shall be subject to screening
recommendations.
(3) FAA requirements for coloring and lighting of wireless support
structures supersedes Township requirements for visual minimum
impact.
(4) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
K. As-built plans. Within 60 days of completion of the initial construction
and any additional construction, applicant shall furnish two complete
sets of plans, drawn to scale and certified to the Township as accurately
depicting the location of a wireless telecommunications facility
constructed pursuant to the building permit.
L. Removal. Any wireless support structure that is no longer in use for its
original communications purpose shall be removed at the owner's
expense. The owner shall provide the Township with a copy of the
§ 184-240 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 184-240
168:867
§ 184-241. Violations and penalties applicable to all wireless
telecommunications facilities.
§ 184-242. Miscellaneous.
notice to the FCC of intent to cease operations and shall be given
90 days from the date of ceasing operations to remove the obsolete
wireless support structure and ancillary structures. In the case of
multiple operators sharing use of a single wireless support structure,
this provision shall not become effective until all users cease
operations. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 379]
M. Site plan. A full site plan and written report containing the information
required in § 184-239D(3) shall be submitted by the applicant in every
instance except as provided in § 184-239C.
A. Penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has
violated or permitted the violation of the provisions of this article shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township as a result thereof. Each day that the violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. In addition to an action to enforce any
penalty imposed by this section and any other remedy at law or in
equity, the Township may apply to a Federal District Court for an
injunction or other appropriate relief at law or in equity to enforce
compliance with or restrain any violation of any provision of this article.
B. Determination of violation. In the event a determination is made that a
person has violated any provision of this article, such person shall be
provided with written notice of the determination and the reasons
therefore. Except in the case of an emergency, the person shall have 30
days to cure the violation. If the nature of the violation is such that it
cannot be fully cured within such time period, the Township may, in its
reasonable judgment, extend the time period to cure, provided that the
person has commenced to cure and is diligently pursuing its efforts to
cure. If the violation has not been cured within the time allowed, the
Township may take any and all actions authorized by this section and/or
federal and/or Pennsylvania law and regulations.
A. Police powers. The Township, by granting any permit or taking any
other action pursuant to this article, does not waive, reduce, lessen or
impair the lawful police powers vested in the Township under
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
B. Amateur radio. This article shall not govern any tower, or the
installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned
and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio status operator.
§ 184-240 LIMERICK CODE § 184-242
168:868
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
202A 6-1-1999 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
203 6-15-1999 Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
204 9-7-1999 Building construction Ch. 60
205 9-7-1999 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 84
206 12-21-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
207 2-1-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. VIII
208 3-21-2000 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 155
209 3-21-2000 Parks and recreation:
rules and regulations
Ch. 114, Art. I
210 2-15-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
211 2-15-2000 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
212 Transportation impact
fee
Not adopted
213 5-2-2000 Construction activities Ch. 72
214 7-5-2000 Lease rental debt NCM
215 7-5-2000 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 155
216 NCM
217 7-18-2000 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
218 11-21-2000 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
219 12-5-2000 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
§ 184-242 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
168:869
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
220 12-19-2000 General obligation
note
NCM
221 1-16-2001 Snow and ice removal Ch. 153, Art. III
222 2-6-2001 Intermunicipal
agreement
NCM
223 4-3-2001 Emergency services:
cost reimbursement
Ch. 81, Art. I
224 4-3-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 170
225 5-1-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
226 5-1-2001 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 155
227 5-16-2001 Transportation impact
fee
Ch. 82, Art. I
228 5-16-2001 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
229 6-5-2001 General obligation
note
NCM
230 7-17-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
231 4-3-2001 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
232 8-7-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
233 10-16-2001 Guaranty agreement NCM
234 10-2-2001 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
235 11-7-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
236 11-20-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
236A 12-18-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
237 4-16-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
238 4-16-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
239 10-7-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
242 7-6-2004 Uniform Construction
Code
Ch. 73
243 7-6-2004 Stormwater
management
Repealed by Ord. No.
356
244 7-20-2004 General obligation
note
NCM
§ DL-1 LIMERICK CODE § DL-1
168:870
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
245 7-20-2004 General obligation
note
NCM
246 11-16-2004 Right-of-way vacation:
Linfield-Trappe Road
NCM
247 2-1-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
248 2-15-2005 Occupational privilege
tax amendment
Ch. 160, Art. II
249 5-3-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
250 5-3-2005 Subdivision and land
development and
outdoor lighting
amendments
Chs. 119 and 155
251 6-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
252 7-5-2005 Refunding project NCM
253 7-19-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
254 7-19-2005 Sewers amendment Ch. 140
255 11-11-2005 Fire prevention Repealed by Ord. No.
267
256 4-13-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
257 4-13-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
258 4-13-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 170
259 4-13-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
260 5-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 170
261 7-13-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
262 8-17-2006 Vacating portion of
South Reed Road
NCM
263 8-17-2006 Cable franchise
agreement with
Verizon Pennsylvania,
Inc.
NCM
264 9-14-2006 Transportation impact
fee amendment
Ch. 82, Art. I
265 9-14-2006 Non-Uniformed
Employees Pension
Plan amendment
Ch. 29, Art. III
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
168:871
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
266 9-14-2006 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 29, Art. II
267 9-14-2006 Alarm systems
amendment; outdoor
burning amendment;
fire prevention
repealer; subdivision
and land development
amendment
Ch. 52; Ch. 66; Ch. 84
(reference only); Ch.
155
268 9-14-2006 Industrial
Development Authority
Ch. 5, Art. II
269 10-26-2006 Zoning readoption Ch. 184 (history only)
270 12-14-2006 Realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. IV
271 12-14-2006 Delaware Valley
Insurance Trust
agreement
NCM
272 3-22-2007 Outdoor burning
amendment
Ch. 66
273 4-26-2007 Uniform construction
codes: permits for
accessory utility and
miscellaneous use
structures
Ch. 73, Art. II
274 5-10-2007 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 155
275 6-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 170
276 6-14-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
277 6-28-2007 Zoning amendment Ch, 184
278 6-28-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
279 6-28-2007 Swamp Creek
Watershed stormwater
management
Repealed by Ord. No.
356
280 7-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 170
281 8-16-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 170
§ DL-1 LIMERICK CODE § DL-1
168:872
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
282 8-16-2007 Delaware Valley
Workers'
Compensation Trust
agreement
NCM
283 8-16-2007 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
Ch. 40
284 10-25-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
285 10-25-2007 Police Department:
auxiliary police officers
Ch. 34, Art. IV
286 12-13-2007 Non-Uniformed
Employees Pension
Plan amendment
Ch. 29, Art. III
287 12-13-2007 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. II
288 12-13-2007 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. I; Ch. 149,
Art. II; Ch. 149, Art. III
289 1-24-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
290 1-24-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
291 1-24-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
292 1-24-2008 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
293 3-13-2008 Assumption of
Municipal Authority
obligations
Repealed by Ord. No.
374
294 4-10-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
295 4-10-2008 Street vacation Ch. 184
296 4-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 170
297 4-24-2008 Cable television
franchise
NCM
298 5-22-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
299 8-14-2008 Sewer use and
connection
amendment; sewer
rents, fees and charges
Ch. 140, Art. I; Ch. 140,
Art. III
300 10-9-2008 Attorneys' fees Ch. 82, Art. II
301 11-13-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
168:873
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
302 11-13-2008 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 132
303 11-13-2008 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 124
304 2-12-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
305 Number not used
306 3-12-2009 Retirement savings
plan
Ch. 29, Art. IV
307 3-12-2009 Nonuniformed
employees' pension
plan amendment
Ch. 29, Art. III
308 8-20-2009 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 60
309 9-10-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 170
310 12-10-2009 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 29, Art. II
311 12-10-2009 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 29, Art. II
312 4-6-2010 Bond NCM
313 4-16-2010 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 155
314 5-20-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
315 6-15-2010 Street vacation NCM
316 9-21-2010 Outdoor burning
amendment; fire
prevention
Ch. 66; Ch. 84
317 9-21-2010 Code enforcement
amendment; property
maintenance
amendment
Ch. 70; Ch. 132
318 9-21-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
319 12-21-2010 Subdivision and land
development
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 155; Ch. 184
320 1-18-2011 Brush, grass and
weeds amendment
Ch. 57
§ DL-1 LIMERICK CODE § DL-1
168:874
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
321 1-18-2011 Official Map Superseded by Ord. No.
336
322 6-21-2011 Transportation impact
fee amendment
Ch. 82, Art. I
323 7-5-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
324 7-5-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
325 8-16-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
326 11-15-2011 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 155
327 12-20-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
328 12-20-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
329 2-21-2012 Warrantless arrests Ch. 34, Art. V
330 6-19-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
331 6-19-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
332 6-19-2012 Sidewalks and curbs
amendment
Ch. 153, Art. II
333 6-19-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 170
334 9-4-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
335 9-4-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
336 12-4-2012 Official Map Superseded by Ord.
339
337 12-18-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
338 12-18-2012 Taxation: collection of
delinquent real estate
taxes
Ch. 160, Art. VIII
339 10-15-2013 Official Map Ch. 27
340 6-18-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
341 8-6-2013 Pawnbrokers Ch. 117
342 8-6-2013 Precious metal dealers Ch. 131
343 2-4-2014 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 29, Art. II
344 3-4-2014 Plumbing repealer Ch. 129, reference only
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
168:875
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
345 3-18-2014 General obligation
note
NCM
346 4-22-2014 Tax collection
amendment
Ch. 44
347 4-22-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
348 4-22-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
349 4-22-2014 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 84
350 4-22-2014 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 31
351 6-3-2014 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 155
352 6-3-2014 Public water:
mandatory water
connection
Ch. 133, Art. I
353 6-3-2014 Realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 160, Art. IV
354 12-16-2014 Parks and recreation:
rules and regulation
amendment
Ch. 114, Art. I
355 12-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 170
356 12-16-2014 Soil erosion,
sedimentation and
grading control
repealer; stormwater
management; Swamp
Creek watershed
stormwater
management repealer
Ch. 147, reference only;
Ch. 151; Ch. 157,
reference only
357 12-16-2014 Bond NCM
358 1-20-2015 Authorization of
participation in PSATS
Unemployment
Compensation Group
Trust
NCM
359 2-3-2015 Street vacation NCM
360 6-16-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
§ DL-1 LIMERICK CODE § DL-1
168:876
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
361 11-17-2015 Authorization of
promissory note
NCM
362 12-15-2015 Taxation: assessment
of fire hydrants
repealer
Ch. 160, Art. VI
(reference only)
363 3-1-2016 Flood damage
prevention amendment
Ch. 89
364 3-1-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
365 3-15-2016 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 155
366 3-15-2016 Stormwater
management
Ch. 151
367 6-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
368 6-7-2016 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
369 6-21-2016 Flood damage
prevention amendment
Ch. 89
370 9-6-2016 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 124
371 9-6-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
372 11-15-2016 Agreement NCM
373 12-6-2016 Street vacation NCM
374 12-20-2016 Municipal authorities:
Sewer Authority
repealer; assumption
of Municipal Authority
obligations repealer
Ch. 5, Art. I (footnote
only); Ch. 5, Art. III
(footnote only)
375 1-3-2017 Police Department:
Emergency Response
Team
Ch. 34, Art. VI
376 Not adopted
377 4-18-2017 Construction activities
amendment; solid
waste: municipal waste
amendment; municipal
waste collectors
amendment
Ch. 72; Ch. 149, Art. I;
Ch. 149, Art. III
378 5-23-2017 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 124
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
168:877
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
379 8-15-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 184
380 11-21-2017 General obligation
note
NCM
381 12-19-2017 Rental property:
residential rental
property registration,
inspection and
licensing
Ch. 135
382 12-19-2017 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 84
383 1-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 170
384 1-16-2018 Tax Collection
Amendment
Ch. 44
385 3-6-2018 Pensions: Police
Pension Plan
Amendment
Ch. 29, Art. II
386 4-17-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
387 4-17-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
388 4-17-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
389 6-19-2018 Street Vacation NCM
390 6-19-2018 Street Vacation NCM
391 6-19-2018 Building Construction
Repealer; Electrical
Standards Repealer;
Mechanical Standards
Repealer
Ch. 60, reference only;
Ch. 80, reference only;
Ch. 111, reference only
392 7-3-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 184
393 7-17-2018 Lewis Road Corridor
Repealer
Ch. 110, reference only
394 11-13-2018 Construction Codes,
Uniform: Building
Code Amendment
Ch. 73, Art. I
395 4-23-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 184
396 4-23-2019 Burning, Outdoor
Amendment
Ch. 66
§ DL-1 LIMERICK CODE § DL-1
168:878
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
397 4-23-2019 Subdivision and Land
Development
Amendment
Ch. 155
398 4-23-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 170
399 5-28-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 170
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
400 11-12-2019 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 84 17
401 12-3-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 170 17
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
168:879