PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 6-2016]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to 53 P.S. § 36018.15 of the Third Class City Code, the codification
of a complete body of legislation for the City of Lower Burrell, County
of Westmoreland, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code, and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 300, together with an Appendix, is hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the City
of Lower Burrell, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the
"Code of the City of Lower Burrell," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
City Council of the City of Lower Burrell, and it is the intention of said
City Council that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby
reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of
former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed
or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only new or changed
provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from
the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
A. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. Except as provided in § 1-4,
Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however, that such repeal
shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid
legislation of the City of Lower Burrell which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and
effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The City Council of the City of Lower
Burrell has determined that the following ordinances are no longer in
effect and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
(1) Ord. No. 6-1980, Educational Service Agency.
(2) Ord. No. 7-1998, Auxiliary Police.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
(3) Ord. No. 7-1995, Purchasing Department.
(4) Ord. No. 7-1995, Procedures or Purchases and Payments, as
amended by Res. Nos. 13-1997 and 15-1997.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to June 13, 2016.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the City prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the City or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the City.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the City or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the City or other instruments or evidence of the
City's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the City.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
§ 1-3 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the City or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the City.
S. Any currently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental
cooperation or establishing an intermunicipal agreement.
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances
and resolutions of the City for adoption and revision as part of the Code,
certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the intention of the
City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if
the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code.1 These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the City Council, and it is the
intent of the City Council that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the legislation so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.
C. Nomenclature changes. Throughout the Code, the following
nomenclature changes were made:
(1) "Zoning Board of Adjustment" to "Zoning Hearing Board."
(2) "Justice of the Peace," "District Magistrate" or "District Justice" to
"Magisterial District Judge."
(3) "Department of Community Affairs" to "Department of Community
and Economic Development."
(4) "Department of Environmental Resources" to "Department of
Environmental Protection" and "DER" to "DEP."
(5) U.S. Dept. of Agriculture's "Soil Conservation Service (SCS)" to
"Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections that were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: [Amended (added, deleted) 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
6-2016]. Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
City offices.
§ 1-6 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 1-8
1:6
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the City Clerk and shall remain there for use
and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy or copies shall be
certified to by the City Clerk, as provided by law, and such certified copy or
copies shall remain on file in the office of the City Clerk, available to persons
desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
City Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed
and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the post-bound book containing said
Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized and directed
by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the City Clerk for
the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all legislation adopted by
the City Council subsequent to the effective date of this codification which
the City Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when
finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new
legislation are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The City Clerk, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner
required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the Code in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. The enactment and application
of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction,
the availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public
and the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as
required by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to
be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a violation
of this section of this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine not exceeding $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City Council that this ordinance
and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after December 22, 2016.
§ 1-13 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 5
AUTHORITY, MUNICIPAL
§ 5-1. Intent.
It is the desire of the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lower Burrell
in the County of Westmoreland in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
said Board of Supervisors hereby signifies its intention to organize an
Authority under the Municipality Authorities Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
as amended.2
§ 5-2. Articles of Incorporation. [Amended 12-4-1959 by Ord. No.
3-1959; 2-11-1991 by Res. No. 1-1991]
In pursuance of said desire and intentions and in conformity with the terms
and provisions of said Municipality Authorities Act and its amendments, the
proposed Articles of Incorporation are hereby set forth in full, as follows:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
OF THE MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY OF THE TOWNSHIP OF LOWER
BURRELL
WESTMORELAND COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Harrisburg, Pa.
In compliance with the requirement of the Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945, approved the second day of May, 1945. P.L. 382, as amended,
and pursuant to a resolution adopted by the Municipal Authorities of
the Township of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, that
a Municipal Authority be established under the provisions of the
aforementioned law, the Township of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania, desiring that a Municipal Authority be established and that
a Certificate of Incorporation be issued to said Authority, does not hereby
certify:
A. The name of the Authority shall be "Municipal Authority of the City of
Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania."
B. The Authority is formed under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as
amended.
C. No other Authority has been organized under the provisions of this
Act, or under the Act approved the 28th day of June, 1935, P.L. 463,
and is in existence within said Township.
D. The name of the incorporating municipality is the Township of Lower
Burrell, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
2. Editor's Note: Repealed by Act 22 of 2001 (June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22). See now
Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2
1:9
The name and addresses of the Board of Supervisors of the Township
of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, are as follows:
[Here followed a list of names and addresses of the Board of
Supervisors.]
E. The names and addresses and terms of office of the first members
of the Board of said Authority are as follows: [Here followed a list
of names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Authority.] All of whom reside in and are citizens of the Township of
Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
F. The term of existence of the Authority is increased to a date of 50
years from the date of approval of these Articles of Amendment.
§ 5-3. Purpose.
The project to be undertaken by said Authority is hereby specified to be
for the purpose of acquiring holding, construction, improving, maintaining,
owning and leasing, in the capacity of lessee or lessor, a sewer system
and sewage disposal system in the said Township of Lower Burrell,
Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, and to make certain charges for the
service rendered in connection therewith as may be prescribed and fixed
from time to time by the Board of said Authority.
§ 5-4. Execution of Articles of Incorporation.
Said proposed Articles of Incorporation of said Authority shall be executed
by and on behalf of the Township of Lower Burrell, by the Chairman of
the Board of Supervisors of said Township and the seal of said Township
shall thereto affixed attested by the Secretary of the Board of Supervisors
of said Township, and filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth. The
solicitor is hereby authorized and directed to cause to be published the
notice of intention to file the Articles of Incorporation with the Secretary of
the Commonwealth as required by the aforementioned Act.
Chapter 16
FIRE COMPANIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's relief association — See Ch. 19.
§ 16-1. Recognizing volunteer fire companies.
The following volunteer fire companies are hereby officially recognized and
accorded the status of "Volunteer Fire Company" serving the City of Lower
Burrell:
§ 5-2 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 16-1
1:10
§ 16-2. Duties and activities.
The City of Lower Burrell Volunteer Fire Departments and the Lower
Burrell Volunteer Fire Department No. 1; Lower Burrell Volunteer Fire
Department No. 3; and Lower Burrell Volunteer EMS Service, and any
individual or unified emergency medical service of said companies and their
membership are authorized by the Council to perform the following duties
in addition to the normal firefighting, rescue and emergency medical duties:
A. Lower Burrell Volunteer Company Fire Department No. 1, aka South
New Kensington Volunteer Fire Company.
B. Lower Burrell Volunteer Company Fire Department No. 3.
C. Lower Burrell Volunteer Company EMS Service.
A. Participation in drills, practices, training sessions and prefire planning
activities authorized by the respective Fire Chief of each department.
B. Participation in community celebrations, ceremonial observances and
funerals for deceased firefighters or other public figures where such
attendance is deemed appropriate and authorized in writing by the
respective Fire Chief of each department.
C. Performing duties necessary to prepare the fire station for use as a
polling place for the primary and general elections. This is extended to
include like services performed at other municipal or school district
buildings for said elections.
D. Preparation for and responsible participation in parades; provided, that
attendance has the prior written approval of the Fire Department and/
or Ambulance Association and written notice is provided to the City
prior to the event.
E. Any public service functions performed for the welfare of the
community as long as these activities are responsibly supervised and
are sanctioned by the Fire Department or Ambulance Association and
written notice is provided to the City prior to the function.
F. Any and all public safety activities undertaken by Fire Department or
Ambulance Association members to render care to the injured, prevent
loss of lives, provide comfort and security to victims, and limit or
prevent damage to or loss of property as circumstances may dictate.
G. Rendering assistance to police officers where such aid is specifically
requested or is done without request to protect our citizens from
imminent danger.
H. Participation in fire prevention inspections, postfire investigations,
bomb searches and evacuation drills.
I. Participating in public programs to promote health and safety, to enlist
new members, solicit community support or conduct fund-raising
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2
1:11
Chapter 19
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire companies — See Ch. 16.
§ 19-1. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Association.
§ 19-2. Certification to Auditor General.
The City Council shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the
Commonwealth, the name(s) of the active associations and the percentage
of service they contribute to the protection of the City. Such certification
shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
activities so long as the activity is specifically sanctioned by the Fire
Department or the Ambulance Association with written notice to the
City prior to the activity or event.
J. Safely and responsibly performing maintenance and remodeling work
on the Fire Department or Ambulance Association vehicles, buildings,
grounds or equipment.
K. Performing such other duties necessary for the efficient operation of
the volunteer services as may, from time to time, be assigned by the
Council, the officers of the Fire Department and the officers of the
Ambulance Association.
A. The following associations are hereby recognized as serving companies
actively engaged in providing fire protection and/or emergency services
in the City:
(1) Lower Burrell Volunteer Fire Company No. 3 Relief Association.
(2) South New Kensington Fire Company Relief Association.
B. The above-named associations have been formed for the benefit of their
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
C. The above-named associations of the City are designated the proper
association(s) to receive such funds as are due and payable to the City
Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania from the tax on
premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 16-2 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 19-3
1:12
§ 19-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the City Treasury all such sums of
money that may hereafter be paid into the City Treasury by the Treasurer of
the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on premiums of foreign
fire insurance companies in pursuance of the Act of December 18, 1984,
No. 205, § 701 et seq.3 as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania. Such monies received
by the City Treasurer from the State Treasurer shall be distributed to the
duly recognized association(s) within 60 days of receipt. The funds shall
be distributed on the basis of the percentage of service established in the
certification to the Auditor General and with other provisions of the Act.
Chapter 22
HEALTH BOARD
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.701 et seq.
§ 19-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-3
1:13

ARTICLE I
City Council as Board of Health
[Adopted 2-12-1979 by Ord. No. 4-1979]
§ 22-1. City Council as Board of Health.
The Council of the City of Lower Burrell shall constitute the Board of Health
of the City of Lower Burrell.
§ 22-2. Powers and duties of Board of Health.
The powers and duties of the Board of Health shall be those powers and
duties set forth in the Third Class City Code, 1931, June 23, P.L. 932, Art. I,
§ 101, 1951, June 28, P.L. 662, § 1, as the same now exists or may hereafter
be amended, 53 P.S. § 35101 et seq.
§ 22-3. Joint cooperation agreement. [Amended 12-9-1997 by Ord.
No. 10-1997]
The Board of Health shall enter into a joint cooperation agreement with the
Boards of Health of the Cities of Arnold and New Kensington, Pennsylvania,
providing for the appointment of a health officer for the Cites of Arnold,
New Kensington and Lower Burrell, Pennsylvania, who shall be one and the
same person, providing for the adoption of uniform rules and regulations,
rate and method of compensation payable to said health officer, and for the
appointment of costs and revenues of health services between the Cites of
Arnold, New Kensington and Lower Burrell, Pennsylvania.
§ 22-4. Execution of agreement.
Said agreement shall be executed by the Mayor, who shall be the Chairman
of the Board of Health, and attested by the City Clerk, who shall be the
Secretary for the Board of Health.
§ 22-5. Rules and regulations. [Added 12-9-1997 by Ord. No.
10-1997]
The Councils for the Cities of Arnold, New Kensington and Lower Burrell,
Pennsylvania, may change the joint cooperation agreement and rules and
regulations from time to time by resolution enacted simultaneously by each
City.
§ 22-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-5
1:15

ARTICLE II
Joint Health Officer
[Adopted 3-25-1998]
§ 22-6. Joint cooperation agreement between Boards of Health of
the cities of Arnold, New Kensington and Lower Burrell.
A. The Boards of Health for said cities agree to appoint and hire a Health
Officer for the cites of Arnold, New Kensington and Lower Burrell, who
shall be one and the same person, and such other personnel as may be
from time to time required to carry out the duties of the Boards of
Health of all three cities. All such appointments to be effective shall
require the approval of all three Boards of Health.
B. The Boards of Health of said cities agree that the rate and method of
compensation for said Health Officer shall be as is from time to time
determined and approved by all of the Boards of Health of said cities.
C. It is agreed that the cost of compensating the Health Officer and any
other personnel who may be necessary to carry out his duties shall be
apportioned between the three cities on the basis of the number of
inspections performed in each city and on an annual basis, it being the
intent that each city shall bear the cost of any services performed by the
Health Officer within its respective boundaries.
D. It is agreed that the Boards of Health for the three cities shall adopt
uniform rules and regulations for their respective cities and that any
and all fees, costs and/or fines received and collected on account of said
rules and regulations shall be payable to the city in which the
inspection or service performed the Health Officer was or is to be
performed.
§ 22-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-6
1:17
Chapter 50
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 55. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 90.
§ 22-6 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 22-6
1:18
ARTICLE I
Hiring Practices
[Adopted 11-8-1993 by Ord. No. 15-1993]
§ 50-1. Union agreement.
In accordance with Act No. 195 of 1970, as amended, the Public Employee
Relations Act,4 Council is enabled to collectively bargain with any
recognized union of City employees. The members of the union shall receive
a salary or compensation as determined by the contract or agreement
entered into annually by the City and a recognized union.
§ 50-2. Seasonal intern employees. [Amended 1-11-1999 by Ord. No.
1-1999]
§ 50-3. Power to hire.
Council shall have the power to hire any employee deemed necessary and
appropriate by Council for the operation of the City.
§ 50-4. Power to discharge.
Council shall have the power to discharge any employee of the City for any
reason whatsoever, except to the extent that their discharge is restricted
A. Seasonal intern employees, primarily students, may be hired by the City
to assist the various departments as follows:
(1) The employment of a seasonal intern employee shall be from May
to October or as may be needed, as determined by the City, in its
discretion. No seasonal intern employee may be hired for more
than four years.
(2) Only those individuals who have a current application on file will be
considered for employment opportunities. A current application is
defined as one not older than 12 months at the time of hiring.
(3) The total number of seasonal intern employees per executive
department, as defined in § 1101 of the Third Class City Code, will
be determined by the department Council person, based upon his
budget, and must be ratified by Council.
B. Council shall have the power to hire any employee deemed necessary
and appropriate by Council for the operation of the City.
C. Council shall have the power to discharge any employee of the City for
any reason whatsoever, except to the extent that their discharge is
restricted through civil service regulations, collective bargaining
agreements or any federal and state requirements relative to the
discharge of public employees.
4. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 1101.101 et seq.
§ 50-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-4
1:19
through civil service regulations, collective bargaining agreements or any
federal and state requirements relative to the discharge of public
employees.
§ 50-4 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 50-4
1:20
Chapter 55
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 50. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 90.
§ 50-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 50-4
1:21

ARTICLE I
Nonuniformed Employees Pension
[Adopted 9-9-1975 by Ord. No. 6-1975]
§ 55-1. Upgrading of benefits established by Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Law.
The City of Lower Burrell, being a member municipality of the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement System, hereby elects to upgrade its member benefits
in that system as established by the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law
as amended, from Article I to Article IV,5 and does hereby agree to be bound
by all the requirements and provisions of said article and the law, as the
case may be, and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise, placed
upon member municipalities by said article, law and amendment, as the
case may be. All references hereafter shall be based on benefits negotiated
between the Board and the City under the provisions of Article IV.
§ 55-2. Election to join Municipal Employees' Retirement System.
The City of Lower Burrell, having placed all of its employees, as far as
they are eligible, under the Federal Social Security Act, has elected to
join the Municipal Employees' Retirement System, established by the Act
of June 4, 1943, P.L. 886, as amended,6 and has agreed to be bound by
all requirements and provisions of said Act and to assume all obligations,
financial and otherwise, placed upon member municipalities by said Act.
"Municipal employee" means a person holding an office or position other
than that of a municipal fireman or municipal policeman, under a
municipality or a municipal government association and paid on a regular
salary or per diem basis. The term shall not include officers and employees
paid wholly on a fee basis.
§ 55-3. Credit for prior service.
Credit for prior service up to the time the City of Lower Burrell joined
the Municipal Employees' Retirement System, toward the municipal annuity
of each original member shall be for all years of service to the City of
Lower Burrell. The City of Lower Burrell does hereby assume the liability
for payment of 100% of the member's annuity for the prior service of each
original member.
§ 55-4. Payment for prior service.
Payment for the prior service noted in § 55-3 hereof shall be made by the
City of Lower Burrell in accordance with § 14 of said Act and may be spread
over a period of 30 years if the City of Lower Burrell so chooses and with
the consent of the Municipal Employees' Retirement Board.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq.
§ 55-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-5
1:23
§ 55-5. Options.
The City of Lower Burrell does hereby elect to extend the provisions of § 209
of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, Act 15 of 1974,7 so that
contributors to the retirement system shall have the options and enjoy the
protection set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of § 209 of the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Law, and § 209 is hereby incorporated and made a
part thereof by reference hereto.
§ 55-6. Official acceptance.
As part of this article, the City of Lower Burrell agrees to the outline of
benefits set forth in letter of the actuary addressed to the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Board, dated July 30, 1975, upgrading the benefits in
the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System from Article II to Article IV.
The passage and adoption of this article by the City of Lower Burrell is an
official acceptance of said benefits, which will include the basic Erie Act and
spouses pension. Costs are shown under Column A, Schedule A.8
§ 55-7. Certified copy.
A duly certified copy of this article shall be filed with the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement Board of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
membership under Article IV for the City of Lower Burrell in the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be effective the first day of
October 1975.
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.209.
8. Editor's Note: Such costs are on file in the City offices.
§ 55-5 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 55-7
1:24
ARTICLE II
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 11-14-2011 by Ord. No. 7-20119]
§ 55-8. Plan amended.
A. The Police Pension Plan of the City of Lower Burrell ("Plan"), which was
established pursuant to ordinance and under the provisions of the Third
Class City Code, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 35101 et seq., for the benefit of the
City's police employees effective May 19, 1961, and which has been
amended and/or restated by ordinances and resolutions of the City
thereafter, shall be, and hereby is, amended and supplemented in the
following respects.
B. Effective January 1, 2011, the Plan shall be amended by entirely
deleting the provisions of said Plan and substituting the following in its
place.10
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided: "Any ordinances or resolutions or parts of
ordinances or resolutions conflicting with the provisions of this ordinance shall be, and
hereby are repealed so far as the same affect this ordinance; however, such repeal shall
not affect any act done or any right or liability accrued under such ordinance or resolution
herein repealed or superseded and all such rights or liabilities shall continue and may be
enforced in the same manner as if such repeal or super session had not occurred but only
to the extent otherwise permitted under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania."
10.Editor's Note: The Police Pension Plan is on file in the City's Office.
§ 55-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-8
1:25
Chapter 59
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 59-1. Creation of Commission.
A City Planning Commission to be composed of five members, appointed
as provided by law (53 P.S. § 10202), is hereby created in and for the
City. The Planning Commission shall perform all duties and may exercise
all powers conferred by law upon City planning agencies; provided, the
Planning Commission previously created in and for said City shall continue
and the members thereof shall continue their tenure, but any and all
vacancies in the said Commission, hereafter occurring, shall be filled in
the manner and for the term provided in the law governing City planning
commissions in effect at the time of the happening of the said vacancy.
Chapter 65
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 65-1. Position of Chief of Police.
There may be a position of Chief of Police. He shall be chosen in the manner,
at the time and for the term prescribed by law. He shall be the head of
the Police Department. He shall perform the duties required of him by the
several Acts of Assembly relating to his office and such law enforcement
duties as the Mayor shall require of him. He shall serve as such officer
until his successor is appointed and qualified. He shall receive a salary as
determined by agreement between himself and the City Council.
§ 65-2. Position of Lieutenant.
There may be Lieutenants in the Police Force, not to exceed two, who shall
perform the duties required of him as prescribed by law, and as the Mayor
shall require of him. He shall serve as such officer until his successor is
appointed and qualified. He shall receive a salary as determined by the
contract or agreement entered into annually by the City and the Wage
and Policy Committee of the City of Lower Burrell Police Department,
or as established by any applicable arbitration ward in accordance with
the several Acts of Assembly relative thereto. He will be appointed in
accordance with the civil service provisions of the Third Class City Code, as
amended.
§ 65-3. Position of Sergeant.
There may be Sergeants in the Police Force, not to exceed five, who shall
perform the duties required of him as prescribed by law, and as the Mayor
shall require of him. He shall serve as such officer until his successor is
appointed and qualified. He shall receive a salary as determined by the
contract or agreement entered into annually by the City and the Wage
§ 55-8 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 65-3
1:26
and Policy Committee of the City of Lower Burrell Police Department,
or as established by any applicable arbitration award in accordance with
the several Acts of Assembly relative thereto. He will be appointed in
accordance with the civil service provisions of the Third Class City Code, as
amended.
§ 65-4. Position of Patrolman.
There may be Patrolmen, not to exceed 11, who shall perform the duties
required of him as prescribed by law, and as the Mayor shall require of him.
He shall serve as such officer until his successor is appointed and qualified.
He shall receive a salary as determined by the contract or agreement
entered into annually by the City and the Wage and Police Committee of the
City of Lower Burrell Police Department, or as established by any applicable
arbitration award in accordance with the several Acts of Assembly relative
thereto. He will be appointed in accordance with the civil service provisions
of the Third Class City Code, as amended.
§ 65-5. Intent.
It is intention of the Mayor and Council in adopting this chapter that the
position of Chief of Police shall be considered as part of management for
any and all matters involving labor relations.
Chapter 90
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 50. Pensions — See Ch. 55.
§ 65-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-5
1:27

ARTICLE I
Elected Officials
[Adopted 12-9-1985 by Ord. No. 7-1985]
§ 90-1. Compensation of Mayor.
On and after the first Monday of January 1, 1988, the Mayor of the City
of Lower Burrell shall receive a salary of $3,400 per annum, payable in
monthly installments.
§ 90-2. Compensation of City Council.
Each Councilman of the City of Lower Burrell taking office on and after the
first Monday of January 1988, shall receive a salary of $2,800 per annum
payable in monthly installments.
§ 90-3. Compensation of Controller.
On and after the first Monday of January 1988, the Controller of the City
of Lower Burrell shall receive a salary of $2,800 per annum, payable in
monthly installments.
§ 90-4. Compensation of Treasurer.
On and after the first Monday of January 1988, the Treasurer of the City of
Lower Burrell shall receive, as City Treasurer, an annual salary of $4,500.
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-4
1:29

ARTICLE II
Appointed Officials
[Adopted 3-15-1960 by Ord. No. 4-1960]
§ 90-5. Compensation. [Amended 9-16-1960 by Ord. No. 16-1960;
5-19-1961 by Ord. No. 8-1961; 2-9-1962 by Ord. No. 1-1962;
2-14-1964 by Ord. No. 1-1964; 12-28-1965 by Ord. No. 12-1965;
12-30-1967 by Ord. No. 9-1967; 12-30-1968 by Ord. No. 10-1968,
1-8-1971 by Ord. No. 7-1970; 1-12-1973 by Ord. No. 3-1973;
3-11-1975 by Ord. No. 3-1975; 12-29-1976 by Ord. No. 8-1976;
12-18-1978 by Ord. No. 8-1978; 12-29-1980 by Ord. No. 13-1980;
12-29-1982 by Ord. No. 12-1982; 1-6-1992 by Res. No. 5-1992;
5-11-1992 by Res. No. 13-1992; 12-14-1992 by Res. No. 30-1992]
On and after the first Monday of January of January 1993, the following
officers shall receive the salary herein provided, payable biweekly for the
Clerk and monthly for the Zoning Hearing Board and Municipal Authority:
A. City Clerk: as set by ordinance each year.11
B. City Solicitor: as set by ordinance each year.12
C. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board: $50 per month.
D. Members of the Municipal Authority: $50 per regular meeting.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 90-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-5
1:31

ARTICLE III
Fines Deducted from Salary of Council Members
[Adopted 12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 8-2000]
§ 90-6. Fine for neglect or refusal to perform duties.
§ 90-7. Medical excuse.
Council may require a medical excuse for alleged sickness or employer
excuse for work absence.
A. If any person, having qualified as a member of City Council, shall
neglect or refuse to:
(1) Attend four successive advertised agenda, regular or special
meetings, unless detained by sickness, or prevented by necessary
absence from the City, caused by work or other matter, and fail to
communicate the same to another member of City Council; or
(2) Act in his or her official capacity as a member of City Council or
otherwise neglect or refuse to perform the executive or
administrative duties of his or her department under Section 1101
of the Third Class City Code;13 then
B. Such Councilperson shall automatically have his or her monthly salary
assessed and retained as a reasonable fine for such neglect or refusal.
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 36101.
§ 90-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-7
1:33
Chapter 100
WARRANTLESS ARRESTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 65.
§ 100-1. General rule.
For any of the following offenses, a police officer shall, upon view, have
the right of arrest without a warrant upon probable cause when there
is ongoing conduct that imperils the personal security of any person or
endangers public or private property:
§ 100-2. Guidelines by governmental body.
The right of arrest without warrant under this chapter shall be permitted
only after the governmental body employing the police officer promulgates
guidelines to be followed by a police officer when making a warrantless
arrest under this chapter.
PART II: GENERAL LEGISLATION
Chapter 110
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 110-1. Prevention of false alarms.
Council finds it to be in the interest of the residents of the City and the
general public to prevent and deter the installation, maintenance and use of
police, burglar or fire alarm systems that provide repetitious false alarms.
A. Under Title 18 when such offenses constitute a summary offense:
(1) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503 (relating to disorderly conduct).
(2) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5505 (relating to public drunkenness).
(3) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5507 (relating to obstructing highways and other
public passages).
(4) 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308 (relating to purchase, consumption, possession
or transportation of liquor or malt or brewed beverages).
B. Violation of an ordinance of a City of the third class.14
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 90-7 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 110-2
1:34
§ 110-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POLICE, BURGLAR OR FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS — Includes alarms
commonly referred to as "burglar alarms" and "holdup" alarms.
§ 110-3. Conditions of alarm use.
The use of police, burglar or fire alarm systems, whether audible or direct
line type of alarms, are expressly permitted, subject to the following
conditions:
§ 110-4. Unlawful to use alarm declared a public nuisance.
If any false alarms shall be given by such system following the date of
receipt of notice as set forth herein, the false alarm shall be unlawful and
constitute a violation of this chapter.
A. Direct line radio or other electronic police, burglar or fire alarm
systems shall be installed by competent workmen so that such devices
shall not emit false alarms.
B. Any alarm system that produces false alarms shall constitute a public
nuisance if such system activates more than one false alarm in any
thirty-day period, or two false alarms in any ninety-day period, or four
false alarms in any three-hundred-sixty-five-day period.
C. Any police officer or fire company who or which responds to a false
alarm shall report the same to the Chief of Police who shall monitor and
maintain records concerning such false alarms.
D. When any alarm system shall constitute a public nuisance, as set forth
hereunder, the Chief of Police shall notify the owner of the system that
it has activated more false alarms than is permissible hereunder, and
that any future false alarms shall result in the prosecution for violation
of this chapter.
E. Notice as required by this chapter shall be given by the Chief of Police
by mailing by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal
service of such notice by handing a copy of the same to the owner of the
subject property, or to an adult representative thereof. If service is
made in person, the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall file a
proof of service which shall be under oath, and which shall designate
the person upon whom service was made.
F. For the purpose of this chapter, the owner of real estate on which an
alarm system is placed and used shall be considered the owner and the
person responsible for its proper maintenance and use.
§ 110-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-5
1:35
§ 110-5. Outdoor audible alarms.
All outdoor audible alarms that are activated falsely shall be subject to the
same conditions applicable to direct-line radio or other electronic calls that
result in false alarms.
§ 110-6. Correction of deficiencies.
Following notice by the Chief of Police that a police, burglar or fire alarm
system constitutes a public nuisance, the owner of such system may file an
affidavit with the Chief of Police indicating under oath that the false alarms
previously caused by such system were caused by a known mechanical or
other defect within the system, not to include improper use. Such owner
may verify and shall include a statement by competent workmen or
repairmen in the field that such system was defective and such deficiency
has been corrected. Upon the filing of such affidavit with appropriate
exhibits, the false alarm history concerning the premises shall be
considered void and of no legal effect.
§ 110-7. Negligent use.
Where false alarms have originated from negligent use or a combination of
negligent use and a defective system, in order to terminate the finding that
the system is a public nuisance, an owner shall comply with the provisions
of § 110-6, and in addition, file an affidavit explaining the steps that have
been taken to correct the negligent use which has resulted in false alarms.
Upon acceptance of such affidavits by the Chief of Police, the declaration of
the alarm system as a public nuisance shall be considered void and of no
legal effect.
§ 110-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days for each false alarm
received after notice is provided as prescribed in § 110-4. In addition, each
false alarm received after notice is provided shall constitute a separate
offense and upon a second offense the fine shall be not less than $25 nor
more than $600. For any third and successive offense occurring within one
year, the fine shall be not less than $75 nor more than $600. Any other
violations of this chapter shall result in the payment of a fine not exceeding
$600, together with cost of suit. In any case where the Chief of Police has
declared an alarm system to be a public nuisance, the City Solicitor may
bring legal proceedings in equity or otherwise to prohibit the continued use
of such system, so long as this was the disposition of the court to order the
termination of a system, and to collect any and all damages on behalf of the
City resulting from the use of such system.
Chapter 115
§ 110-5 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 110-8
1:36
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 115-1. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words or phrases shall
be construed according to the definitions set forth below:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 1/2% of alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage
purposes.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can or other vessel in which alcoholic beverages
are contained.
§ 115-2. Consumption.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any quantity upon any
public street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, stairway, thoroughfare or other public
property within the City of Lower Burrell, nor shall any person consume
any alcoholic beverage in, on or around any public way or thoroughfare
while on private property open to public view without the express or implied
permission of the owner, his agent or other party in lawful possession
thereof.
§ 115-3. Possession.
No person shall possess any container of alcoholic beverage whether
wrapped or unwrapped which has been opened or on which the seal has
been broken in any manner on any public street, avenue, alley, thoroughfare
or other public property within the City of Lower Burrell, nor shall any
person possess any container or alcoholic beverage in, on or around any
public way or thoroughfare while on private property open to public view
without the express or implied permission of the owner, his agent or other
person in lawful possession thereof.
§ 115-4. Exceptions.
Provided, however, that the provisions of §§ 115-2 and 115-3 above shall not
apply to interior portions of any private dwelling, habitat or building, nor
to the consumption or possession by persons in the areas herein designated
of any duly prescribed and dispensed medication having alcoholic content
as set forth in § 115-1 hereof; provided, further, that the provisions of said
§§ 115-2 and 115-3 above shall not apply to premises duly licensed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board and to persons then and there patrons
of said licensee.
§ 110-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-5
1:37
§ 115-5. Violations and penalties.15
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 120
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 120-1. License required for certain electronic or mechanical
devices.
§ 120-2. License application.
Any person or persons, firm or legal entity or corporation desiring to
procure a license, as provided in § 120-1, shall apply therefor in writing
to the License Officer. Said application shall at a minimum set forth the
name or names, the residence or residences of the person or persons,
firm or corporation so applying, together with the present and previous
occupation of the applicant or applicants and the length of residence at the
present address of the applicant and at the previous place of residence,
the name of the owner of the premises upon which the aforesaid machines
are to be used and installed, and if the owner of the premises is not the
applicant, then the applicant shall set forth the length of time for which
the premises has been leased. The applicant shall also set forth the length
of time for which the premises has been leased. The applicant shall also
set forth the manufacturer and nature of the machines to be installed and
used. Additional information may be required to effectuate the purposes of
A. Mechanical or electronic amusement machine or apparatus. From and
after the passage and enactment of this chapter, no person or persons,
firm, legal entity or corporation shall at any time have in his, her, its or
their possession within the City of Lower Burrell any mechanical or
electronic device, machine or apparatus whatsoever for the playing of
games, amusement or entertainment, which are played through the
insertion therein of legal tender, a coin or any metal disk, slug or token
whatsoever, without first having procured a license therefor as
hereinafter provided.
B. Jukeboxes or other similar musical devices. No person or persons, firm,
legal entity or corporation, shall at any time have in his, her, its or their
possession within the City of Lower Burrell any jukebox, music box,
phonographs or other similar musical device, machine or apparatus,
which are played through the insertion therein of legal tender, a coin or
any metal disk, slug or token whatsoever, without first having procured,
a license thereof as hereinafter provided in this chapter.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 115-5 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 120-2
1:38
this chapter in the discretion of the License Officer. The information hereby
required shall be furnished over the signature of the applicant or applicants
and shall be made under oath, verification or affirmation.
§ 120-3. Investigation of application; transfer prohibited.
No license shall be granted until a period of seven days shall have elapsed
from the date of application, during which time the License Officer or police
may, at their discretion, investigate the facts set forth in the application. No
license shall be transferable.
§ 120-4. Gambling devices not licensed.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling device whatsoever or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to law
or that may be contrary to any present or future laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
§ 120-5. License fee.
§ 120-6. Issuance of license.
Upon payment of the license fee, the License Officer shall issue a colored
sticker, metal disc or plate or other identification, setting forth the number
of the license for each machine. Such identification shall be attached and
fastened to the respective machine or device so that the same shall be
clearly observable and readable.
A. No license shall be issued until an annual fee shall have been paid to the
License Officer. The amount of each fee shall be set by City Council
pursuant to resolution. Each license shall expire on December 31 of
each year. Until changed, the fees shall be in an amount as established
from time to time by resolution of City Council.16
B. License fees shall not be prorated but shall remain the same for the
whole or portion of any one year.
C. The License Officer or police may, at their discretion, put a lead (or any
other type) seal upon any device for which no license fee has been paid;
and when the proper license fee has been paid for such sealed device,
said seal shall be removed by the License Officer or police officer of the
City of Lower Burrell.
D. While said unlicensed device is under seal as aforesaid, the owner,
proprietor, manager or person in charge of the place where said device
is located shall be responsible for the device and for any unlawful use
thereof while such mechanical device is unlicensed.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 120-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-7
1:39
§ 120-7. Enforcement and inspections.
The following persons are authorized to conduct inspections necessary for
the enforcement of this chapter:
§ 120-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 124
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 210.
A. License Officer.
B. Any police officer of the City of Lower Burrell.
C. All violations discovered by the above-mentioned inspections shall be
reported to the License Officer in any manner or form that the License
Officer shall require.
§ 120-7 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 120-8
1:40
ARTICLE I
Feeding of Animals and Water Fowl in City Parks
[Adopted 6-11-2001 by Ord. No. 3-2001]
§ 124-1. Definitions.
§ 124-2. Feeding of animals prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed any animal in any City park within
the City of Lower Burrell.
§ 124-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600, and in
default of payment, to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30
days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. As used in this article, the following terms, shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning appears from the context:
ANIMAL — Any domestic animal or domestic fowl, or any wild animal
or wild fowl, bird or waterfowl.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or
legal entity.
B. In this article, the singular shall include a plural, a plural shall include
the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 124-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-3
1:41

ARTICLE II
Running at Large
[Adopted 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 5-2004]
§ 124-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the meaning indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in any animal or domestic
pet or having custody of any animal or domestic pet, or any person who
harbors or permits an animal or domestic pet to remain on or around his or
her property.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park
or any public land, or upon property of another person other than the owner,
and not being accompanied by or under the control of the owner or any
other person having custody of said animal or domestic pet.
§ 124-5. Appointment and duties of Animal Control Officer.
An Animal Control Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall report
to the Chief of Police. Such Animal Control Officer, along with the police
officers, shall have concurrent responsibility for the enforcement of this
article and of the Dog Law of 1982, (3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq., as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania); provided, that he shall not have the power to make arrests
under this Act of Assembly or any other Act of Assembly or ordinance of the
City.
§ 124-6. Unlawful to allow animals or domestic pets to run at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal or domestic pet to allow or
permit such animal or domestic pet to run at large in the City.
§ 124-7. Seizing of animals or domestic pets.
Any police officer may seize any animal or domestic pet found at large in the
City. Such animal or domestic pet shall be impounded in a facility provided
by the City.
§ 124-8. Identified animals or domestic pets.
Owners of animals or domestic pets with an identification tag giving the
name and address of the owner shall be notified by registered or certified
mail, with return receipt, that the animal or domestic pet is impounded and
will be disposed of in three days if not claimed. Three days after the return
receipt indicates delivery or notification by registered or certified mail to
the recipient, and the animal or domestic pet has not been claimed, the
animal or domestic pet may be destroyed in a humane fashion by the City.
§ 124-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-9
1:43
§ 124-9. Unidentified and threatening animals or domestic pets.
Animals and domestic pets that do not have an identification tag giving the
name and address of the owner or that in the opinion of any police officer
constitutes a threat to public health and welfare may be destroyed by the
City in a humane fashion.
§ 124-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person allowing an animal or domestic pet to run at large in violation
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $600 and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
§ 124-9 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 124-10
1:44
ARTICLE III
Animal Nuisances
[Adopted 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 3-2016]
§ 124-11. Legislative findings.
The City Council finds that:
§ 124-12. Definitions.
Certain terms contained in this article are defined as follows:
OWNER — Every person having a right of property in a dog, cat, bird or
other animal, and every person who controls, keeps or harbors such dog,
cat, bird or other animal or has it in his or her care, and every person
who permits such dog, cat, bird or other animal to remain on or about any
premises occupied by him or her.
§ 124-13. Harboring a nuisance.
A. The City of Lower Burrell residents have, on numerous occasions,
complained of nuisances relative to animal noise, animal defecation,
offensive odors, and other animal activity, carried out on public and
private property. These activities are nuisances.
B. Nuisances of the foregoing type interfere with the normal use and
enjoyment of public and private property in the City and are
detrimental to the physical, mental, and social well-being of the people
as well as to their comfort, living conditions, general health, welfare
and safety and are therefore a public health and welfare hazard.
C. Regulations of such nuisances are necessary to protect the safety,
health and welfare of persons residing in, or visiting, the City.
D. The Third Class City Code (53 P.S. §§ 3414, 37701-A, now 11 Pa.C.S.A.
§§ 12414, 127A01) gives the City Council power to regulate these
activities.
A. No person shall keep or harbor any dog, cat, bird or other animal in the
City so as to create offensive odors, excessive noise or unsanitary
conditions which are a menace to the health, comfort or safety of the
public, or otherwise permit the commission or existence of a nuisance
as defined herein.
B. It shall be illegal within the City of Lower Burrell for any person or
persons to own, possess, harbor, or control any animal or bird which
makes any noise continuously and/or incessantly outdoors for a period
of 10 minutes or makes such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more
to the disturbance of any person any time of the day or night regardless
of whether the animal or bird is physically situated in or upon private
property, said noise being a nuisance; provided that, at the time the
animal or bird is making such noise, no person is trespassing or
§ 124-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-13
1:45
§ 124-14. Exceptions.
§ 124-15. Warnings.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon the
first offense, be given a written warning notice by personal service and/or
by mail. Such notice shall inform such person that he/she is in violation of
this article and subject to the penalties described.
threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the
animal or bird is situated nor is there any legitimate cause which
justifiably provoked the animal or bird.
C. Any dog, cat or other animal which, by frequent and habitual barking,
howling, screeching, yelping, squawking or baying or in any way or
manner, disturbs or endangers the comfort, repose or health of persons
is hereby declared to be committing a nuisance. No owner or person
having the custody of such animal shall harbor or permit it to commit
such a nuisance.
D. Any dog, cat, bird or other animal which scratches, digs or defecates
upon the lawn, tree, shrub, plant, building or any other public or private
property, other than the property of the owner or person in charge or
control of such animal, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
E. No person being the owner or in charge of or in control of any dog, cat,
bird, or other animal shall permit such animal to commit a nuisance on
any school grounds, City park or other public property, or upon private
property other than that of the owner or person in charge or in control
of such dog, cat, or other animal without the permission of the owner of
such property. Where the owner or person in charge or control of such
animal immediately removes all feces deposited by such animal and
disposes of same in a sanitary manner, such type of nuisance shall be
considered abated.
F. Owners shall not permit the occurrence of strong and offensive odors
from their animals on their property, which odors carry off of or beyond
their property, as this is a nuisance. This shall not apply to agricultural
operations, landscaping or home gardens.
A. This article shall not be deemed to prohibit or otherwise declare
unlawful any agricultural operations protected from nuisance suits by
Act No. 1982-133.
B. Persons with defective eyesight or hearing while relying upon a dog
specifically trained for these purposes shall be exempt from compliance
with this article. Owners who rely on service animals or birds and those
animals used for Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) purposes are
also exempt.
§ 124-13 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 124-16
1:46
§ 124-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined $600 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 124-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-16
1:47
Chapter 134
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, DANGEROUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 140.
§ 134-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUILDING — An independent structure having a roof supported by
columns or walls resting on its own foundation and includes, but is
not limited to, dwelling, garage, barn, stable, shed, house, apartment,
condominium, greenhouse, mobile home, plant, factory, warehouse,
school or similar structure.
DANGEROUS BUILDING — All buildings or structures which have one
or more of the following defects shall be deemed dangerous buildings:
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its
base;
(1)
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show damage or
deterioration to 33% of the member or members, or damage or
deterioration to 50% of the non-supporting enclosing or outside
walls or covering;
(2)
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors
or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used;
(3)
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so
as to be dangerous to life safety, or the general health and welfare
of the occupants or the public;
(4)
Those which are so damaged, dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary, vermin infested or which utterly fail to provide the
amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human
habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to
work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living
therein;
(5)
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they
may fall and injure property or members of the public;
(6)
§ 124-16 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 134-1
1:48
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
EXTERMINATION — Control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places, removing or making
inaccessible, materials that may serve as their food, poisoning,
spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal
pest elimination methods.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INFESTATION — Presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
NUISANCE — Included the following:
Those which lack illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities or
because of another condition are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous
to the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants or the
public;
(7)
Those which because of their location are unsanitary, or otherwise
dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or the public;
(8)
Those existing in violation of any provision of the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code (UCC) as well as any building code or
property maintenance code, latest editions, adopted by the City of
Lower Burrell, or other ordinances of the City of Lower Burrell
relating to health, fire, housing, building, safety, water, sewage, or
pollution. [Amended 4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 3-2015]
(9)
The physical condition; or use of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law;
(1)
Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations and unsafe fences or structures;
(2)
Any premises which have unsanitary sewerage or plumbing
facilities;
(3)
(4) Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use;
Any premises which are manifestly capable of being a fire hazard,
or are manifestly unsafe or unsecure as to endanger life, limb or
property;
(5)
Any premises from which the plumbing or heating facilities have
been removed, or from which utilities have been disconnected,
(6)
§ 134-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-1
1:49
§ 134-2. Dangerous buildings and nuisances declared public
nuisances.
All dangerous buildings and nuisances within the terms of § 134-1 of this
chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated,
repaired, removed, vacated, or demolished as herein provided.
OWNER — Person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PERSON — Any individual firm, corporation, association or partnership,
or other legal entity.
PROPERTY — A piece, parcel, lot or tract of land.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, including residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and
other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.
STRUCTURE — Anything construed or erected with a fixed or
ascertainable location on the ground or in water, whether or not affixed
to the ground or anchored in the water, including buildings, walls,
fences, platforms, docks, wharves, billboards, signs and walks.
destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective, or the required
precautions against trespassers have not been provided;
Any premises which are unsanitary, or which are littered with
rubbish or garbage, or which have an uncontrolled growth of
weeds; or
(7)
Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; faulty construction; overcrowded; open,
vacant or abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent as not to
provide shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and is dangerous to
anyone on or near the premises.
(8)
Shall have legal title to any property, dwelling, or dwelling unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any property, dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor,
executrix, administrator, administratrix, or guardian of the estate
of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter and
with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same
extent as if he were the owner.
(2)
B. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," or "premises," are
used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words "or any part thereof."
§ 134-1 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 134-3
1:50
§ 134-3. Standards for abatement, repair, removal, vacation, or
demolition.
The following standards shall be followed in substance by the Code
Enforcement Officer of the City of Lower Burrell in ordering abatement,
repair, removal, vacation, or demolition:
§ 134-4. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer.
A. If the dangerous building or property can be reasonably repaired so
that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it
shall be ordered to be repaired.
B. If the dangerous building or property is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, or
the public and is so placarded, is shall be ordered to be vacated or
removed within such length of time, not exceeding 30 days, as is
reasonable.
C. No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been placarded as unfit for
human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written
approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall remove such
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the placarding
action were based have been eliminated.
D. If a dangerous building is 50% or more damaged or decayed, or
deteriorated from its original condition; if a dangerous building cannot
be repaired, so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this
chapter or any ordinance of the City of Lower Burrell or statute of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, it shall be ordered to be demolished;
provided the cost of repairs to rectify or remove the conditions
constituting the nuisance exceed 50% of the market value of the
building at the time demolition is proposed.
E. If the property constitutes a nuisance and cannot be repaired, or if the
defects and ordinance violations are not cured by the owner within the
applicable time frame, the Code Enforcement Officer shall order the
removal or abatement of the condition.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect property, dwellings,
buildings and structures to determine whether any conditions exist
which render such property or premises in violation of the terms of
§ 134-1 above when he is made aware of them.
B. Whenever an inspection discloses that a dwelling, building, property or
structure has become a public nuisance, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall issue a written notice to the person or persons responsible
therefor. The notice:
(1) Shall be in writing;
§ 134-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-4
1:51
§ 134-5. Hearings.
(2) Shall include a statement of the reasons it is being issued;
(3) Shall state a reasonable time to rectify the conditions constituting
the nuisance or to remove the violation and demolish the dwelling,
building or structure;
(4) Shall be served upon the owner, or his agent, or the occupant, as
the case may require.
(a) Except in emergency cases and where the owner, occupant,
lessee, or mortgagee is absent from the City of Lower Burrell,
all notices shall be deemed to be properly served upon the
owner, occupant or other person having an interest in the
dangerous building, if a copy thereof is served upon him
personally, or if a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure affected by the notice; or if he is served
with such notice by any other method authorized or required
under the laws of the Commonwealth.
(b) Except emergency cases, in all other cases where the owner,
occupant, lessee, or mortgagee is absent from the City of
Lower Burrell, all notices or orders provided for herein shall be
sent by registered mail to the owner, occupant, and all other
persons having an interest in a building, as shown by the
records of the County Recorder of Deeds, to the last known
address of each, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the dangerous building to which it
relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate
service.
(5) May contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
C. Appear at all hearings conducted by the Council and testify to the
condition of dangerous buildings or nuisances.
A. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, may request and
shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Council; provided,
that such person shall file with the Clerk a written petition requesting
such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds
therefore within 10 days after the day the notice was served. Upon
receipt of such petition, the Clerk shall set a time and place for such
hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such
hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to
show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
B. After such hearing, the Council shall sustain, modify or withdraw the
notice. If the Council sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be
§ 134-4 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 134-5
1:52
§ 134-6. Removal of notice prohibited.
No person shall remove or deface the notice of dangerous building, except
as provided in § 134-3C.
§ 134-7. Emergency cases.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as is necessary to meet
the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, such
order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After
such hearing, depending upon the findings as to whether the provisions of
this chapter have been complied with, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
continue such order in effect, or modify, or revoke it. The costs of such
emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall
be collected in the same manner as provided herein for other cases.
§ 134-8. Abatement by City.
If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply with the order
of the Code Enforcement Officer within the time specified in the notice
issued by him and no petition for a hearing is filed within 10 days thereafter,
or following a hearing by the Council where the order is sustained thereby,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause such building or structure to
be repaired, vacated, or demolished, as determined by the Council in
accordance with the standards herein before provided. The City of Lower
Burrell may collect the cost of such repair, vacation or demolition together
with a penalty of 10% of such cost, plus attorneys' fees in the manner
provided by law. Or, the Council may seek injunctive relief in a court of
competent jurisdiction pursuant to the rules of civil procedure.
§ 134-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000, and in default of
payment thereof, to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation continues beyond the date fixed for compliance
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 140
deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall
automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not
filed with the Clerk within 10 days after such a notice is served.
C. Any aggrieved party may appeal the final order to the Court of Common
Pleas in accordance with the provisions of the Judicial Code.
§ 134-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-9
1:53
CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings and structures — See
Ch. 134.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 154.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 170.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 252.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
260.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 134-9 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 134-9
1:54
ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 5-10-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004]
§ 140-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The City hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 140-2. Adoption by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the City.
§ 140-3. Means of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within the City shall be
undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the governing
body of the City from time to time by resolution:
§ 140-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing body
of the City in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions
of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth
herein. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly
with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be
established by joint action of the participating municipalities.
§ 140-5. Effect on existing ordinances.
A. By the designation of an employee of the City to serve as the municipal
code official to act on behalf of the City;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the City;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the City;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 140-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-5
1:55
§ 140-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the City for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be established by the
governing body by resolution from time to time.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the City on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or
exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the City not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 140-5 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 140-6
1:56
Chapter 145
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 191.
§ 145-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 145-2. Purpose.
This chapter prescribing, in accordance with prevailing community
standards, regulations for the conduct of minors on streets at night, for
the protection of younger children in the City from each other and from
other persons on the streets during nighttime hours, for the enforcement
of parental control and responsibility for their children, for the protection
of the public from nocturnal mischief by minors and for the reduction of
the incident of juvenile criminal activity, all for the good of minors, for
the furtherance of family responsibility, and for the public good, safety and
welfare.
§ 145-3. Curfew; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any minor to be or remain in or upon any public
highway, park or other public place within the City, or in any enclosure or
vehicle which is on or in close proximity to any such public place within the
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
MINOR — Person under the age of 18 years.
PARENT — Any natural parent of a minor, as herein defined, or a
guardian, or any adult person responsible for the care and custody of
a minor. When used in this chapter, "parent" shall mean one or both
parents.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, playground,
public building or vacant lot in the City.
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the
streets, including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors)
totaling four or more persons in which any minor involved would not be
using the streets, for emergencies or ordinary purposes such as mere
passage of going home.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 140-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-3
1:57
City, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. on the following
day. Exceptions to the above are the following:
§ 145-4. Parents not to permit violation.
It is hereby made unlawful for any parent, guardian, or the person having
the legal care or custody of a minor to allow or permit such minor to violate
any of the provisions of this chapter without legal justification therefor.
§ 145-5. Procedure upon violation.
Any minor found upon the streets, alleys, parks or public places within the
City in violation of § 145-2 shall be taken into custody by the City police, be
delivered to his parent(s), guardian, or person having the legal custody of
said minor, and be given a copy of this chapter. A report shall be filed and
kept in a book for that specific purpose. If said parent, guardian or person
having the legal custody of said minor shall again allow him to be on the
streets, alleys, parks or public places in violation of § 145-2, said parent,
guardian, or person having the legal custody of said minor so offending
shall, upon the second offense, be called along with offender and be so
advised once again as to the penalty provisions contained in this chapter.
Upon the third violation, said parent, guardian or person will be cited for
the violation.
§ 145-6. Procedure in case of repeated violations or other factors
interfering with enforcement.
Any minor who shall violate this chapter more than three times may, at
the discretion of the City Police Department, be reported to a society or
organization the purpose of which is to take charge of incorrigibles and
delinquents, and proceedings shall then be taken in the proper court for
the permanent welfare of such minor and a like procedure may be taken in
cases where the arrest of the parent is not effective, or where for any other
reason the provisions of § 145-2 of this chapter cannot be made effective by
the imposition of fines and penalties.
A. Minor accompanied by parent, guardian, or other person having legal
care or custody of such minor.
B. Minor possessing a written statement dated that day and signed by
parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care or custody of
such minor, which statement specifies the time, place, purpose and
necessity of the minor being in a public place contrary to this chapter.
C. Minor lawfully employed making it necessary to be on or in highways,
streets, parks, etc., as stated above and possessing a current letter
certifying the same and signed by employer, parent or guardian.
D. Minor on an emergency errand.
E. Minor traveling to and from church, school or municipal activity with
parental permission statement as in Subsection B above.
§ 145-3 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 145-7
1:58
§ 145-7. Police discretion in age determination.
The police officers of the City in taking minors into custody shall use their
discretion in determining age and in doubtful cases may require positive
proof of age. Until such proof is furnished, the officer's judgment shall
prevail.
§ 145-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 154
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 140.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 170.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 252.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
260.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 145-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-8
1:59

ARTICLE I
Earth Disturbance Activities
§ 154-1. Notice of violations.
The Building Inspector or any police officer of the City, upon the advice
of the City Engineer, shall serve upon any person who has committed any
act prohibited by this chapter, a notice that such person has violated the
provisions of this chapter. The notice shall set forth in detail the manner
of the violation and shall be sufficiently served if it is mailed by certified
mail to the usual place of residence or the usual place of business of the
offender or, if a corporation, to its usual place of business. The offender shall
be allowed 10 days from the day on which such notice is placed in the mail
to take all necessary measures to cease the violation and in all respects to
restore circumstances as they existed prior to the violation.
§ 154-2. Permit to be obtained.
Any person who produces any earth disturbance activity (i.e., a construction
or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including
land clearing and grubbing, excavations, embankments, land development,
agricultural plowing or tilling, operation of animal heavy-use areas, timber
harvesting activities, road maintenance activities, oil and gas activities,
well drilling, mineral extraction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling or
storing of soil, rock or other earth materials) as defined by 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102, situated within the City shall first obtain a permit from the
Building Inspector to do so.
§ 154-3. Conditions of permit issuance; fee.
Each applicant for a permit required by § 154-2 shall submit to the City
Engineer plans and specifications fully disclosing and outlining the manner
in which the applicant proposes land disturbance. The City Engineer shall
direct the Building Inspector to issue a permit only if the applicant's
proposed action will be in accordance with commonwealth regulations. At
the direction of the City Engineer and upon payment of the applicant of a
fee in an amount established from time to time by resolution of City Council
and posting of the cash or bond required by § 154-4, the Building Inspector
shall issue a permit to take the proposed action, as approved by the City
Engineer.
§ 154-4. Cash or bond to be posted.
The applicant shall post with the Clerk either cash money or a bond
approved by the City Solicitor and executed by the applicant as principal
and by a compensated surety company as surety in an amount, estimated
by the owner or developer and subsequently approved by the City Engineer,
equal to the actual cost of carrying out the action proposed to be taken by
the applicant, in accordance with such plans and specifications as approved
by the City Engineer. The determination regarding the estimated cost by the
§ 154-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-4
1:61
City Engineer shall be conclusive. The cash or bond shall be returned to the
applicant by the Clerk upon receipt from the City Engineer of a certificate
stating that such action has been taken in accordance with such plans and
specifications.
§ 154-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 154-6. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article for which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 for the first
offense, and for all subsequent offenses not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail, within the time
prescribed by § 154-1, to remove the violation and to restore the status
quo in accordance with the notice served shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 for the first offense and
for all subsequent offenses not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues shall be
constituted a separate offense.
§ 154-4 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 154-6
1:62
ARTICLE II
Erosion and Sediment Control Plans
§ 154-7. Scope and purpose.
§ 154-8. General standards.
A. If this article conflicts with the Department of Environmental Protection
standards, the DEP standards shall take precedent without rendering
the remaining portions of the article inadequate.
B. This article requires persons proposing or conducting earth
disturbance activities to develop, implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation (E&S) control best management practices (BMPs) to
minimize the potential for accelerated erosion and sedimentation and to
protect, maintain, reclaim and restore water quality and existing and
designated uses. Various E&S BMPs and their design standards are
listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual
(Manual), Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, No. 363-2134-008 (April 2000), as amended
and updated.
C. The BMPs shall be undertaken to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore
water quality and the existing and designated uses of waters of this
commonwealth.
D. In addition to local and/or county regulations to control erosion and
sedimentation, all development in Lower Burrell shall meet the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, as amended17,
and the following Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection erosion control requirements:
(1) 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 - Water Quality Standards, latest edition.
(2) 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 - Erosion and Sediment Control, latest
edition.
(3) 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105 - Dam Safety and Waterway Management,
latest edition.
E. All developers shall submit a proposed erosion and sedimentation
control plan to the Planning Commission at the preliminary review
stage. An approved plan or permit from the DEP when required shall
accompany the final plan submission.
A. Permit required. Regulations require that certain earthmoving
activities may not be undertaken until a permit from the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) has been obtained. This requirement
allows the DEP to review the erosion and sedimentation control plan
17.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 154-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-8
1:63
§ 154-9. Performance principles.
The following measures are effective in minimizing erosion and
sedimentation and shall be included where applicable in the erosion control
plan:
and approve it prior to any earthmoving activity. (Refer to 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102 for permit requirements.)
B. No earth disturbance activity shall commence until such time that a
plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation in accordance with local
and commonwealth regulations has been processed with and approved
by the Zoning Officer.
C. No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless there
has been a plan approved by the Zoning Officer that provides for
minimizing erosion and sedimentation consistent with this article, and
an improvement bond or other acceptable securities are deposited with
the City in the form of an escrow guarantee which will ensure
installation and completion of the required improvements.
A. Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be done
in such a way that will minimize erosion.
B. Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut-fill
operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity with topography so as
to create the least erosion potential and adequately handle the rate,
volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
C. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and
supplemented.
D. The disturbed land area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
E. Disturbed soils shall be temporarily stabilized immediately following
earth disturbance activities and permanently stabilized immediately
after final elevations are achieved.
F. Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed
critical areas during development.
G. The permanent (final) vegetation and structural erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed immediately after final elevations
are achieved.
H. Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development. Where necessary, the rate and volume of surface water
runoff will be structurally retarded.
I. Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed land
area is stabilized, by the use of E&S BMPs, including, but not limited to,
§ 154-8 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 154-9
1:64
§ 154-10. Grading for drainage.
In order to provide more suitable sites for building and other uses, to
improve surface drainage and to control erosion and sedimentation, the
following requirements shall be met:
sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures required locally or by
the DEP.
A. All lots, tracts or parcels and land within a development shall be graded
to provide proper drainage away from buildings and to drain and
dispose of surface water without ponding, except where approved by
the City Engineer.
B. All drainage provisions shall be of such design as to adequately handle
the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable outlet, such as a
curbed street, storm drain or natural watercourse. Where drainage
swales are used to divert surface waters away from buildings, they shall
be lined, sodded or planted as required and shall be of such slope,
shape and size in accordance with the requirements of the City, Chapter
252, Stormwater Management, and the commonwealth.
C. Excavations and fills.
(1) Cut-and-fill slopes shall not be steeper than a 2:1 horizontal-tovertical
ratio unless stabilized by a retaining wall or cribbing, or
unless authorized by the City Engineer after considering the
special physiographic conditions of a particular site.
(2) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the cut face of excavations and the sloping surfaces of
fills.
(3) Cut-and-fills shall not endanger adjoining property.
(4) Fill shall be placed and compacted as to minimize sliding or erosion
of the soil.
(5) Fills placed adjacent to natural watercourses or constructed
channels shall have suitable protection against erosion during
periods of flooding.
(6) Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed
channels unless the appropriate permits are obtained from the PA
DEP.
(7) Grading shall not be done in such a way as to divert water onto the
property of another landowner without the express consent, in the
form of a drainage easement, of such landowner and the City
Engineer.
(8) During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control
shall be exercised.
§ 154-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-11
1:65
§ 154-11. Responsibilities; maintenance.
§ 154-12. Compliance.
A. All building materials and wastes shall be removed from the site and
recycled or disposed of in accordance with the Department's solid
waste management regulations at 25 Pa. Code §§ 260.1 et seq., 271.1,
and 287.1 et seq. No building materials or wastes or unused building
materials shall be burned, buried, dumped, or discharged at the site.
B. Maintenance of all drainage facilities within any subdivision or land
development is the responsibility of the developer until they are
accepted by the City or some other official agency, after which they
become the responsibility of the accepting agency.
C. No person, corporation or other entity shall block, impede the flow of,
alter, construct any structure, or deposit any material or thing, or
commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any communal
stream or watercourse without having obtained prior approval from the
City or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as applicable.
A. The Planning Commission, in its consideration of all preliminary plans
of subdivision and land development, shall condition its approval upon
the execution of erosion and sediment control measures as contained in
this article.
B. The installation and design of the required erosion and sediment
control measures shall conform to criteria established by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Final plans for minimizing erosion and sedimentation, as approved, will
be incorporated into the agreement and bond requirements as required
under § 154-8C.
D. The approval of plans and specifications for the control of erosion and
sedimentation shall be concurrent with the approval of the final plats of
subdivision or land development and become a part thereof.
§ 154-11 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 154-12
1:66
Chapter 160
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
§ 160-1. No carrying or discharging of firearms or weapons.
[Amended 9-12-1994 by Ord. No. 7-1994]
§ 160-2. Exceptions. [Amended 9-12-1994 by Ord. No. 7-1994]
This chapter shall not apply to the use of the within mentioned weapons
at indoor or outdoor ranges approved by the Chief of Police or to licensed
hunters carrying such weapons upon leaving or returning to the City from
lawful hunting beyond the City limits. This chapter shall not apply to onduty
law enforcement officers acting in their official capacity.
§ 160-3. Police action against violators.19
The police officers shall have the right to seize, take, possess, or remove any
weapons herein mentioned involved in a violation of the provisions of this
chapter as evidence.
§ 160-4. Violations and penalties.20
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
A. No person shall use or discharge firearms of any kind, air rifles, spring
guns, slings or any other form of weapon potentially inimical to wildlife
and dangerous to human safety within the limits of the City or upon any
property owned by the City. This section does not apply to the use of
bow and arrows within the City limits during the state archery hunting
season by licensed hunters or bow and arrow target practice on
property in conformance with the one-hundred-fifty-yard safety zone
and hunting regulations set by the Pennsylvania Game Commission.
B. Persons lawfully engaged in hunting under the Pennsylvania Game
Code and City ordinances, if hunting on the property of another person,
must have the written permission of the owner in his possession, and
follow all safety zone and hunting regulations set by the Pennsylvania
Game Commission.18
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 154-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-4
1:67
Chapter 165
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 110. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 140.
§ 160-4 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 160-4
1:68
ARTICLE I
Smoke Detectors
[Adopted 4-19-1982 by Ord. No. 6-1982]
§ 165-1. Smoke detectors required.
§ 165-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
6-2016]
All persons being owners of real estate upon which a building is erected
shall, upon violation of the provisions of this article and upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 30 days.
A. In each dwelling unit or individual apartment within buildings used as
multiple dwellings, there shall be provided and installed by the owner
of the building, a minimum of one approved automatic smoke detector
which when activated provides an alarm suitable to warn the occupants
therein, and said detector shall also be required to have Underwriters
Laboratories approval. Said detectors shall be installed by not later
than December 1, 1982.
B. In all other existing buildings, a minimum of one detector shall be
installed within 30 days of change of ownership of the real estate upon
which the building is erected.
C. In all newly constructed buildings occupied subsequent to the
enactment of this article, a minimum of one detector (per unit) shall be
installed not later than upon occupancy of the building.
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-2
1:69

ARTICLE II
Open Burning
[Adopted 6-10-1996 by Ord. No. 5-1996]
§ 165-3. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lower Burrell Open
Burning Ordinance of 1996."
§ 165-4. Policy.
The Council of the City of Lower Burrell has determined that unrestricted
fires may be detrimental to the health, comfort, living conditions, welfare
and safety of the citizens of Lower Burrell.
§ 165-5. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them:
CONTAINED FIRE — A fire in which any material is burned in a receptacle
other than a furnace or incinerator.
COUNCIL — City Council of Lower Burrell.
FURNACE — Any enclosed device specifically designed for the burning of
any materials for the production of heat.
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INCINERATOR — Any device specifically designed for the destruction by
burning of refuse, sewage sludge or any other combustible material.
OPEN FIRE — A fire in which any material is burned in the open or in a
receptacle other than a furnace or incinerator. This includes a contained
fire.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company,
firm, trust, corporation, department, bureau, agency or other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTICS — Any domestic-related plastic products or materials containing
plastics, Styrofoam, foam rubber, tires, rubber products, paints, solvents,
lacquers, varnishes, epoxies and resins.
REFUSE — Garbage, rubbish and trade waste.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable, including but not
limited to wood, tree branches, yard trimmings and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATION — Any business, trade or industry engaged in whole
or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material including, but
not limited to, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums.
§ 165-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-5
1:71
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade
or industry including, but not limited to, plastic products, cartons, paint,
grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other
forms of solid or liquid waste materials; provided, however, that trade waste
shall not include any coal refuse associated with the mining or preparation
of coal.
§ 165-6. Enforcement.
The Police, Fire Chief, Ordinance Officer or any other duly authorized agent
shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 165-7. Prohibited activities; exceptions.
A. No person shall:
(1) Ignite or feed an open fire for the destruction of refuse or in the
conduct of a salvage operation in any public or private place
outside of any building.
(2) Cause, suffer, allow or permit the maintenance of any open fire for
the destruction of refuse or in the conduct of a salvage operation on
any property under his control.
(3) Any type of burning by businesses or commercial establishments is
prohibited.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Open fires.
(a) Open fires may be set in the performance of an official duty of
any public officer if the fire is necessary for:
[1] The prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by
other means.
[2] The protection of public health, safety or welfare.
(b) Open fires may be set by permit approval of the Ordinance
Officer, provided:
[1] Only rubbish, such as tree branches and similar material,
excluding leaves, is burned.
[2] No hazardous condition or nuisance will be created by
such burning. Any fire determined to be a nuisance or
hazardous upon investigation by those individuals with the
right to enforce this article shall be extinguished.
[3] The open burning permit will be valid for one week and
only one permit per address will be issued per month.
§ 165-5 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 165-7
1:72
[4] The open fire must be 50 feet from the property line and 50
feet from any structure.
[5] The fire must be supervised by a responsible individual.
[6] Open fires may be set for recreational purposes such as
cooking, fishing, camping, etc.
(2) A contained fire is only permitted at residences subject to the
following conditions: [Amended 10-11-2004 by Ord. No.
3-2004]
(a) Burning is prohibited from April 1 to October 1. However,
indoor woodburning fireplaces, chimineas, outdoor barbecues
for eating purposes, and outdoor wood fireplaces for heating
are permitted.
(b) Burning is permitted from October 2 to March 31. However,
burning is only permitted on Tuesdays and Saturdays from
dawn to dusk.
(c) The only material permitted to be burned is wood from yard
waste during the burning periods.
(d) Burning of materials that produce noxious, irritating odors are
prohibited. The burning of garbage, trade waste, plastics, oils,
and newspapers is prohibited.
(e) No hazardous condition or nuisance is permitted.
(f) Recreational fires, such as scout campfires, or bonfires, are
permitted. However, if a complaint is received concerning such
campfire or bonfire from surrounding residents, the ordinance
officer or police will require the fire to be extinguished.
(g) Fires must be supervised at all times.
(h) At residences, a fire must be burned in a container or at least a
two-foot high fire ring.
(i) Properties two acres or more are permitted to burn Tuesday
and Saturday of each month year round from dawn to dusk;
except that Saturday burning, during the months of June, July,
August, and September is restricted to the hours of dawn to
noon. The fire must be at least 50 feet from property lines and
50 feet away from any structure. The fire must also be
contained and supervised at all times. However, if surrounding
residents complain to the City concerning the burning, the
Ordinance Officer or police will require the fire to be
extinguished.
§ 165-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-7
1:73
§ 165-8. Violations and penalties.
(j) Burning on properties of less than two acres must be 15 feet
from any property from any property line and 25 feet from any
structure.
(k) Any person who engages in burning shall be responsible for all
costs associated with putting out a fire if the fire goes out of
control or spreads and the Fire Department is called to assist
in the extinguishment.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.21
B. Any person who engages in burning shall be responsible for all costs
associated with putting out a fire, if the fire goes out of control or
spreads and a Fire Department or the City is called to assist in the
extinguishment.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 165-7 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 165-8
1:74
Chapter 170
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 140.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 154.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 252.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
260.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 165-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-8
1:75

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 170-1. Authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,22 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the City of Lower Burrell do
hereby order the following.
22.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1
1:77

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 170-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 170-3. Applicability.
§ 170-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 170-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the City of Lower Burrell unless a permit
has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Lower
Burrell or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
§ 170-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-5
1:79
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 170-5 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-5
1:80
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 170-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Building Code Official and City Engineer within the City of Lower
Burrell are hereby appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is
referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator."
§ 170-7. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the City of Lower Burrell.
§ 170-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);23 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);24 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);25 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
23.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
24.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
25.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 170-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-8
1:81
§ 170-9. Application procedures and requirements.
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to Mayor and Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the City of Lower
Burrell. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
§ 170-8 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-9
1:82
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed Permit Application Form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood;
§ 170-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-9
1:83
§ 170-10. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations;
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a special floodplain area (see § 170-18B)
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point;
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood elevation. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure
and/or the development;
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 170-23, Subsection F, Storage, and § 170-24, Development
which may endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 170-23F and 170-24 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 170-24
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development";
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 170-9 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-10
1:84
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 170-11. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 170-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 170-13. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 170-14. Start of construction.
§ 170-15. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin
within 180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within
12 months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. Construction and/or development shall be considered to
have started with the preparation of land, land clearing, grading, filling,
excavation of basement, footings, piers, or foundations, erection of
temporary forms, the installation of piling under proposed subsurface
footings, or the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes, or electrical
or other service lines from the street.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for
the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
§ 170-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-15
1:85
§ 170-16. Appeals.
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine to
City of Lower Burrell, of not less than $25 nor more than $1,000 plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue and all such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
Mayor and Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to Mayor and Council. Such appeal must be filed, in
writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or action of the
Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Mayor and Council shall set a time and
place, within not less than 10 or not more than 30 days, for the purpose
of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at which the
appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Mayor and Council may
seek relief there from by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.26
§ 170-15 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-16
1:86
26.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 170-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-16
1:87

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 170-17. Identification.
§ 170-18. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the City of Lower
Burrell, classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) dated March 17, 2011 and issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision
thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study.
B. The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments are hereby adopted by City of Lower Burrell and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. Floodway area.
(1) Description.
(a) The area identified as Floodway in the FIS which represents
the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point.
(b) This term shall also include floodway areas which have been
identified in other available studies or sources of information
for those special floodplain areas where no floodway has been
identified in the FIS.
(2) Special requirements:
(a) Any encroachment that would cause any increase in flood
heights shall be prohibited.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
B. Special floodplain area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zones AE and A1-30 in the FIS
which are subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual chance
flood event determined by detailed methods and have base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown.
§ 170-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-18
1:89
(2) Special requirements.
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top of bank of
any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(b) In special floodplain areas without a designated floodway, no
new development shall be permitted unless it can be
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past and
projected development will not increase the BFE by more than
one foot.
C. Approximate floodplain area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zone A in the FIS which are
subject to inundation by the one-percent-annual-chance flood event
determined using approximate methodologies. Because detailed
hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs or flood
depths are shown.
(2) Special requirements.
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top of bank of
any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(b) When available, information from other federal, state, and
other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the BFE,
as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other
information is available, the BFE shall be determined by using
a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which
is nearest the construction site in question.
(3) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the City of Lower Burrell.
D. Shallow flooding area.
(1) Description. The areas identified as Zones AO and AH in the FIS.
These areas are subject to inundation by one-percent-annualchance
shallow flooding where average depths are between one
and three feet.
(2) Special requirements. Establish drainage paths to guide
floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
§ 170-18 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-19
1:90
§ 170-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Mayor
and Council where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change, approval must be obtained from the FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify the FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 170-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the City of Lower Burrell Planning
Commission and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
appeal to the Mayor and Council. The burden of proof shall be on the
appellant.
§ 170-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-20
1:91

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 170-21. General.
§ 170-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, the FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted to FEMA for a Letter of
Map Revision (LOMR) within six months of the completion of any new
construction, development, or other activity resulting in changes in the
BFE.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to 1 1/2 feet
above the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 170-18C(2)(b) of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at 1 1/2 feet above
the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
§ 170-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-22
1:93
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to
405, as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to 1 1/2 feet above the
regulatory flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that
the space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 170-18C(2)(b) of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the WI or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the above
referenced standards.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to
405, as amended) shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
§ 170-22 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-22
1:94
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 1,000 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
§ 170-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-22
1:95
§ 170-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical foot to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
§ 170-22 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-23
1:96
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 170-24, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of flood water.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
§ 170-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23
1:97
§ 170-24. Development which may endanger human life.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The Standards and
Specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 to 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of
this chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Secs. R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101,
Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,27
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or, will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or, will involve the production,
27.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 170-23 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-24
1:98
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances; shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated.
B. Within any floodway area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be prohibited.
C. Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A above shall
be:
(1) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(2) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood.
(3) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 170-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-25
1:99
§ 170-25. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 170-26. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
NOTE: Municipalities may elect to prohibit manufactured homes.
§ 170-27. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
A. Within any FW (Floodway Area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
B. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes,
and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2006 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, shall apply, and
34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 to 405.
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2006 IBC, and the 2006 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the unit's(s') proposed installation.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
C. Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 170-26.
§ 170-25 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-27
1:100
ARTICLE VI
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 170-28. Permits required.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,28 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit
has been issued by the City of Lower Burrell:
§ 170-29. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request including a completed permit application form.
B. A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
28.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 170-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-29
1:101
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water including direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
§ 170-29 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-29
1:102
§ 170-30. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the City of Lower
Burrell, the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of Article
III:
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood;
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's "Planning Module for Land Development";
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;29 and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within 15 working days following receipt of the application, a complete
copy of the application and all accompanying documentation shall be
forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the City of Lower Burrell
Planning Commission and City Engineer for review and comment.
29.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 170-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-30
1:103
§ 170-31. Special technical requirements.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the City of Lower Burrell
shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect the
application is deficient.
C. If the City of Lower Burrell decides to disapprove an application, it shall
notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the City of Lower Burrell approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information,
with the Department of Community and Economic Development, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date of
approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the City of Lower Burrell shall allow
the Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days
after receipt of the notification by the Department to review the
application and decision made by the City of Lower Burrell.
F. If the City of Lower Burrell does not receive any communication from
the Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the City of Lower
Burrell and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval,
and the City of Lower Burrell shall not issue the special permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article V of this chapter, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development
requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the
following requirements and those in Article V of this chapter or in any
other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents below
the BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
§ 170-30 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-31
1:104
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc. shall
be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by
the City of Lower Burrell and the Department of Community and
Economic Development.
§ 170-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-31
1:105

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 170-32. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 170-33 shall apply.
§ 170-33. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any special floodplain area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one
foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC.
E. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 170-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-33
1:107

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 170-34. Grant of variance.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the City of Lower Burrell may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 170-35. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the City of Lower Burrell
in accordance with the procedures contained in § 170-9 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any special floodplain area that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the BFE than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special permit (Article VI) or to § 170-24,
Development which may endanger human life.
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the City of Lower Burrell shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the City of Lower Burrell shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the City of Lower Burrell
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
§ 170-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-35
1:109
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the City of Lower Burrell. In addition, a report of
all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to the FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-hundred-year flood.
§ 170-35 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-35
1:110
ARTICLE IX
Terminology
§ 170-36. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 170-37. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
§ 170-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-37
1:111
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The Official Map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 170-37 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-37
1:112
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after February 8, 1982, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
§ 170-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-37
1:113
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown
on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 170-37 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 170-37
1:114
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however include either:
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by The Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
B.
§ 170-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-37
1:115
Chapter 172
FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health board — See Ch. 22.
§ 172-1. Purpose.
This chapter provides for the inspection of the business premises, stock and
equipment of all dealers in food and foodstuffs, for the issuance of Health
Department permits and the schedule of fees therefor and for penalties.
§ 172-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
DEALER — Any person selling food, retail and wholesale and food
processors, excluding milk dealers and processors.
FOOD — Articles used for consumption by humans and articles used for
components thereof, but shall not include drugs or liquor.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any room or place where food is prepared,
cooked, mixed, baked, smoked, preserved, exposed, bottled, packed,
handled, stored, manufactured, offered for sale or sold.
FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT — A facility whose principal
function is the production of an article or articles for human consumption
or components therefor.
FOOD STORAGE ESTABLISHMENT — A facility whose principal function is
the storage of an article or articles for human consumption or components
therefor.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer for the City of Lower Burrell
Health Department or his authorized representative.
ITINERANT RESTAURANT — One operating for a temporary period in
connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or other similar
gathering.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, City,
borough or township.
PUBLIC SERVICE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Food establishments serving
or operating in schools, hospitals, governments or any benevolent,
educational, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, religious, scientific or
eleemosynary organization which offers is services of facilities gratuitously
or at a nominal rate to the public so that such services or facilities act
in relief of the public service food establishments that donate all proceeds
§ 170-37 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 172-2
1:116
to said establishment shall not include any association whose benefits and
benevolence are not extended to the public at large but instead are
restricted to its members or to a particular person or donor.
RESTAURANT — Restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe,
luncheonette, tavern, bar, sandwich stand, soda fountain, takeout
establishment and all other eating or drinking establishments, as well as
kitchens or other places in which food or drink is dispensed or prepared for
sale elsewhere.
RETAIL — Sale directly to consumer.
WHOLESALE — Sale other than retail.
§ 172-3. Permit issuance.
§ 172-4. Permit fees.30
Each dealer at the time he makes his application shall be required to pay
fees applicable to his particular business as set forth in an amount as
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council:
A. Every dealer selling food in the City of Lower Burrell shall apply to the
Health Department upon forms supplied by the Department for a health
permit. Restaurants must have Health Department permits on or before
January 1; itinerant restaurants and restaurants commencing after
January 1 must have Health Department permits on or before July 1.
This permit shall be good for a period of one licensing year, is not
transferable; is valid for use only by the person or persons owning the
business establishment at the address given at the time of issuance.
B. Upon submission of an application, the Health Officer shall issue to the
dealer a Health Department permit, provided that the Health Officer
finds the dealer complying with the rules and regulations of the City of
Lower Burrell Health Department and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania applicable to his business.
C. The Health Department permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
or at the place or places for which issued.
A. Retail food establishment.
(1) Restaurant and itinerant restaurants. A minimum fee in an amount
as established from time to time by resolution of City Council for
each 20 seats or fraction thereof over 30 seats. Restaurants or
itinerant restaurants that serve alcoholic beverages shall be
assessed in addition to the previously listed fees in this subsection
or other applicable fees. Bar stools shall not be counted as seats
under this section.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 172-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-4
1:117
(2) Retail sales establishments. Retail food establishments selling
meats and groceries, meats only, groceries only, poultry, eggs and
other retail food establishments such as confectioneries, bakery
outlets and mobile retail food outlets shall be assessed fees in an
amount as established from time to time by resolution of City
Council.
B. Wholesale food establishments. Wholesale food establishments such as
food storage and distribution establishments, cold food storage and
distribution establishments and produce establishments shall be
assessed a fee in an amount as established from time to time by
resolution of City Council.
C. Food processing establishments.
(1) Retail and wholesale processors. Fees shall be established in an
amount as established from time to time by resolution of City
Council.
(2) Caterers. Fees shall be established in an amount as established
from time to time by resolution of City Council.
D. Public food service establishment.
(1) Complete preparation kitchens. All public food establishments
which operate a complete preparation kitchen shall be assessed a
fee in an amount as established from time to time by resolution of
City Council. The area to be measured for the purpose of
determining the fee will consist of the area in which food is
prepared, cooked, mixed, baked, smoked, preserved, exposed,
bottled, packed, handled, stored, manufactured, offered for sale or
sold.
(2) Limited preparation kitchen. All public service food establishments
which operate a limited preparation kitchen shall be assessed a fee
in an amount as established from time to time by resolution of City
Council. A limited preparation kitchen shall be one which stores
and handles for sale or distribution precooked food or food
prepared at another location.
(3) Not-for-profit establishments. All volunteer not-for-profit groups'
establishments which are public service food establishments as
defined in this chapter, but excluding schools, hospitals and
government agencies, shall be fee exempt.
E. In the event that the business of a person dealing in food and foodstuffs,
including persons serving meals for a price, operators of soda fountains
and bars, retailers, wholesalers, processors, manufacturers, is not
completely described in the above schedule, he shall pay the fee
applicable to the business described above most nearly resembling the
business in which he is engaged.
§ 172-4 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 172-4
1:118
§ 172-5. Summary suspension or quarantine.
§ 172-6. Suspension of permit upon hearing and reinstatement.
If the Health Officer determines that there is a violation of any of these
rules and regulations or laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
there is no imminent danger to the public health, he may suspend the
permit of the food establishment. The suspension shall not become effective
until written notice of the proposed suspension, sent by registered letter to
the address stated in the application for the permit, has been given, and
until an opportunity for a hearing has been afforded to the holder of this
permit. The notice shall contain the reason therefor, and where applicable,
any corrective action which must be taken and the time within which such
correction must be completed. The Health Officer shall fix a hearing before
the Board of Health no sooner than 10 days from the date of mailing the
F. Establishments conducting more than one different category of
business within the same structure, of the businesses described in the
categories above, either Subsection A, B, C or D, shall pay only the
highest fee applicable. Establishments conducting more than one
business activity of the same category of either Subsection A, B, C or D,
in the same structure, shall pay a separate fee for each business
activity.
G. Prorating fees.
(1) Establishments opening: first quarter: 100%; second quarter: 75%;
third quarter: 50%; fourth quarter: 25% of total fees.
(2) A transfer fee in an amount as established from time to time by
resolution of City Council shall be charged for any change of
ownership for a continuing establishment during a calendar year.
(3) No refunds due to termination of business or temporary seasonal
suspension of business shall be permitted.
(4) Fees of itinerant restaurants shall be prorated by the quarter.
H. The maximum fee for any single establishment shall be in an amount as
established from time to time by resolution of City Council.
A. If the Health Officer in his judgment finds that there is imminent danger
to the public health, he shall immediately suspend the license or
quarantine the establishment.
B. Any person whose permit has been suspended or establishment
quarantined under this section shall, upon request in writing, be
entitled to a hearing before the Board of Health within 48 hours of the
suspension or quarantine. A person whose permit has been suspended
or establishment quarantined under this section shall have his permit
reinstated if he completes the corrective action required by the Health
Officer.
§ 172-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 172-6
1:119
notice of suspension, unless the Health Officer and the applicant both agree
to a hearing at an earlier date. If the permit holder fails to appear at the
hearing, the suspension shall become effective at such time as may be fixed
by the Health Officer but no sooner than 10 days from the date of the
hearing.
§ 172-7. Violations and penalties.31
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
chapter or any rule or regulation of the City of Lower Burrell Department
of Health or who interferes with the Health Officer or any other agent of
the Department of Health in the discharge of his official duties shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $30 nor more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 174
GRASS, WEEDS OR VEGETATION
§ 174-1. Nuisance declared. [Amended 5-18-1977 by Ord. No.
7-1977; 9-13-1993 by Ord. No. 12-1993]
§ 174-2. Owners to remove.
The owner of any premises, as to vacant premises or premises occupied
by the owner, and the occupant thereof, in case of premises occupied by
other than the owner thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or
other vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of
the provisions of § 174-1.
§ 174-3. City action. [Amended 9-12-1993 by Ord. No. 12-1993]
A. No person, firm or corporation, owning or occupying any property shall
permit any grass, weeds or any vegetation whatsoever to obstruct the
view of any driver entering, exiting or traveling upon any City street.
B. No person, firm or corporation, owning or occupying any property shall
permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation whatsoever, not edible or
planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon
such premises so as to exceed a height of 10 inches or to throw off any
unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create
or produce pollen. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon
any premises in violation of any provision of this section is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety,
cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the City.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 172-6 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 174-3
1:120
§ 174-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-13-1993 by Ord. No.
12-199332]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 185
INSURANCE
A. The Council or any officer or employee of the City designated thereby
for this purpose is hereby authorized to issue an immediate citation for
violation of this chapter.
B. In addition, after notice, the City may remove, trim or cut such grass,
weeds or vegetation, and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of
10% of the cost thereof shall be collected by the City from such person,
firm or corporation, in the manner provided by law, after notice is given
to correct the violation. The City or any officer or employee of the City
designated thereby for this purpose is authorized to give the notice, by
personal service or by United States mail, to the owner/occupant, as the
case may be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation
is growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of § 174-1 of this
chapter, directing and requiring such owner or occupant to remove,
trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation, so as to conform to the
requirements of this chapter, within five days after issuance of such
notice.
C. Whenever, in the judgment of the City, or any officer or employee of the
City designated thereby for this purpose, it shall appear to be
impracticable to give notices provided above, either because the owner
or occupant cannot readily be found or because a search for the owner/
occupant would entail unreasonable delay, or because the owner or
occupant had been previously cited in the same for year for violation of
§ 174-1, the City or any officer or employee or the City designated
thereby for that purpose, may give notice by posting conspicuously on
the property, a notice or order directing and requiring conformance to
the requirements of this chapter.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 174-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-4
1:121

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Proceeds
[Adopted 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 4-1993; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 185-1. Use of fire insurance proceeds.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter "insurer")
doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim
of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the
City where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the structure
under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insurer is furnished by the
City Treasurer with a certificate pursuant to Section 508(b) of the
Insurance Company Law of 1921, as amended by Act 98 of 1992, and
Act 93 of 1994 (collectively, the "Act"),33 and unless there is compliance
with the procedures set forth in Section 508(c) and (d) of the Act.34
B. Where there are delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user
charges against the property ("municipal claims"), or there are
expenses which the City has incurred as a cost for the removal, repair
or securing of a building or other structure on the property (collectively
"municipal expenses"), the Treasurer of the City shall immediately
render a bill for such work, if he has not already done so. Upon written
request of the named insured specifying the tax description of the
property, the name and address of the insurer and the date of receipt by
the insurer of a loss report of the claim, the Treasurer shall furnish,
within 14 working days after the request, to the insurer, a certificate (or
at his discretion an oral notice confirmed in writing) either:
(1) Stating that there are no unpaid municipal claims or municipal
expenses against the property; or
(2) Specifying the nature and amount of such claims or expenses,
accompanied by a bill for such amounts.
(3) Taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges shall be deemed
delinquent for this purpose if a lien could have been filed for such
claims under applicable law. Upon receipt of a certificate and bill
pursuant to Subsection B(1) of this section, the insurer shall
transfer to the Treasurer an amount from the insurance proceeds
sufficient to pay such sums prior to making payment to the named
insured, subject to the provisions of Subsection C hereof.
C. When all municipal claims and municipal expenses have been paid
pursuant to Subsection B of this section, or where the Treasurer has
issued a certificate described in Subsection B(1) indicating that there
are no municipal claims or municipal expenses against the property, the
insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided, however,
33.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b).
34.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(c) and (d).
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-1
1:123
that if the loss agreed upon by the named insured and the insurer
equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all fire
policies covering the building or structure, the following procedures
must be followed:
(1) The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Treasurer, in the aggregate, $2,000 for each $15,000 of such claim
or fraction thereof.
(2) If at the time a loss report is submitted by the insured, such insured
has submitted to the insurer, with a copy to the City, a contractor's
signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure in an amount less than the amount
calculated under the foregoing transfer formula, the insurer shall
transfer to the Treasurer from the insurance proceeds the amount
specified in the estimate. If there is more than one insurer, the
transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all insurers
insuring the building or other structure.
(3) Upon the Treasurer's receipt of the above described portion of the
insurance proceeds, the following procedure shall be followed:
(a) The Treasurer shall place the proceeds in a separate fund to be
used solely as security against the total municipal expenses
anticipated by the City to be required in removing, repairing or
securing the building or structure as required by this article.
Such costs shall include, without limitation, any engineering,
legal or administrative costs incurred by the City in connection
with such removal, repair or securing or any proceedings
related thereto; and
(b) The Treasurer shall mail to the named insured, at the address
received from the insurer, a notice the proceeds have been
received by the City and that the procedures under this
subsection shall be followed.
(c) After the transfer, the named insured may submit to the City a
contractor's signed estimate of the cost of removing, repairing
or securing the building or other structure, in which event the
Treasurer shall, if such estimate is deemed by the Treasurer to
be reasonable, return to the insured the amount of the funds
transferred to the City in excess of that required to pay the
municipal expenses; provided the City has not commenced to
remove, repair or secure the building or other structure, in
which case the City will complete the work.
(d) The named insured shall pay to the Treasurer, for
reimbursement to the City general fund, the amount of the
municipal expenses paid by the City.
(e) The Treasurer shall pay the remaining balance in the fund
(without interest) to the named insured upon receipt of a
§ 185-1 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 185-1
1:124
§ 185-2. Limits of liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to make an insurance company,
association or exchange liable for any amount in excess of proceeds payable
under its insurance policy or for any other act performed pursuant to this
article or to make this City, any City official, a municipality or public official
an insured under a policy of insurance or to create an obligation to pay
delinquent property taxes or unpaid removal liens or expenses other than
as provided in this article.
§ 185-3. Insurance company rights reserved.
An insurance company, association or exchange making payment of policy
proceeds under this article for delinquent taxes or structure removal liens
or removal expenses incurred by the City shall have a full benefit of such
payment including all rights of subrogation and of assignment.
§ 185-4. Construal of provisions.
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to deter
the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the
abandonment of property and to prevent urban blight and deterioration.
§ 185-5. Notification of Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development.
The Clerk of the City shall transmit a certified copy of this article promptly
to the Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic Development.
§ 185-6. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or insurer who violates the
provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements hereof shall be sentenced, upon conviction thereof, to a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day on
which an offense shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
certificate issued by the Treasurer that the repair, removal or
securing of the building or other structure has been completed
in accordance with all applicable codes and regulations of the
City.
(f) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of
the City to recover any deficiency in the amount of municipal
claims or municipal expenses recovered pursuant to this
article, or to insurance proceeds, by an action at law or in
equity to enforce the codes of the City or to enter into an
agreement with the named insured with regard to such other
disposition of the proceeds as the City may deem responsible.
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-6
1:125
Chapter 191
LOITERING
§ 191-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
LOITERING — Remaining idle essentially in one location; lingering;
spending time idly; loafing or walking about aimlessly in one vicinity or
neighborhood; or "hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access including any
public street or public sidewalk, public property, the front of and the area
immediately adjacent to any school, parking lot, store, restaurant, tavern or
other place of business.
§ 191-2. Certain type of loitering prohibited.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 191-3. Request to leave.
Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 191-2 of this chapter,
any police officer may order that person to leave that place. Any person who
shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be
guilty of a violation of this section.
§ 191-4. Violations and penalties.35
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 196
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
B. Obstruct, hinder or impede the free passage of pedestrians, patrons,
vehicles or the general public.
C. Obstruct, molest, hinder, impede or interfere with any person lawfully
in any public place as defined in § 201 of this chapter. This shall include,
but is not limited to, the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive,
disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or
disturb the person to, or in whose hearing, they are made.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 185-6 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 191-4
1:126
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS
§ 191-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 191-4
1:127

ARTICLE I
Attorneys' Fees
[Adopted 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 4-2004]
§ 196-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the authority of the Municipal Claims Act,36 the City is
permitted to recover all charges, expenses, and fees incurred in the
collection of any delinquent account, including reasonable attorney fees for
failure to pay promptly.
§ 196-2. Fees.
The Council of the City of Lower Burrell hereby adopts the following fee
schedule for the attorney fees incurred in the collection of any delinquent
account for failure to promptly pay:
§ 196-3. Amendment of fee schedule by resolution.
This attorney fee schedule may be changed from time to time by resolution
of the Council of the City of Lower Burrell.
§ 196-4. Notice of collection by certified mail.
Thirty days' prior notice of the City's intent to assess attorney fees in
the collection of a municipal claim or lien must be given to the owner by
certified mail at the owner's last address known to the City and the county
assessment office. [53 P.S. § 7106(a.3)(3)]
§ 196-5. Notice of collection by first-class mail.
If the certified mail is refused or unclaimed within 30 days of mailing,
10 days' notice prior to the assessment of the attorney fees in connection
with the collection of the delinquent account shall be given by United
States first-class mail to the owner at the address in § 196-4 above. [53 P.S.
§ 7106(a.3)(2)]
§ 196-6. Form of notice.
The form of the notice to assess attorney's fees is attached to this article.37
A. Ten percent of the amount of the delinquent account for the filing of a
municipal claim or lien.
B. Ninety dollars an hour for any or all proceedings to enforce the
municipal claim after filing.
36.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
37.Editor's Note: The form of notice is on file in the City's office.
§ 196-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-6
1:129
Chapter 210
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 196-6 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 196-6
1:130
ARTICLE I
Hours of Operation
[Adopted 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 2-1992]
§ 210-1. Hours of operation.38
On and after the effective date of this article, all parks and playgrounds
owned by the City of Lower Burrell shall open and close in accordance with
posting by the Director of Parks and Public Property, and all persons using
said parks and/or playgrounds shall vacate said parks and playgrounds at
that time.
§ 210-2. Special permission.
The Parks and Public Property Director of the City of Lower Burrell may
grant special permission to groups or organizations upon proper application
therefor to use said parks and/or playgrounds after the established closing
time, within the discretion of said Director of the City of Lower Burrell.
§ 210-3. Fisher Hall.
Fisher Hall shall be closed on the following days of the calendar year:
§ 210-4. Violations and penalties.39
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 210-5. Revision of dates and times.
The Council of the City of Lower Burrell may revise the dates and times set
forth in this article by resolution.
A. New Year's Eve (December 31).
B. New Year's (January 1).
C. Easter Sunday.
D. Thanksgiving.
E. Christmas Eve (December 24).
F. Christmas (December 25).
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-5
1:131

ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 15-1977]
§ 210-6. Rules and regulations established. [Amended 4-19-1982 by
Ord. No. 5-1982; 8-8-1994 by Ord. No. 6-1994]
§ 210-7. Violations and penalties.43
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
A. On and after the effective date of this article, with the exception of City
vehicles, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor
vehicle, including motorcycles, automobiles, trucks and snowmobiles,
in any park owned and operated by the City of Lower Burrell.40
B. It shall be unlawful to bring into any City park any horses except for
those occasions where the City has a special event and permission is
granted to have horses in the park for a specific time period by the
Department head in writing.
C. Swimming and boating are hereby prohibited in City parks.
D. Littering of any type whatsoever is hereby prohibited in any and all City
parks.
E. Possession and use of any alcoholic beverage of any type or nature is
hereby prohibited in any and all City parks.
F. The setting of fires for any purpose whatsoever is hereby prohibited in
any and all City parks, with the exception of fires made or created in
designated fireplaces for that purpose. Recreation fires are permitted
by permit issued by the City.41
G. No ice skating shall be permitted in any City park or lakes in the City of
Lower Burrell.42
H. Ice fishing shall be prohibited in any lake or lakes in any park or
playground in the City of Lower Burrell.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-7
1:133

ARTICLE III
Rental Rates for Facilities in City Parks
[Adopted 2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999]
§ 210-8. Rental rates.
A. This article shall apply to all persons or entities desiring to use the
facilities at City parks.
B. The rental fee for Fisher Hall shall be an amount as established, from
time to time, by resolution of the City Council, per hour of use. A
deposit, in an amount as established from time to time by resolution of
the City Council, is required. This payment shall be made at the City
Treasurer's office. There is also a nonrefundable fee, in an amount as
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council, to be
deducted from the deposit for setup and teardown of the chairs and
tables. An amount, as established from time to time by resolution of the
City Council, will be refunded from the deposit if there is no damage
and the premises are left clean.44
C. The fee for a pavilion rental is an amount, as established from time to
time by resolution of the City Council. A deposit, in an amount as
established as established from time to time by resolution of the City
Council, is required. The deposit shall be paid at the office of the City
Treasurer.45
D. Fifty percent of the rental deposit is due 60 days prior to the rental date
and the remaining rental deposit is payable 14 days prior to the rental
date. Nonpayment of the fees set forth above, pursuant to any schedule
established by the City will result in forfeiture of the reservation.
E. There will be no refunds of the deposits if the reservation is canceled or
for nonpayment of the entire rental deposit as established by the
payment schedule set by the City.
F. There will be no fee for organizations with their headquarters located in
the City of Lower Burrell that are an IRS 501(c) organization. The nofee
provision shall apply only when the nonprofit organization submits a
copy of its 501(c) nonprofit certification along with a transmittal letter
on the organization's letterhead.
G. Council may change the fee schedules and payment provisions
established in this article from time to time by resolution.
H. Council of the City of Lower Burrell may adopt such rules and
regulations as they deem necessary for the use and rental of the
facilities at City parks.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-8
1:135
Chapter 215
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 215-1. License required; exceptions. [Amended 7-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 8-1992]
§ 215-2. Trespassing in violation of posted signs. [Amended
7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 8-1992]
No person, while engaged in any canvassing or solicitation, shall knock at
the door or ring the bell of any home, apartment, apartment building or
other dwelling unit in the City upon which is displayed at the entrance a
notice which reads "No Trespassing," "No Solicitation," or which otherwise
clearly purports to prohibit peddlers or solicitors on the premises, unless
such peddler or solicitor is or has been invited onto the premises by the
owner, licensee or occupant thereof.
§ 215-3. License application, investigation and fee. [Amended
9-10-1990 by Ord. No. 5-1990; 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 3-1992;
7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 8-1992]
A. No person shall sell or offer for sale, order or exchange, or go from door
to door soliciting the purchase of, or gift of any products, wares,
merchandise or other articles of value or any money, or any services, in
any place in, upon, along or through the streets, alleys or other public
places within the City, unless he is the holder of a license which is in full
force and effect and issued pursuant to provisions of this chapter. Such
person shall at all times have the license with him while exercising such
calling, and shall exhibit the license to any police officer, official or City
resident upon demand.
B. This section shall not apply to: [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
6-2016]
(1) Farmers selling their own produce.
(2) The sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose.
C. Any person who sells products he has grown from a fixed location must
have written permission from the property owner. [Amended
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 6-2016]
A. Any person required to have a license under § 215-1 and who desires to
engage in the business of a peddler or solicitor shall make application in
person for a license at the City Hall upon a form provided by the Mayor.
The form may request, but is not limited to, the following information:
name, address, telephone number, one type of identification which may
§ 210-8 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 215-3
1:136
§ 215-4. Hours and business restrictions. [Amended 7-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 8-1992]
§ 215-5. License suspension or revocation. [Amended 12-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 6-2016]
The Mayor or anyone acting on his behalf may suspend or revoke any
peddler's or solicitor's license for violation of any City ordinance, false or
incorrect information submitted on the license application or for any fraud
or misrepresentation made in the solicitation or due to numerous residents
filing complaints. Such person whose license is suspended above may not
apply for a new license thereafter until one complete calendar year after
such revocation or license suspension.
§ 215-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
6-2016]
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to a fine of not more than $600 plus costs and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 30 days. The amount charged may be changed by resolution of
Council.
Chapter 221
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous buildings and structures — See
Ch. 134.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 140.
Rental property — See Ch. 232.
Abandoned and junked vehicles — See Ch.
278.
include but is not limited to such forms of identification as a drivers'
license.
B. Upon approval by the Mayor or his designee, the applicant shall pay a
license fee in an amount as established from time to time by resolution
of City Council. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 6-2016]
A. No person, whether licensed or not, shall go on private premises for the
purposes of noncommercial solicitation before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or
after the hour 9:00 p.m. Eastern standard time or 9:00 p.m. Eastern
daylight saving time; nor for the purpose of commercial solicitation
before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after the hour of 7:00 p.m.
B. No licensed peddler or solicitor shall engage in or transact any type of
business or solicitation other than that specified on the license
application.
§ 215-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:137
§ 221-1. Adoption.
The International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) latest edition is
hereby adopted.
§ 221-2. File and distribution copies.
Three copies of the BOCA Basic Property Maintenance Code adopted herein
are on file with the City Clerk for public use, inspection and examination. In
addition the City Clerk has copies available for distribution to the public at
cost.
§ 221-3. Appeals.
The appeal procedures of Ordinance 12-1999, Dangerous Structures,46 shall
apply to any violations of the above stated codes, except the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code.
§ 221-4. Conflict of law.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any other ordinance or code or code of the City existing on
the effective date of this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the
people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of any other ordinance
or code of the City existing on the effective date of this chapter establishes
a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety
of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail, and such other
ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that
they may be found in conflict with this chapter.
Chapter 228
REAL ESTATE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 140.
Realty transfer tax — See Ch. 266, Art. II.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 134, Buildings and Structures, Dangerous.
§ 215-6 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 221-4
1:138
ARTICLE I
Certificate of Compliance Required
[Adopted 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 5-2007]
§ 228-1. Necessity of obtaining certificate.
It shall be unlawful to change ownership of a building unless a certificate of
compliance shall have been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer prior to
the change of ownership, stating that the building and land conform to the
requirements of the Property and Maintenance Code as well as any other
City ordinance or code.
§ 228-2. Application for certificate.
The applicant may be the current owner or the proposed new owner.
§ 228-3. Inspections.
The applicant for the certificate required shall notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of the date upon which change of ownership shall take place, and
the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the building within 10 days of
such notice.
§ 228-4. Issuance of certificates.
A. Upon inspection of the premises to determine whether or not a
certificate of compliance shall be issued, if the Code Enforcement
Officer shall find such premises in accordance with the codes and
ordinances of the City of Lower Burrell, a certificate of compliance shall
be issued provided that the premises complies with the stormwater
separation ordinances and regulations.
B. A provisional certificate may be issued subject to correction of existing
violations within a specified period of time, unless the property is unfit
for habitation.
C. Written notice shall be given to the applicant stating why a certificate of
compliance cannot be issued when the Code Enforcement Officer finds
that the premises are not fit for habitation. An appeals board
designated by the City will hear any disagreements of the Code
Enforcement Officer decision.
D. Upon transfer of ownership of property, the current owner shall
produce and deliver a copy of the certificate of compliance to the new
owner, including notice of any conditions associated with the
certificate.
§ 228-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:139
§ 228-5. Municipal lien letter.
A municipal lien letter shall not be issued in the case of a change of
ownership of residential property unless a certificate or a provisional
certificate of compliance has previously been issued.
§ 228-6. Revocation or suspension.
A certificate of compliance may be revoked or suspended by the Code
Enforcement Officer if the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the property
owner has failed to comply with conditions attached to the issuance of the
certificate or if the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the operation of the
premises or land fail to comply with the requirements of this article or any
code or ordinance of the City of Lower Burrell, which failure occurred after
the change of ownership, unless occupant doesn't change, i.e., change title
of ownership within family of the property.
§ 228-7. Fee.
The fee for the issuance of the certificate of compliance shall be $35, which
shall be paid to the order of the City of Lower Burrell at the time the
applicant applies for an inspection.
§ 228-8. Violations and penalties.
A penalty or fine not exceeding $600 and costs shall be imposed against any
person who violates any provision of this article. Such penalty or fine shall
be in addition to any penalty or fine imposed for violation of any building,
housing, property maintenance, fire prevention, electrical, plumbing or
zoning ordinance, or the violation of the Property Maintenance Code.
§ 228-5 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 228-8
1:140
Chapter 232
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 228-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-8
1:141

ARTICLE I
Landlord Occupancy Reports
[Adopted 4-9-1974 by Ord. No. 3-1974]
§ 232-1. Reports required. [Amended 2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 5-1999]
The owners, lessors and rental agents of all real estate, residences,
apartments, stores and other structures in the City of Lower Burrell leased,
offered for lease or occupied by persons, partnerships, corporations or
others than the owner thereof shall, within 15 days after effective date of
this article, supply to the City Treasurer of the City of Lower Burrell lists
of names and addresses of all current lessees and occupants of real estate,
residences, apartments, stores and other structures of which they are the
owners, lessors or rental agents and shall thereafter supply to the City
Treasurer in writing, and within 15 days, the names and addresses of all
new lessees or occupants of such premises.
§ 232-2. Supply of names.
The City Treasurer shall supply the names and addresses of all lessees and
occupants of real estate obtained by him hereunder or by any other means
to all other officials and departments of the City requesting same for the
proper performance of their duties.
§ 232-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-8-1999 by Ord. No.
5-199947]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 232-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-3
1:143

ARTICLE II
Minimum Standards
[Adopted 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 6-2007]
§ 232-4. Rental agreement license required.
A rental agreement license is required before any new tenant be allowed to
rent, dwell or occupy in any fashion a unit until all procedures, policies and
protocols are fulfilled, culminating in the issuance of a rental license by the
City Treasurer.
§ 232-5. License issuance contingent upon inspection.
A rental license is contingent upon the successful inspection of the Code
Enforcement Department. The Code Enforcement Officer will review each
unit based on a standardized check list (Appendix A).48
§ 232-6. Inspection fees.
The fee structures charged to the landlord/property owner will be $35 for
each of the first two inspections, $100 for the third inspection and $125 for
every inspection thereafter.
§ 232-7. Flow chart.
A flow chart of this application process is detailed in Appendix B.49
§ 232-8. List of deficiencies.
After each inspection, the property owner will be provided a list of the
deficiencies (Appendix C).50 The property owner will correct the deficiencies
before reoccupancy. The Code Enforcement Officer may grant an extension
based on the magnitude of the deficiency to be corrected.
§ 232-9. Smoke detectors.
A license will not be issued if smoke detectors are lacking in terms of
operation or appropriate number.
§ 232-10. Application process fine.
Also, in the event a landlord/property owner rents, allows dwelling or
occupation of a dwelling that has been vacated by the previous tenants
without going through the application process, the property owner will
incur a fine of up to $1,000 and will then be subject to the inspection
process with the current tenant in this unit.
48.Editor's Note: Appendix A, Inspection Form Checklist, is on file in the City offices.
49.Editor's Note: Appendix B, Flow Chart, is on file in the City offices.
50.Editor's Note: Appendix C, Burstible Form Highlighting Inspector's Deficiencies, is on file
in the City offices.
§ 232-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-11
1:145
§ 232-11. Reasons for application failure.
It should be noted that an application can be failed for any inspection
deficiency as well as any incomplete or missing information pertaining to
either the landlord or prospective tenant. All information must be accurate
to the best of the landlord's knowledge at the time of the application.
§ 232-12. Existing structure dimensions.
Existing structures will be subject to a "grandfather" for existing structural
dimensions, provided the existing structures offer no undue safety hazard,
as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, subject to appeal as
stipulated in the International Property Maintenance Code (current
edition).
§ 232-13. Tenant and landlord information.
All tenant and landlord information listed must be provided at the time of
application and such information may be used for any purpose by any City
entity deemed appropriate by Mayor and Council.
§ 232-14. Notice regarding rental properties; fines.
All landlords/property owners must inform the Code Enforcement Officer
of all rental properties in the City of Lower Burrell. This notice shall be
received in writing on or before 30 days after passage of this article.
Further, all new acquisitions designated for rental throughout the year must
be reported to the Code Enforcement Officer within 10 days after real estate
settlement closing on the property. Failure to comply shall be interpreted
as bypassing the procedure and will incur a fine of up to $1,000. Also, any
landlord that furnishes false information to the City or uses false name or
address will be sentenced to a fine of up to $1,000.
§ 232-15. Topics not addressed default to Property Maintenance
Code.
This article is not meant to be all encompassing; therefore, in the event, a
subject topic was not explicitly addressed, the procedure will default to the
guidelines of the International Property Maintenance Code, latest edition.
§ 232-11 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 232-15
1:146
Chapter 238
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 140.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 154.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 170.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 252.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
260.
Water — See Ch. 290.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 232-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-15
1:147

ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 3-6-1952 by Ord. No. 2-1952]
§ 238-1. Required sewer connections. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord.
No. 5-1986]
A. Existing properties.
(1) All owners of property situated in the City abutting on or adjoining
any street, road, alley, lane or other public way in which there is a
sanitary sewer owned or constructed by the Municipal Authority
are hereby required to connect at their own costs, and in
accordance with the regulations and charges of the Authority, the
building erected on such property to the sewer for the purpose of
discharging all household waste liquids and other matter
customarily directed into a sanitary sewer system, and shall be
required to pay the usual and customary tapping fee and the
service charge for such sewage service to the City. Oils, grease, tar,
gasoline or any other liquids that are not of the usual household
nature, including stormwater or drainage due to rain or snow, shall
not be emptied into or permitted to enter the sanitary sewer
system.
(2) Specifically, any wastes containing noxious or malodorous gas or
substance which, either singly or by interaction with sewage or
other wastes, is, in the opinion of the City Engineer, likely to create
a public nuisance or hazard to life, or prevent entry to sewers for
their maintenance and repair.
(3) Relating to fat, oil or grease. Any waste or water which may contain
more than 100 parts per million by weight of such substances are
prohibited. Grease, oil or fat interceptors shall be provided when it
is determined in the opinion of the City Engineer or his
representative that the limit of 100 parts per million is being
exceeded on a regular or consistent basis; or, if necessary, for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive
amounts. Such interceptors shall be sized for a ten-minute
retention time and a minimum grease retention capacity in pounds
equal to two times the total flow through rating in gpm (i.e., waste
flow through the interceptor is 10 gpm, the minimum grease
retention capacity equals 20 pounds).
(4) Grease interceptors shall be equipped with devices to control the
rate of water flow so that it does not exceed the design rated flow.
Such grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature.
§ 238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-1
1:149
§ 238-2. Tap-in requirements. [Added 5-12-1986 by Ord. No.
5-198652]
(5) They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be
gastight and watertight.
(6) All grease and oil interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at
his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
(7) When it is determined that industrial, commercial or other wastes
are of such a nature as to be injurious to the system or process by
virtue of temperature, or content, pretreatment or special handling
requirements will be established by the owner and approved by the
City and the New Kensington Sanitary Authority before initiating a
discharge.51
B. Additional properties. As from time to time sewer service becomes
available to additional properties within the City abutting on or
adjoining any street, road, alley, lane or other public way in which there
is a sanitary sewer, or by reason of the extension of the sanitary sewer
so as to make sewer service of such additional properties shall likewise
be required to connect their premises with the sanitary sewer and shall
be required to pay the usual and customary tapping fee and the service
charge for such sewage service to the Authority.
A. All premises accessible to the public sanitary sewer system shall be
connected to the system, at the expense of the user and/or property
owner. Such costs shall include but not limited to construction,
inspection, permits and tap-in fees.
B. All premises which hereafter become accessible to the sanitary sewer
system shall be connected to the system at the expense of the user and/
or property owner, and such connection shall be made within two
months after notice to make connection is issued by the Authority, the
City, or its authorized representative.
C. All connections shall be made in accordance with standard
requirements established and revised from time to time and in
accordance with the International Plumbing Code or other applicable
requirements of the City, authority, county and/or state, including
acquisition of applicable permits and inspection.
D. Where accessibility is in question, a determination of accessibility will
be made by the Authority's engineer. Hardship cases will be considered
by the Authority on an individual basis.
E. Trunk or collector line construction is processed through the Authority
as outlined in § 238-5 below. Individual service lines will require a tap-in
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-1 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-2
1:150
§ 238-3. Service line extension and service line connection
condensed sanitary sewer system installation specifications. [Added
5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 5-198653]
permit from the City and be subject to inspection by the City as
described on the permit.
F. Installation of the service line from the home to the municipal main line
is the responsibility of the owner. Work with the City right-of-way will be
subject to the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 256, Streets
and Sidewalks, including but not limited to an excavation permit and
bond.
G. Connections to the main line must be at Ys provided, if available.
Otherwise, manufactured saddles made for the purpose must be used.
Sized per § 238-4.
H. Before the ditch is closed, the City is to be notified so that an employee
of the Sewer Department can inspect the service line in its entirety.
I. Tap-in fees include cost of one inspection trip during the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Additional visits required
due to errors or inadequacies under the owner's responsibility or
beyond the regular work hours outlined above may be subject to
additional charges.
J. No taps into manholes will be permitted except in express written
permission from the Councilman in charge of the Sewer Department or
his designee.
K. It shall be unlawful for any person owning any occupied building or
premises accessible to the public sanitary sewer system to erect,
construct, use, or maintain or cause to be erected, constructed, used or
maintained, any privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or other
receptacle on such premises for receiving sewage.
A. General. Service line extension shall include: connection to main line,
sewer service line, trap with fresh air vent, cleanout, inspection port
and connection to building sanitary sewer line. No surface water from
roof leaders, foundation drain, area drains or other pipes shall be
connected to the sanitary sewer.
B. Sewer lateral. All sewers below floors of building and five feet outside
the building shall be ductile iron pipe (DIP), Schedule 40 polyvinyl
chloride (PVC), ABS sewer pipe or SDR35 sewer pipe. A trap with vent
shall be installed within eight feet, plus or minus, of building as shown
in the diagram.54 A cleanout shall be included on the downstream side
of all traps installed below four feet in depth.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
54.Editor's Note: The Standard Sewer Service Connection diagram is on file in the City
offices.
§ 238-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-3
1:151
C. Size. All service lines shall be four inches or six inches in diameter and
laid on minimum slope of 1/8 inch per foot.
D. Cleanouts. Cleanouts consisting of wye branch, elbow, riser and
watertight cap are required at intervals specified above or at all
direction changes greater than 45 degrees. If a cleanout is located in
the driveway area, eighteen-inch concrete encasements and metal
frame cover are required. Cleanout shall be provided at intervals of not
more than 100 feet.
E. View port. A six-inch-diameter view port consisting of a six–by-six-by-six
tee, six-inch riser and removable cover shall be install at the property
line or edge of right-of-way as shown in the diagram.55
F. Materials. All sewer materials shall be as described above for sewer
lateral and standard service connection detail.
G. Installation. Before digging a trench, the installer shall expose existing
building sewer connection and existing building drain. The installer
shall verify adequate grade for gravity flow building sewer to main
sewer. Trench width shall be kept to minimum width and have uniform
slope at approved grade and as near as possible at right angles to the
street. Excavate all trenches at least four inches below invert of pipe.
Place backfill bedding in trench uniformly along both sides of pipe to 12
inches above top of pipe. In streets, an excavation permit is required
and one-hundred-percent-stone backfill is mandatory. Compliance with
utility notification laws, Act 172 and 286,56 are the excavator's
responsibility.
H. Adapters. Connection between the plain end of different pipe material
shall be made with flexible couplings manufactured by Calder, Fernco
or equivalent (Series 1002 for VCP to PVC, Series 1056 for CIP to PVC).
I. Inspection. The City's Public Works Department requires twenty-fourhour
notice (724-334-0690) when the sewer lateral, service line
extension and related appurtenances have been installed and prior to
any backfill so that the entire installation can be inspected. Final
inspection will not be scheduled until all applications for service have
been submitted and approved and all tapping fees or other charges due
and payable have been remitted to the City. Any reinspection required
as a result of failure to follow this specification shall require
reinspection fee of $25 prior to completion of that inspection. No
charge for inspections during normal working hours of 7:00 a.m. to 3:30
p.m., Monday through Friday; $100 charge for Saturday inspections
and $150 for Sunday or holiday inspections.
J. Final connection. If a sewer lateral is not completed to the building at
the time of the installation of the building sewer, a temporary plug shall
55.Editor's Note: The Standard Sewer Service Connection diagram is on file in the City
offices.
56.Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 238-3 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-3
1:152
§ 238-4. Notice.57
The owners of property abutting on or adjoining any street, road, alley, lane
or other public way in which there is a sanitary sewer shall be given 60 days'
notice in writing by the Secretary of the City Council of the City of Lower
Burrell of the requirement that all buildings erected upon abutting property
shall have sewer connections, and upon his, her, its or their failure to make
such connections within said period, the City shall may make the same and
collect the costs thereof from the owner by a municipal claim or in action of
assumpsit.
§ 238-5. Applications. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 5-1986;
7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 9-1992]
Before making such connection to said sanitary sewer system, the owner or
owners of the premises to be served shall:
be installed into the end of lateral and shall not be removed until
such time as the connection is made to the building sewer and a City
inspector is present.
K. OSHA standards. All excavations shall be performed in accordance with
the latest edition of Employer-Employee Safe Practices for Excavation
and Trenching Operations.
L. Inspection form. Following the inspection of the service lateral, the
property owner or authorized representative (contractor) and inspector
shall complete a service lateral inspection form.
M. Property owner/applicant is responsible for installation, maintenance
and repair of the sewer lateral from the "house" to the "main" line to
insure proper elevation flow to City sewer.
N. Street opening. Any excavation through or under public streets or
sidewalks requires a street opening permit.
A. Make written application therefor, agreeing to pay all lawful charges
for sewage service to said premises so long as the applicant remains the
owner thereof and thereafter until said applicant shall give written
notice to the City of a change of ownership and the name and address of
the new owner.
B. Construction specifications. [Amended 4-14-2014 by Ord. No.
1-2014]
(1) All sewers and facilities constructed as a part of the connecting
lateral sewer installation to the public sewer shall conform to the
following:
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-5
1:153
§ 238-6. Procedure for plan approval. [Added 5-12-1986 by Ord. No.
5-1986]
The developer shall follow the procedure outlined below to obtain the
Authority's approval of his plans:
(a) No connecting sewer shall be connected to the effluent of any
septic tank, privy vault, cesspool, roof drain, driveway drain or
foundation drain.
(b) All pipe installed shall be PVC or ABS plastic solid wall or
ductile iron pipe (DIP) of at least four inches inside diameter.
Terra cotta or vitrified clay pipe (VCP) are not permitted.
(c) Where pipes of two different sizes, materials or joint types are
being connected, special transition adapters (Calder, Fernco,
or equivalent) must be utilized. Inspection is required by the
City prior to any backfilling.
(2) The construction of all lateral sewers, building sewer lines or house
service sewers, connecting to the public sewer shall be done in
accordance with the specifications, procedures, rules and
regulations established by the City as the same may be amended
from time to time, copes of which are on file with the City.
C. Obtain a connection permit and pay the connection charges therefor in
accordance with the rates herein specified.
A. Letter of application and deposit.
(1) Submit to the Authority Secretary a letter of an application stating
the owner's full name, address, telephone number, brief description
of location of plan, subdivision of lots, proposed number of lots,
proposed number of lots, approximate lineal feet of sewer line
number of manholes, place of sewage treatment, utilities serving
lots, lineal feet and width of rights-of-way, proposed time schedule,
and anticipated completion of project, type of project, whether lots
will be developed from sale or whether lots and houses will be sold
as packages on a speculative basis, whether developer has
completed any past projects; if so, name last project; if this is his
first project, so state; include total acreage in plan and acreage.
(2) A minimum is required, payable to the Lower Burrell Municipal
Authority: $1,000 for plans of development up to 10 lots, and
$1,800 deposit for plans of 11 or more lots. Alternate amounts may
be set by the Authority of the agreement. This deposit will be used
by the Authority to cover cost of plan review by the Authority's
Engineer and the cost of preparation of "Agreement for the
Construction of Sanitary Facilities in the City of Lower Burrell."
After completion of the sanitary sewer by the developer, and the
acceptance thereof by the Authority, if there remains any monies
not spent by the Authority for plan review, inspection, or
§ 238-5 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-6
1:154
construction and/or legal fees, such monies shall be returned to
the developer. In the event the initial deposit is insufficient for
the purpose provided, the developer will, at the request of the
Authority, deposit additional funds to defray additional costs and
expense. An itemized accounting of all such monies will be supplied
to the developer if requested.
B. Developer authority agreement. At the same time the developer files
the letter of application with the Authority, the developer shall enter
into an agreement with the Authority by signing the "Agreement for the
Construction of Sanitary Facilities in the City of Lower Burrell." The
procedure and examples are outlined in the special manual of
procedures and requirements for constructing sanitary sewers in the
City of Lower Burrell. A general outline follows:
(1) The developer shall submit detailed plans and sewer modules to the
Municipal Authority of the City of Lower Burrell as outlined in the
Sewage Manual for their approval. Plans shall include
specifications for materials and installation which complies with
applicable current local and state requirements. Minimum City
sewer construction specifications have been developed and will be
revised and updated from time to time. Authority review and
recommends City signoff and transmit.
(2) The developer shall obtain all permits as required by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and other pertinent
agencies.58
(3) All sewers shall be designed in accordance with the Sewage
Manual of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
Division of Sanitary Engineering, and all applicable City and
Municipal Authority rules and regulations.59
(4) Prior to final acceptance of any sewer extensions by the Authority,
it will be necessary for the developer to furnish to the Authority
reproducible "as built" in a digital format compatible with the City's
GIS system showing the angle and distance between manholes, the
top and invert elevation of each manhole, and the exact location of
all house sewer connections relative to the nearest manhole both
downstream and upstream, and the structure served, including
depth from ground surface to lateral flow line. The end of each
lateral shall be marked with a minimum two-inch diameter pole
extending to the existing ground surface.60
(5) Easements shall be recorded in the name of the City of Lower
Burrell for all sewers (except laterals) to be constructed outside of
dedicated street rights-of-way. These permanent easements to be a
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-6
1:155
minimum of 20 feet in width. Temporary construction easements up
to 25 feet in width may be required.61
(6) All construction shall be in accordance with the approved
specifications and inspected by the Authority's inspector before it is
covered up. Fee: see Subsection A.
(7) The installation of all gravity sewers and force mains (except
laterals) shall be tested in the field in the presence of the Authority
Engineer or his authorized assistant. Sewers shall be field tested
either pneumatically or hydrostatically for leakage. Each and every
section of sewer shall be tested.
(a) The pneumatic test shall be made by tightly capping all stubs
and Ys, plugging the ends and placing the section being tested
under air pressure. Air pressure is raised to four psig greater
than the average back pressure of any ground water. After a
two-minute air temperature stabilization time, test time starts.
Line pressure must not drop more than one psig in the time
allowed below:
Pipe Size
(inches)
Time Allowed for 1 psig Drop
(minutes)
6 2
8 4
10 5
12 5.5
15 7.5
(b) The hydrostatic or infiltration test is to be conducted following
installation of all manholes, service connections and collector
lines. Occurrence of rate of infiltration of groundwater in
excess of 50 gallons per inch diameter per mile of sewer per
day will be considered evidence of defective materials and/or
workmanship and shall require repair or replacement by the
contractor.
C. All obvious leaks in the line and in the manholes under test shall be
repaired regardless of the test result.
D. A report of all test results signed by the developer or its agent and
confirmed by the Authority Engineer shall become a permanent part of
the City maintenance records.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-6 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-7
1:156
§ 238-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-14-2014 by Ord. No.
1-2014]
Except as provided for in Subsection B, any person, firm or corporation
who shall violate any provision of § 238-1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine plus costs:
A. Not exceeding one per month on a property and limited to no more than
$1,000 plus costs, for the first two continual and uncorrected violations
of the same part of this article on the same property; and not exceeding
$5,000 for the third or more continual and uncorrected violation of the
same part of this article on the same property;
B. If a violation of this article is found to pose a threat to the public health,
safety or property, then upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine, plus costs:
(1) Not exceeding one citation per five calendar days for a continual
and uncorrected violation of the same part of this article on the
same property;
(2) Limited to no less than $500 and no more than $1,000 for the first
two continual and uncorrected violations of the same part of this
article on the same property and no less than $1,000 and not
exceeding $10,000 for the third or more continual and uncorrected
violation of the same part of this article on the same property, or
imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 238-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-7
1:157

ARTICLE II
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 7-12-1976 by Ord. No. 4-1976]
§ 238-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage from
Burrell Lake Park uses, and it is hereby declared that the enactment of
this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this City.
§ 238-9. Definitions. [Amended 1-13-1992 by Ord. No. 9-1991]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
CITY — The City of Lower Burrell, a Pennsylvania municipal corporation,
Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site. Holding tanks are limited to the following:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings and any
noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the public
health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation.
§ 238-10. Rights and privileges granted.
The City is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the City
the control and methods of holding tank sewage disposal and the collection
and transportation thereof.
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by
a water carrying system.62
A.
PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where water under
pressure is not available.63
B.
62.Editor's Note: Original Subdefinition (1), Burrell Lake Park Toilet, which immediately
preceded this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
63.Editor's Note: The original definitions of "improved property" and "owner," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-11
1:159
§ 238-11. Rules and regulations.
The City is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and
regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time to
time to effect the purpose herein.
§ 238-12. Rules and regulations to be in conformity with applicable
law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the City shall be in conformity
with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the City, and all
applicable laws, and applicable rules and regulations of administrative
agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 238-13. Rates and charges.
The City shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
§ 238-14. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.64
The collection and transportation of all sewage from the improved property
utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the direction and
control of the City, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at such site
or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental Protection
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 238-15. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
§ 238-16. Violations and penalties.65
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this or any ordinance of
this City, the provisions of any applicable law, and the rules and
regulations of the City and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the City or anyone acting under the direction of the City to
collect, transport and dispose of the contents therein.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-11 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-17
1:160
§ 238-17. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of
§ 308, above shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the City
by seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
§ 238-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-17
1:161

ARTICLE III
Sewer Rates
[Adopted 10-24-1958 by Ord. No. 10-1958]
§ 238-18. Rates, penalty and interest on unpaid bills. [Last
amended 2-4-2019 by Res. No. 1-2019]
A. All owners of property connected or connecting with the sewers and
sewage system as owned or leased by the Township of Lower Burrell,
Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, and all of the owners of property
who may hereafter connect with and use the same shall pay sewer
rentals or charges, payable quarterly as hereinafter provided, for the
use of such sewage facilities based upon the schedule of rates below,
which may be amended by resolution from time to time:
(1) For residential users of said sewers and residential properties to
which the system is available for use, the following rate schedule
will be used for quarterly billing:
Meter Size Minimum Rate
5/8" $98.17
3/4" $117.85
1" $157.22
1 1/2" $255.65
2" $373.75
4" $1,055.48
Wells
(flat rate) Minimum Rate
4 people $178.06
3 people $157.58
2 people $138.18
1 person $118.19
Empty $98.17
Plus $3.56 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption
(2) For all commercial users of said sewers and properties to which the
system is available for use, the following rate schedule will be used
for quarterly billing:
Meter Size Minimum Rate
5/8" $112.37
3/4" $136.34
1" $184.63
§ 238-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-18
1:163
§ 238-19. Billings.
Sewer rentals or charges shall be paid quarterly in accordance with billings
for sewage service; however, during the first month that a residential,
commercial or industrial user begins to discharge sewage into the sewage
system, said charge shall be based on a per diem pro rata amount from
Meter Size Minimum Rate
1 1/2" $304.45
2" $448.25
Well (flat rate) $200.72
Plus $4.59 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption
(3) For all schools and public buildings users of said sewers and
properties to which the is available for use, the following rate
schedule will be used for system billing:
Meter Size Minimum Rate
5/8" $112.37
3/4" $136.34
1" $184.63
1 1/2" 304.45
2" $448.25
3" $783.78
4" $1,263.11
6" $2,391.82
Plus $4.59 per 100 cubic feet of water consumption
B. There shall be a penalty charged in the amount of 5% which shall be
added to all bills paid later than 15 days after the date of said bill,
together with interest on the unpaid balance at the rate of 1% per
month for each month thereafter.
C. A disconnect/reconnect billing fee in an amount of set by the Water
Authority shall be assessed when water service is either disconnected
or reconnected. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 6-2016]
D. This article may be changed from time to time by resolution of Council.
E. All property owners who are connected to the sewage system or who
have access to the sewage system, shall pay the base rate whether or
not they are actively putting sewage into the system. [Added
10-14-2013 by Ord. No. 2-201366]
66.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it shall be retroactive to January 1, 1998, and
take effect immediately.
§ 238-18 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-19
1:164
the time such sewer connection is made until the next following quarterly
billing period. Quarterly charges for sewage service shall be due and
payable immediately upon receipt and shall be paid not later than the 10th
day following the date of billing.
§ 238-20. Sewer connections. [Amended 2-5-1960 by Ord. No.
2-1960; 7-15-1960 by Ord. No. 8-1960; 8-9-1960 by Ord. No.
13-1960; 1-11-1963 by Ord. No. 1-1963; 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
6-2016]
Sewers heretofore constructed by real estate developers or others and
designed to serve groups of properties and which have been determined
by the consulting engineer of the Municipal Authority of the City of Lower
Burrell to have been properly installed and usable in connection with the
sewage collection system of the City of Lower Burrell may be connected to
and incorporated into said sewage collection system upon the condition that
a tap-in fee shall be paid to the City of Lower Burrell in the operation of said
sewer system for each residential property served or which may be served
by said privately constructed sewer system or systems.
§ 238-21. Existing sewers. [Amended 2-5-1960 by Ord. No. 2-1960;
8-9-1960 by Ord. No. 13-1960; 7-13-1973 by Ord. No. 7-1973;
5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 5-1986; 12-12-1988 by Ord. No. 10-1988;
12-13-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2004; 3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2-2011]
A. The sewer tap-in fees for connection to existing sewers or sewers
hereinafter constructed shall be those recommended sewer tap-in fees
set forth in the November 2010, revised December 21, 2010, Schedule
prepared by Alpha Engineering Co., Inc., which schedule is included
below. The Fee Schedule is approved in accordance with Third Class
City Code, Section 3215, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 38214.167 and the Pa.
Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5607. [Added 3-14-2011
by Ord. No. 2-2011]
(1) Residential.
Existing Sewer
System Rate
(developer installed)
New Expansion
Assessment Rate*
(Lower Burrell
Municipal Authority)
Single-family $2,025 $3,925*
Multifamily $2,025 per unit $3,925 per unit*
Duplex $4,050 $7,850*
Triplex $6,075 $11,775*
4-Unit $8,100 $15,700*
67.Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 38214.1 was repealed by 3-19-2014 by P.L. 52, No. 22.
§ 238-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-21
1:165
§ 238-22. Liability for damage.69
Neither the City of Lower Burrell nor Municipal Authority of Lower Burrell,
Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, shall be liable for any damage
resulting from leaks, broken pipes or from any other cause occurring to
or within any house or building between the sewer line and any house or
building, and neither said City nor Authority shall be liable to any owner
for any claim for damage arising by reason by leaking or breaking of any
main, trunk, interceptor, lateral or building connection, sewer line or any
attachment to the sewer.
Mid-Rise or High-Rise
(one lateral per building)
First unit $3,925
Each additional unit (EDU),
additional
$2,025
(2) Nonresidential commercial/industrial, etc.: $3,925 first EDU;
$2,025 each additional EDU.
Mid-Rise or High-Rise
(one lateral per building)
First unit $3,925
Each additional unit (EDU),
additional
$2,025
Typical Distribution of Fees
$525 MSANK $525 MSANK
$1,000 City $1,000 City
$500 LBMA $2,400 LBMA
$2,025 $3,925
NOTE:
* EDU (equivalent dwelling unit) = 350 gallons per day
B. The fee structure of this section may be changed from time to time by
resolution of the Council of the City of Lower Burrell.68
68.Editor's Note: Original Section 105, Sewer assessments, as amended 12-17-1974 by Ord.
No. 6-1974 and 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 5-1986, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-21 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-23
1:166
§ 238-23. Inspections.70
The duly authorized agents of the City of Lower Burrell and Municipal
Authority of the City of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania,
shall have access at all reasonable hours of the day to all parts of the
premises to which sewer service is supplied to make necessary inspections.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-23
1:167

ARTICLE IV
Wastewater Pretreatment Regulations
[Adopted 12-12-1994 by Ord. No. 8-1994]
§ 238-24. General provisions.
A. Purpose and policy.
(1) This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment systems
of the City of Lower Burrell and enables the City of Lower Burrell
and the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the
Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations
(40 CFR, Part 403).
(2) The objectives of this article include but are not limited to:
(a) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system of the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington which will interfere with the operation of the
collection or treatment systems including interference with the
use or disposal of the resulting sludge;
(b) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system of the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington which will pass through the system, inadequately
treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise
be incompatible with the system;
(c) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters
and sludges from the system; and
(d) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the
municipal wastewater system.
(3) This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the
issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through
enforcement of general requirements for the other users,
authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user
reporting, assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be
preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
(4) This article shall apply to the City of Lower Burrell and to persons
outside the City of Lower Burrell who are, by contract or
agreement with the City of Lower Burrell, users of the sewage
treatment plant of the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
manager of the sewage treatment plant of the Municipal Sanitary
§ 238-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-24
1:169
Authority of the City of New Kensington shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this article.71
B. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator in an NPDES
state with an approved state pretreatment program and the Regional
Administrator in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an
approved state pretreatment program.
APPROVED PRETREATMENT PROGRAM or PRETREATMENT
PROGRAM — The program administered by the City of Lower Burrell
and the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
that meets the criteria established by 40 CFR 403.8 and 403.9 and
which has been approved by a Regional Administrator or State Director
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An
authorized representative of industrial user may be:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, five days at 20° C. expressed in terms of
concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president,
if the industrial user is a corporation.
(1)
A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
(2)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
Subsection (1) or (2) if:
(a) Described in Subsection (1) or (2);
The authorization specifies either an individual or person
having responsibility for the overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company; and
(b)
(c) Written authorization is submitted to the control authority.
(3)
If an authorization individual or position has responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements of Subsection (3) must be submitted to
the control authority prior to or together with any reports to be
signed by an authorized representative.
(4)
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-24 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-24
1:170
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the wastewater system of the City of Lower Burrell or the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — National categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment standard.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The "approval authority," defined
hereinabove; or the Manager of the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the
City of New Kensington if there is an approved pretreatment program
applicable under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
DIRECTOR — The chief administrative officer of a state or interstate
water pollution control agency with an NPDES permit program
approved pursuant to § 402(b) of the Act and an approved state
pretreatment program.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may
also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailer, septic tanks, and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
pollutants into the sewage treatment plant of the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington from any source regulated
under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
Inhibits or disrupts the sewage treatment plant of the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal;
and
(1)
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington sewage
treatment plant's NPDES permit (including an increase in the
(2)
§ 238-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-24
1:171
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, NATIONAL
PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies
to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits
established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5. The categorical pretreatment
standards found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405.471 are
hereby incorporated.
NEW SOURCE —
magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory
provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent state or local regulations): § 405 of the Clean Water Act,
the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title II, more
commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act" (RCRA), and including State regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA], the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, and the
Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such
source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance
with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located;
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production of wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source should be considered.
(c)
(1)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction
does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) of this definition
but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or
production equipment.
(2)
§ 238-24 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-24
1:172
NPDES PERMIT or PERMIT — A permit issued to a POTW pursuant to
§ 402 of the Act.
NPDES STATE — A state (as defined in 40 CFR 122.2) or interstate
water pollution control agency with an NPDES permit program
approved pursuant to § 402(b) of the Act.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A treatment
works as defined by § 212 of the Act, which is owned by a state or
municipality [as defined by § 502(4) of the Act]. This definition includes
any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if
they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also
includes the municipality as defined in § 502(4) of the Act, which has
jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from
such a treatment works. Within the context of this, the term "POTW"
specifically refers to the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington Sewage Treatment Plant.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — The portion of the POTW which is
designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of
municipal sewage and industrial waste.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
Construction of a "new source" has commenced if the owner or
operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
[1]
Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly,
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this section.
(b)
(3)
§ 238-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-24
1:173
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration
may be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process
changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such
as equalization tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or
slug loadings that might interfere with or otherwise be incompatible
with the POTW. However, where wastewater from a regulated process
is mixed in an equalization facility with unregulated wastewater or
with wastewater from another regulated process, the effluent from
the equalization facility must meet an adjusted pretreatment limit
calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National
Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an industrial user.
REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR — The appropriate EPA Regional
Administrator.
SHALL — Is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
Except as provided in Subsection (2) of this definition, a significant
industrial user of the wastewater disposal system of the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington is defined as:
All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N; and
(a)
Any other industrial user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per average work
day or more of process wastewater to POTW (excluding
sanitary, non-contract cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater);
[1]
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5%
or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic
capacity of the POTW treatment plant;
[2]
Has in their wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to
§ 307 of the Act;
[3]
Is found by the City of New Kensington, Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington, State
Control Agency, or the U.S. EPA to have significant impact,
either singly or in combination with other contributing
industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the
quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air
emissions generated by the steam; or
[4]
(b)
(1)
§ 238-24 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-24
1:174
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — An industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of these criteria,
among others listed in 40 CFR 403.8:[Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 3-2008]
Is designated as such by the control authority on the basis
that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating
any pretreatment standard or requirement [in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)].
[5]
Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
Subsection (1) of this definition has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may
at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 CFR
403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant
industrial user unless the industrial user is classified as a
categorical industrial user.
(2)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those
in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during
a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous
limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1).
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the
same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal
or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits defined by 40 CFR
403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC [TRC = 1.4 for
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), Total Suspended Solids (TSS),
Oil and Grease, and 1.2 for all other parameters except pH].
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering
the health of POTW personnel or the general public).
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment, or
has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority
under Paragraph (f)(1)(vi)(B) of 40 CFR 403 to halt or prevent such
a discharge.
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
(5)
§ 238-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-24
1:175
SLUG DISCHARGE or ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE — Any discharge of
a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accident
spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUBMISSION —
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA Section
307(a) or other acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the POTW.
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction or attaining final compliance.
Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance
with compliance schedules.
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
Any other violation or group of violations which may include a
violation of best management practices (BMPs), which the POTW
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
(8)
A request by the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington for approval of a pretreatment program to the EPA or a
director.
(1)
A request by the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington to the EPA or a director for authority to revise the
discharge limits in categorical pretreatment standards to reflect
sewage treatment plant pollutant removals.
(2)
A request to the EPA by an NPDES state for approval of its state
pretreatment program.
(3)
§ 238-24 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-24
1:176
§ 238-25. Regulations.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or
permitted to enter the POTW.
WATER MANAGEMENT DIVISION DIRECTOR — One of the directors
of the Water Management Divisions within the regional offices of the
Environmental Protection Agency or this person's delegated
representative.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT — As set forth in § 238-27B of
this article.
C. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand.
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations.
COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand.
l - Liter.
mg - Milligrams.
mg/l - Milligrams per liter.
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
POTW - Publicly owned treatment works.
SIC - Standard Industrial Classification.
SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
USC - United States Code.
TSS - Total suspended solids.
A. General discharge prohibitions.
(1) No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause pass
through or interfere with the operation or performance of the
POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a
POTW, whether or not the user is subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not
contribute the following substances to any POTW:
§ 238-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-25
1:177
(a) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by
interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or
be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation
of the POTW. These substances include but are not limited to
waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F.
(60° C.) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At
no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard
meter at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point
in the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over
10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones,
aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates,
carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances
which the control authority, the state or approved authority has
notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the collection or
treatment system.
(b) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to:
grease, garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any
dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair,
hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass,
straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent
hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues,
residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil,
mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
(c) Any wastewater having a pH less than five, unless the POTW is
specifically designed to accommodate such wastewater, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or
personnel of the POTW.
(d) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants or pollutants which
result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes, in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, or cause injury, pass-through or
interference of the POTW, cause acute worker health and
safety problems, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to
exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment
standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to
any pollutant identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act.
(e) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to
§ 238-25 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-25
1:178
create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(f) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any
other product of the POTW such as residues, sludge, or scum,
to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with
the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance
discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in
noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines
or regulations developed under § 405 of the Act; any criteria,
guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean
Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.
(g) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water
quality standards.
(h) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(i) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in
pass through or interference, but in no case wastewater with a
temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds
40°C (104° F.), unless U.S. EPA has approved alternate limits as
requested by the POTW.
(j) Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD,
etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which a user knows or has reason to know will cause passthrough
or interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug
load have a flow rate or contain concentration or quantities of
pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15
minutes more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation.
(k) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
of such half life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the Superintendent in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
(l) Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates
a public nuisance.
(m) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause pass through or
interference of the POTW.
§ 238-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-25
1:179
(n) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Municipal Authority of the City of New
Kensington.
(2) When the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington determines that a user is contributing to the POTW any
of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to cause
pass-through or interference of the POTW, the Control Authority
shall: advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the
POTW; and develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the
problem of pass-through or interference of the POTW. The
Authority may pursue an enforcement action, as outlined in
§ 238-28, Enforcement, of this article against the industrial user in
the event that the user causes pass-through or interference.
B. Federal categorical pretreatment standards. Upon the promulgation of
the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular
industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than
limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory,
shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article.
The categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR, Chapter 1,
Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are incorporated herein by
reference. The control authority shall notify all affected users of the
applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
C. Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards.
(1) Where said POTW treatment plant achieves consistent removal of
pollutant(s) discharged by an industrial user to which a categorical
pretreatment standard(s) applies, the Municipal Sanitary Authority
of the City of New Kensington may, at its discretion and subject to
the conditions of 40 CFR 403.7, make application to the approval
authority for permission to grant removal credits to reflect removal
by the POTW of pollutants specified in the categorical pretreatment
standard(s). The control authority may grant a removal credit equal
to, or at its discretion, less than its consistent removal rate. Upon
being granted a removal credit, each affected industrial user shall
calculate its revised discharge limits in accordance with 40 CFR
403.7(a)(4).
(a) Consistent removal shall mean the average of the lowest 50%
of the removal measured according to 40 CFR 403.7(b)(2). All
sample data obtained for the measured pollutant during the
time period prescribed in 40 CFR 403.7(b)(2) must be reported
and used in computing consistent removal. If a substance is
measurable in the influent but not in the effluent, the effluent
level may be assumed to be the limit of measurement, and
those data may be used by the POTW at its discretion and
subject to approval by the approval authority. If the substance
is not measurable in the influent, the data may not be used.
§ 238-25 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-25
1:180
(b) The POTW may grant removal credits only if:
[1] The POTW applies for, and receives, authorization from the
approval authority to give a removal credit in accordance
with the requirements and procedures specified in 40 CFR
403.7(e);
[2] The POTW demonstrates and continues to achieve
consistent removal of all the pollutant(s) in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.7(b);
[3] The POTW has an approved pretreatment program in
accordance with and to the extent required by 40 CFR
403;
[4] The granting of removal credits will not cause the POTW to
violate the local, state, and federal sludge requirements
which apply to the sludge management method chosen by
the POTW; and
[5] The granting of removal credits will not cause a violation
of the POTW's permit limitation or conditions.
(2) The Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal
pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR
403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is
obtained.
D. Specific pollutant limitations. No person shall discharge wastewater
containing pollutants in excess of the maximum amounts specified in
then-current rules and regulations governing sewage services of the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington.
E. State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations on those in this article.
F. City of Lower Burrell's right of revision. The City of Lower Burrell
reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations
or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if
deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in § 238-24A
of this article.
G. Excessive discharge. No user shall ever increase the use of process
water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment
standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the
City of Lower Burrell, the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington or state. Dilution is permitted only where expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement.
§ 238-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-25
1:181
H. Slug or accidental discharges.
(1) Each significant industrial user shall provide protection from
accidental or slug discharge of prohibited materials or other
substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental
or slug discharges of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained by the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed
plans showing facilities and a complete description of operating
procedures implemented to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington prior to construction of the facility. All existing
significant industrial users shall have completed the
aforementioned plan as required by this article. No industrial user
who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date
of this article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the
system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved
by the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall
not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the
industrial user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of
this article. All industrial users shall notify the Authority of any
changes at the user's facility that affect the potential for slug
discharges even if it is not anticipated that a discharge would
normally occur based on the facility changes. [Amended
7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
(2) A complete description of operating procedures must include, but
not be limited to, the following:
(a) A listing of all stored chemicals, including the type and nature
of chemical, maximum quantity stored, and any safety
procedures to be followed if an accidental discharge occurs.
(b) A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine
batch discharges.
(c) A description of procedures to prevent adverse impact from
accidental or slug discharges, including but not limited to
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations,
control of site runoff, employee training, building of
containment structures or equipment for emergency response.
I. Notification.
(1) In the case of accidental or slug discharge or any discharge that
could cause problems at the POTW, it is the responsibility of the
industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of
the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge,
type of waste discharged, concentration and volume of waste
discharged and corrective actions.
§ 238-25 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-25
1:182
§ 238-26. Fees.
(2) Within five days following an accidental or slug discharge, the
industrial user shall submit to the Municipal Sanitary Authority of
the City of New Kensington a detailed written report describing the
cause of the discharge and the measures taken by the industrial
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, to the
POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil
penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article or
other applicable law.
J. Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent location advising
employees whom to contact in the event of an accidental or slug
discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
K. Control authority review. The Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City
of New Kensington shall, at least once every two years, evaluate
whether each industrial user will be required to develop a plan to
control accidental or slug discharges.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of
costs from industrial users of the said wastewater disposal system for
the implementation of the pretreatment program established herein.
The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the schedule of fees
of the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington after
approval by resolution of the City of Lower Burrell.
B. Charges and fees.
(1) The Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
may adopt charges and fees which may include:
(a) Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing and operating
the pretreatment program of the Municipal Sanitary Authority
of the City of New Kensington.
(b) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
(c) Fees for reviewing accidental or slug discharge procedures
and construction.
(d) Fees for permit applications.
(e) Fees for filing appeals.
(f) Fees for consistent removal (by the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington) of pollutants
otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards.
§ 238-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-26
1:183
§ 238-27. Administration.
(g) Other fees as the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
(2) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and
are separate from all other fees chargeable by the City of Lower
Burrell or by the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington.
A. Wastewater dischargers. It shall be unlawful to discharge without a
permit to any natural outlet within the City of Lower Burrell, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of said City of Lower Burrell, and/or to the
POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the City of Lower
Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Wastewater contribution permits.
(1) General permits. All significant industrial users proposing to
connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater
discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW.
All existing significant industrial users connected to or contributing
to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution permit within
180 days after the effective date of this article. Compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements by industrial
users is mandatory.
(2) Permit application.
(a) Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater contribution
permit shall complete and file with the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington an application in the
form prescribed by the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City
of New Kensington and accompanied by a fee as determined by
the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington. Existing industrial users shall apply for a
wastewater contribution permit within 30 days after the
effective date of this article, and proposed new sources shall
apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to
the POTW. In support of the application, the industrial user
shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the
following information:
[1] Name, address, and location (if different from the address)
of the facility, and the name of all operators and owners.
[2] A list of any environmental control permits held by or for
the facility.
§ 238-26 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-27
1:184
[3] SIC number according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as
amended.
[4] A description of the nature of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises including all materials which
are or could be discharged.
[5] Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production.
[6] Type and amount (average and maximum per day) of raw
materials processed.
[7] Number and type of employees, hours of operation of
facility, and proposed or actual hours of operation of
pretreatment system.
[8] A complete set of site plans, floor plans, mechanical and
plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer
connections and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation.
[9] The average daily and thirty-minute peak wastewater flow
rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if
applicable.
[10] Time and duration of wastewater contribution.
[11]Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including
but not limited to those mentioned in § 238-25 as
determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling
and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section
304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as
amended. Laboratory analysis must be attached and
submitted with the application. Sampling for all reports,
including reports from both categorical users and
significant noncategorical users, must be representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period.
[Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
[12] The nature and concentration of any pollutant in the
discharge which are limited by any municipal, state or
federal pretreatment standards, or best management
practices, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis, including submission of information needed to
demonstrate compliance with any best management
practice, and if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
§ 238-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-27
1:185
standards or best management practice. [Amended
7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
[13] If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to
meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest compliance
schedule by which the industrial user will provide such
additional pretreatment or O&M. The completion date in
this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The
following conditions shall apply to the compliance
schedule requirement:
[a] The compliance schedule shall contain increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement
and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment
facilities or O&M required for the industrial user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g.,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans,
completing final plans, executing contract for major
components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.).
[b] No increment referred to in Subsection B(2)(a)[13][a]
shall exceed nine months.
[c] Not later than 14 days following each date in the
compliance schedule and the final date for
compliance, the industrial user shall submit a
progress report to the Municipal Sanitary Authority of
the City of New Kensington including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date
on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being
taken be the industrial user to return the construction
to the schedule established. In no event shall more
than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the Control Authority.
[d] The signature of an authorized representative of the
industrial user and certification statement as
expressed in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii).
[e] Any other information as may be deemed by the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington to be necessary to evaluate the permit
application.
(b) The Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial
§ 238-27 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-27
1:186
user and may require additional information. After evaluation
and acceptance of the data furnished, the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington may issue a
wastewater contribution permit subject to the terms and
conditions provided herein. The Authority may at its discretion
deny issuance of a permit to industrial users where such
contributions of pollutants do not meet applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements or where such
contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
permit.
(3) Permit requirements. Permits shall contain self-monitoring,
sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements,
including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based
upon the applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR
403, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and
local law.
(4) Permit notification.
(a) Within 90 days of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution permit of
significant industrial users subject to such standards shall be
revised to require compliance with such standard within the
time frame prescribed by such standard. Within 60 days after
the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 60
days after the final administrative decision made upon a
category determination submission under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4),
whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such
categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging
to or scheduled to discharge to a POTW shall be required to
submit to the Control Authority the information required by
§ 238-27B(2) of this article.
(b) At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new
sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent
to the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard, shall be required to submit to the control authority
an application for a wastewater contribution permit as
required by § 238-27B(2) of this article. New sources shall also
be required to include in the wastewater contribution permit
application information on the method of pretreatment that the
source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment
standards. New sources shall provide estimates of the
information requested in § 238-27B(2)(a)[5], [6], [9], [10], [11],
[12] and [13] of this article.
(5) Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the Municipal
§ 238-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-27
1:187
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington. Permits may
contain the following:
(a) Effluent limits based upon applicable general pretreatment
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits,
and state and local law.
(b) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.
(c) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics.
(d) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
(e) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities.
(f) Specification for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
(g) Compliance schedules.
(h) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports.
(i) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington, and
affording the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington access thereto.
(j) Requirements for notification of the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington in advance of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial
change in the volume or character of the wastewater
constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment
system.
(k) Requirements for notification of slug discharges, as per
§ 238-25H, including the requirement for development and
implementation of slug control measures, and any changes at a
user's facility that affect the potential for slug discharges, even
if it is not anticipated that a discharge would normally occur
based on the facility changes. [Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 3-2008]
(l) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington, including
requirements for implementation of best management
practices and reporting of information on compliance with the
§ 238-27 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-27
1:188
best management practices. [Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 3-2008]
(m) Requirements for permit duration as outlined in § 238-27B(6)
of this article.
(n) Requirements of permit transfer as outlined in § 238-287B(7)
of this article.
(6) Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less
than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The
industrial user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180
days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms
and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington during
the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified
in § 238-25 are modified or other just cause exists. The industrial
user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at
least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes
or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time for
compliance.
(7) Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user,
different premises or a new or changed operation without the
written approval of the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply
with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.
(8) Civil and criminal penalties. Permits shall contain a statement of
applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment
standards, as specified in § 238-29 of this article, and any
applicable compliance schedules.
(9) All industrial users of the wastewater system of the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington shall promptly
notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the
volume or characteristics of pollutants in their discharge, including
the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the
industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR
402.12(p). All industrial users shall notify the Authority of any
changes at the user's facility that affect the potential for slug
discharge even if it is not anticipated that a discharge would
normally occur based on the facility changes. [Amended
7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
C. Permittee reporting requirements.
(1) Measurement of pollutants. The industrial user shall comply with
the requirements as specified in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5), as amended:
§ 238-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-27
1:189
(a) The industrial user shall identify the pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process, including best
management practice where required by the pretreatment
standards or Control Authority. [Amended 7-14-2008 by
Ord. No. 3-2008]
(b) The industrial user shall submit the results of sampling and
analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass,
where required by the Standard or Control Authority) of
regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or
mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations. Sampling for all reports,
including reports from both categorical users and significant
noncategorical users, must be representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period. Additionally, the
industrial user shall submit information needed to demonstrate
compliance with any best management practice. [Amended
7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
(c) A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For
all other pollutants, twenty-four-hour composite samples must
be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling
techniques where feasible. The control authority may waive
flow proportional composite sampling for any industrial user
that demonstrates that flow-proportional composite sampling
is infeasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through
time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a
minimum of four grab samples when the industrial user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of
the effluent being discharged.
(d) The industrial user shall take a minimum of one representative
sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the
requirements of § 238-27C(1).
(e) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist, or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the industrial user should
measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use
of the combined waste stream formula presented in 40 CFR
403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment
standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has
been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this
adjusted limit, along with supporting data, shall be submitted
to the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington.
§ 238-27 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-27
1:190
(f) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments
thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in questions, or where
the administrator determines that the 40 CFR 136 sampling
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using
validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling
and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by
the POTW or other parties, approved by the administrator.
(g) The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline
report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for
industrial pretreatment measures.
(h) The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such
sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles
and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
(2) Periodic compliance reports: categorical industrial users. The
following requirements must be followed by industrial users to
which categorical pretreatment standards apply:
(a) Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment
standard, in the case of a new source after commencement of
the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington during the
months of June and December, unless required more frequently
in the pretreatment standard or by the Control Authority or
Approval Authority, a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by
such categorical pretreatment standards, including best
management practices. In addition, this report shall include a
record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period for the discharge reported.
However, the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington may require more detailed reporting of flows. At
the discretion of the Control Authority and in consideration of
such facts as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget
cycles, etc., the Control Authority may agree to alter the
months during which the above reports are to be submitted.
Any categorical industrial users subject to best management
practice requirements shall submit information on compliance
with the applicable best management practice. Additionally,
the industrial user shall submit information needed to
demonstrate compliance with any best management practice.
[Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
§ 238-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-27
1:191
(b) Where the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington has imposed mass limitations on industrial users as
provided for by 40 CFR 403.6(d), the report required by
Subsection C(2)(a) of this section shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the
discharge from the industrial user.
(c) For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established by the control authority in
accordance with the procedures of 40 CFR 403.6(c), the report
required by Subsection C(2)(a) of this section shall contain a
reasonable measure of the industrial user's long-term
production rate. For all other industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of
allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other
measure of operation), the report required by Subsection
C(2)(a) of this section shall include the industrial user's actual
average production rate for the reporting period.
(3) Periodic compliance reports: noncategorical industrial users.
[Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
(a) The Control Authority shall require appropriate reporting from
those industrial users with discharges that are not subject to
categorical pretreatment standards. All noncategorical
industrial users subject to best management practice
requirements shall submit information on compliance with the
applicable best management practice.
(b) Significant noncategorical industrial users shall submit to the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington at
least once every six months (in dates specified by the Control
Authority) a description of the nature, concentration and flow
of the pollutants required to be reported by the Control
Authority. These reports shall be based on sampling and
analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and
performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40
CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not
contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, or where the Administrator determines that the 40
CFR sampling and analytical techniques are in appropriate for
the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed using validated analytical methods or any other
applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the POTW or other person, approved
by the Administrator. This sampling and analysis may be
performed by the Control Authority in lieu of the significant
noncategorical industrial user. Where the POTW itself collects
all the information required for the report, the noncategorical
significant industrial user will not be required to submit the
report.
§ 238-27 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-27
1:192
(4) Compliance report deadline.
(a) Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of
a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to
pretreatment standards and requirements, including best
management practices, shall submit to the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington a report containing the
information described in § 238-27C(1) of this article. Sampling
for all reports, including reports from both categorical users
and significant noncategorical users, must be representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period. [Amended
7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
(b) For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established by the control authority in
accordance with the procedures of 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report
shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial user's
long-term production rate. For all other industrial users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in
terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production
(or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
industrial user's actual production during the appropriate
sampling period.
(c) The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is
necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance with the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This
report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user and certified in accordance with
§ 238-27B(2)(a)[14] of this article.
D. Monitoring.
(1) Monitoring and analysis. [Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No.
3-2008]
(a) The reports required in Subsections B(2) and C(2) and (3) of
this section shall contain the results of sampling and analysis
of the discharge, including the flow and nature and
concentration, or production and mass, where required by the
Control Authority, of pollutants contained therein which are
limited by applicable pretreatment standards. This sampling
and analysis may be performed by the Control Authority in lieu
of the industrial user. Where the POTW performs the required
sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user, the
industrial user will not be required to submit the compliance
certification required in the aforementioned reports. In
§ 238-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-27
1:193
addition, where the POTW itself collects all the information
required for the report, including flow data, the industrial user
will not be required to submit the report.
(b) Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil
and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds. For all
other pollutants, twenty-four-hour composite samples must be
obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling
techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or
grab sampling is authorized by the Control Authority. Where
time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is
authorized by the Control Authority, the samples must be
representative of the discharge and the decision to allow the
alternative sampling must be documented in the industrial
user file for that facility or facilities. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected
during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to
the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides,
the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the
field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may
be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as
documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the Control Authority, as appropriate.
(c) If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a
violation, the industrial user shall notify the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also
repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the control authority within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not
required to resample if:
[1] The control authority performs sampling at the industrial
user at a frequency of at least once per month; or
[2] The control authority performs sampling at the industrial
user between the time when the industrial user performs
its initial sampling and the time when the industrial user
receives the results of this sampling.
(d) The reports required in Subsection C(2) and (3) of this section
shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate
sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by
the report, which data is representative of conditions occurring
during the reporting period. The Municipal Sanitary Authority
of the City of New Kensington shall require that frequency of
monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by
§ 238-27 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-27
1:194
industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
(e) All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the administrator pursuant to § 304(h) of the
Act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or
with any other test procedures approved by the administrator
(see 40 CFR 136.4 and 136.5). Sampling shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator.
Where 40 CFR 136 does not include sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the
administrator determines that 40 CFR 136 sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using
validated analytical methods or another sampling and
analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
POTW or other parties, approved by the administrator.
(f) If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of
Subsection C(2) or (3) of this section monitors any pollutant
more frequently than required by the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington, using the procedures
prescribed in Subsection D(1)(d) of this section, the results of
this monitoring shall be included in the report.
E. Monitoring facilities.
(1) The Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
shall require to be provided and operated at the industrial user's
own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling
and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal
drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be
situated on the industrial user's premises, but the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington may, when such a
location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the
industrial user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public
street or sidewalk area and so located as not to be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles.
(2) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at
the expense of the industrial user.
(3) Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling
and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington and all applicable local construction standards
and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days
§ 238-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-27
1:195
following notification by the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the
City of New Kensington.
F. Inspection and sampling. The Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City
of New Kensington shall sample the discharge and inspect the facilities
of any industrial user a minimum of two times per year to ascertain
whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements
are being complied with. Owners and occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington or its representative ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for inspection,
sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their
duties. The EPA shall have the right to set up on the industrial users
property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where
an industrial user has security measures in force which would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with their security
guards so that, upon presentation of appropriate identification,
personnel from the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington, approval authority and the EPA will be permitted to enter,
without delay, for the purposes of performing their duties.
G. Recordkeeping requirements.
(1) Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements
established in Subsection C of this section shall maintain records of
all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by
Subsection C of this section. Such records shall include for all
samples:
(a) The dates, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the
names of the person(s) obtaining the samples.
(b) The dates analysis were performed.
(c) Who performed the analysis.
(d) The analytical techniques/methods used.
(e) The results of such analyses.
(2) Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirement
established by Subsection C of this section shall be required to
retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring
activities and results, or best management practices, including
records of compliance with the best management practices
(whether or not such monitoring activities, or best management
practices are required by this section) and shall make such records
available for inspection and copying by the Director, Regional
Administrator and the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington. This period of retention shall be extended during
§ 238-27 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-27
1:196
the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial
user, or when required by the Director, the Regional Administrator,
or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington.
[Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
(3) Any POTW to which report are submitted by an industrial user
pursuant to Subsections B(2) and C(2) and (3) of this section, shall
retain such reports, including documentation associated with any
best management practices, or information on compliance with the
best management practices, for a minimum of three years and shall
make such reports, or documentation available for inspection and
copying by the Director and the Regional Administrator. This
period of retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the
industrial user or the operation of the POTW pretreatment program
or when requested by the Director or the Regional Administrator.
[Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
(4) Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirement
established by Subsection C of this section shall be required to
retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring
activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are
required by this section) and shall make such records available for
inspection and copying by the Director, Regional Administrator,
and the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington. This period of retention shall be extended during the
course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user, or
when requested by the Director, the Regional Administrator, or the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington.
(5) Any POTW to which reports are submitted by an industrial user
pursuant to Subsections B(2), C(2) and (3) of this section shall
retain such reports for a minimum of three years and shall make
such reports available for inspection and copying by the director
and the regional administrator. This period of retention shall be
extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding
the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user or the operation
of the POTW pretreatment program or when requested by the
director or the regional administrator.
H. Hazardous waste notification. The industrial user shall comply with the
hazardous waste notification requirements established below:
(1) The industrial user notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste
management division director, and state hazardous waste
authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance, which, if otherwise disposed, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name
of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA
hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous,
batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100
§ 238-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-27
1:197
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification shall also contain the following information to the
extent such information is known and readily available to the
industrial user. An identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged
during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during
the following 12 months. All notifications must occur within 180
days of the effective date of 40 CFR 403. Industrial users who
commence discharging after the effective date of 40 CFR 403 shall
provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge
of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification
under this subsection need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharged. However, notification of changed
discharges must be submitted under Subsection B(9) of this
section. The notification requirement in this section does not apply
to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring
requirements of Subsection C of this article.
(2) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection H(1)
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.30(e).
Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous
wastes, as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.30(e), requires a
one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the
industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any
hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
(3) In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing
any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user
must notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management waste
division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the
discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of
such regulations.
(4) In the case of any notification made under Subsection G of this
section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in
place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes
generated to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
I. Pretreatment.
(1) Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all
federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limits
specified by federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the
§ 238-27 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-27
1:198
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington shall
be provided, operated and maintained at industrial user's expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Municipal Sanitary Authority
of the City of New Kensington for review, and shall be acceptable
to the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and
operating procedures will, in no way, relieve the industrial user
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to
produce an effluent acceptable to the Municipal Sanitary Authority
of the City of New Kensington under the provisions of this section.
Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington prior to the
industrial user's initiation of such changes.
(2) The Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
shall annually publish in the Valley News Dispatch, Legal Ads
Department, a list of the users which were not in compliance with
any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during
the 12 previous months in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii).
The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions
taken against the user(s) during the same 12 months.
J. Confidential information.
(1) Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring
programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or
other governmental agency without restriction unless the
industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the industrial user.
(2) When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall
not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be
made available upon written request to governmental agencies for
uses related to this article, the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, state disposal system permit
and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such
portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any
state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. In addition, all
industrial user information will be provided without any restriction,
to U.S. EPA upon which U.S. EPA will follow the confidentiality
requirements of 40 CFR 403.14 in determining what information
will be made available to the public. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
§ 238-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-27
1:199
§ 238-28. Enforcement.
(3) Information accepted by the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the
City of New Kensington or the City of Lower Burrell as confidential,
shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the
general public by the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington until and unless a ten-day notification is given to
the user.
A. Enforcement policy.
(1) All violations of pretreatment standards and requirements are
instances of noncompliance and will receive a specific enforcement
response in accordance with the Municipal Sanitary Authority of
the City of New Kensington Control Authority enforcement
response plan. Pretreatment standards and requirements are a
matter of strict liability. Hence, good faith or lack of negligence on
the user's part is no defense to a violation of pretreatment
standards and/or requirements. The enforcement responses shall
range from notices of violation to formal civil litigation and/or
termination of service, depending upon the severity of the violation.
While similar violations will receive similar enforcement responses,
some inherent discretion exists within each enforcement response
selection. For example, some violations will trigger either an
administrative action, formal civil litigation or permit revocation.
Selection of the specific enforcement response option shall be at
the sole discretion of the City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington.
(2) When making determinations regarding the level of enforcement,
the City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the
City of New Kensington shall take into consideration the following:
(a) Damage to air, water, land or other natural resources and their
uses.
(b) Costs of restoration and abatement.
(c) Savings to the user as a result of the violation.
(d) History of past violations by the user.
(e) Deterrence of future violations.
(f) Other relevant factors as determined by the control authority.
(3) Emergency authority.
(a) The City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority
of the City of New Kensington may suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or a pretreatment permit when such
suspension is necessary, in the opinion of Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington, in order to stop an
§ 238-27 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-28
1:200
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons, to the environment, causes pass through
or interference to the POTW or causes Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington to violate any
condition of its NPDES permit or any other federal or state
permit or regulation.
(b) Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater
treatment service and/or pretreatment permit shall
immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a
failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington shall take such steps as deemed necessary
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to
prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or
endangerment to any individuals or the environment. The
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
shall reinstate the pretreatment permit and/or the wastewater
treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement
submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington within five days of the
date of occurrence.
B. Enforcement procedures. For violations not requiring the City of Lower
Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington to invoke its emergency authority, the following procedures
shall apply:
(1) Notice of violation. Whenever the City of Lower Burrell or the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington finds
that a user has violated or is violating this article, pretreatment
permit or any prohibition, limitation, or requirements contained
herein, the City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington shall serve upon such
person a written notice stating the nature of the violation(s), which
may include the assessment of a civil penalty, and require a written
response from the user. As required by the publicly owned
treatment works penalty law, such notice shall include the name,
address, and telephone number of the control authority manager or
other person responsible for accepting appeals. Within 30 days of
the date of the notice of violation, a plan for the satisfactory
correction thereof shall be submitted to the City of Lower Burrell
and the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
by the user.
(2) Compliance schedule. When the City of Lower Burrell or the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington finds
§ 238-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-28
1:201
that a user is in violation of this article, pretreatment permit,
or requirements contained herein, the City of Lower Burrell or
the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
may require the user to submit or may itself issue a schedule of
compliance for the necessary correction.
(a) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form
of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the pretreatment
permit requirements (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract
for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.).
(b) No increment referred to in Subsection B(1)(a) shall exceed
nine months.
(c) Not later than 14 days following each date in the compliance
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall
submit a progress report to the City of Lower Burrell and the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the
date on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the
user to return construction to the schedule established. In no
event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the City of Lower Burrell and to the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington.
(3) Consent order. The City of Lower Burrell or the manager of the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington is
hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with the user responsible for the noncompliance. Such
consent orders shall include a specific action to be taken by the
user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified in the consent order. Consent orders shall have the same
force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to this
section.
(4) Compliance order. When the City of Lower Burrell or the Manager
of the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article,
pretreatment permit or order issued thereunder, the City of Lower
Burrell or the Manager of the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the
City of New Kensington may issue an order to the user responsible
for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period,
sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been
§ 238-28 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-28
1:202
installed and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such
other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and
appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the
installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring,
and management practices.
(5) Show-cause order.
(a) The City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority
of the City of New Kensington may order any user who causes
or allows a discharge of sewer, industrial waste, or other waste
into the POTW in violation of the provisions, requirements, or
pretreatment standards of this article or the Rules and
Regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection or
the Environmental Protection Agency to show cause before the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
why the proposed assessment of penalty and/or enforcement
action should not be taken. A notice shall be served upon the
user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by
the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
regarding the alleged violation, setting forth the specific facts
and circumstances upon which the proposed enforcement
action is to be taken, and directing the user to show cause
before the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington as to why the proposed assessment of penalty and/
or enforcement actions should not be taken.72
(b) The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) upon the
user, not less than 20 days prior to the hearing. Such notice
shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the
control authority manager or other person responsible for
accepting appeals. Within 15 days from the date of service of
the notice, the user shall file with the manager of the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington a verified
answer responding to the allegations in the notice. Allegations
in the notice which are not specifically denied shall be deemed
to have been admitted. Failure to file an answer or to
specifically deny the allegations of the notice shall constitute a
sufficient basis for the entry of a default adjudication upon
expiration of said 15 days.
(c) The Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or
the Manager to:
[1] Issue in the name of the Municipal Sanitary Authority of
the City of New Kensington notices of hearings requesting
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-28
1:203
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in
such hearings.
[2] Take the evidence.
[3] Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Municipal Sanitary Authority of
the City of New Kensington for action thereon.
(d) At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken
must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The
transcript so recorded will be made available to any member of
the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the
usual charges thereof.
(e) After the Council and the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the
City of New Kensington has reviewed the evidence, it may
issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer
service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances shall have been
installed, or existing treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders
and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued,
including but not limited to injunctive relief and civil penalties.
(6) Cease-and-desist order. Whenever the City of Lower Burrell or the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington finds
that a user has violated or is violating this article, pretreatment
permit or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained
herein, the City or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington shall issue an order to cease and desist all such
violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to:
(a) Comply forthwith.
(b) Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may
be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including halting operations and terminating the
discharge.
(c) As required by the publicly owned treatment works penalty
law, such notice shall include the name, address, and telephone
number of the control authority manager or other person
responsible for accepting appeals.
C. Civil proceedings. If any person discharges sewage, industrial waste, or
other wastes into the wastewater disposal system of the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington in violation of the
provisions, requirements or pretreatment standards of this article, the
§ 238-28 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-28
1:204
rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, or the Environmental Protection Agency which presents an
imminent danger or substantial harm to the POTW or the public, an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the environment, causes the
POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES permit, or has shown a
lack of ability or intention to comply with said pretreatment provisions,
requirements or standards, any other order of the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington, or the City of Lower Burrell,
or its other enforcement procedures would not be adequate to effect
prompt correction of the condition or violations, the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington or the City of Lower Burrell
may institute an action to obtain injunctive relief in the Court of
Common Pleas of Westmoreland County, where the activity has taken
place, where the condition exists, or where the public is affected.73
D. Criminal proceedings. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representations or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this article or pretreatment permit, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device
or method required under this article, will be prosecuted to the extent
permitted by law under the Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
E. Revocation of permit.
(1) Any user who violates the following conditions of this article or
applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having its
pretreatment permit revoked.
(a) Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of its discharge.
(b) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations,
or wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(c) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection and/or monitoring.
(d) Violation of conditions of the pretreatment permit.
(2) If pretreatment permit is revoked, the control authority may take
steps it deems advisable, including severance of the sewer
connection, to promote compliance with this article.
F. Appeals. The user shall have such right of appeal to the court of
common pleas having jurisdiction as is provided for under § 7(b) of the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law,74 the Local Agency Law,
2 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. or Judicial Code, 42 Pa.C.S.A. § 762.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
74.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 752.7(b).
§ 238-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-29
1:205
§ 238-29. Violations and penalties.
A. Civil penalties. Any user who is found to have violated the provisions,
requirements, or pretreatment standards of this article, the rules and
regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection or the Environmental Protection Agency, an order, rule,
regulation or permit of the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington or the City of Lower Burrell, whether or not the
violation is willful or negligent, may be assessed a civil penalty in an
amount not to exceed $25,000 per day for each violation, regardless of
jurisdictional boundaries. Each violation for each separate day shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. The Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington or the City of Lower Burrell
may recover its costs for reestablishing the operating of the POTW, in
addition to any civil penalty imposed hereunder. In addition, the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington or the City
of Lower Burrell may recover attorneys' fees, all court costs, and all
other expenses of litigation to the extent permitted by law.75
B. Civil penalty assessment policy.
(1) This section constitutes the civil penalty assessment policy
required by the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law
(herein "Penalty Law") Act No. 9 of 1992, 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq.
When making determinations of the level of enforcement, the City
of Lower Burrell and/or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the
City of New Kensington shall take into consideration the following:
(a) Damage to air, water, land, or other natural resources and their
uses.
(b) Costs of restoration and abatement.
(c) Savings to the user as a result of the violation.
(d) History of past violations.
(e) Deterrence of future violations.
(f) Other relevant factors as determined by the City of Lower
Burrell and/or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington.
(2) A user must usually spend money to comply with pretreatment
standards and requirements. The user makes initial capital
expenditures for pretreatment equipment or process changes and
incurs subsequent operation, maintenance, and repair costs
annually. By delaying or avoiding these costs, the user realizes and
economic advantage or benefit over a competitor which complied
with pretreatment requirements in a timely manner. Thus, the
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-29 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-29
1:206
"economic benefit" of noncompliance is defined as the difference
between the cost of on time compliance and delayed compliance.
Economic benefits realized by the user which fails to comply by a
required deadline can be measured by:
(a) The money that the user would expect to earn by delaying the
purchase of pretreatment equipment or implementation of
process changes and investing the money in more profitable
projects.
(b) The annual costs that the user avoids, and the expected return
on avoided costs, during the period of noncompliance.
(c) Any competitive advantage the user may gain, such as
increased market share over competitors already in
compliance, because of cost advantages attributed to delayed
compliance.
(3) In this article, the economic benefit calculation is focused on the
first two benefits. The "Guidance Manual for POTW's to Calculate
the Economic Benefit of Noncompliance," U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, September 5, 1990, may be applied in
calculating the penalty.
(4) Consideration of the gravity and length of a violation is important
when determining the penalty amount. Removing the economic
benefit of noncompliance only places the violation user in the
position it would have been had it complied on time. Both
deterrence and fundamental fairness require that the civil penalty
include an additional amount to ensure that noncompliance is more
costly than compliance, and the City of Lower Burrell and/or the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington's policy
will be to include such an amount.
(5) Recovering for damages to public facilities and/or natural
resources.
(a) Failure to comply with pretreatment standards and
requirements may cause damage to the collection system of
the City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of
the City of New Kensington. Damage may also be caused to the
natural environment. Therefore, an additional purpose of
penalties in pretreatment enforcement shall be to recover for
such damages. Specifically, the City of Lower Burrell or the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
may determine to require that a violating user pay reparations
for any damages caused to the collection system by improper
disposal of pollutants. Such a user may also be required to pay
for replacement of equipment, facilities, and/or other damaged
processes at the POTW caused by pollutant interference.
§ 238-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-29
1:207
(b) Pollutants which pass through or interfere with POTW
processes may cause damage to natural systems in receiving
waters. In addition to assessing penalties to recover for such
damages, the City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington may consider
requiring mitigation and remediation programs.
(c) The City of Lower Burrell and/or the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington will consider assessing
higher penalties for violations resulting in actual or potential
harm to the environment. Such potential environmental harm
occurs whenever a user discharges a pollutant into the sewer
system that:
[1] Passes through the POTW inadequately treated and causes
a violation of the POTW's National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit (including water
quality standards).
[2] Has a potentially toxic effect on the receiving waters (e.g.,
a fish kill).
(6) Cost of restoration and abatement. Some violations may have
negative impacts on the POTW itself. For example, such violations
may result in significant increases in treatment costs, interference,
harm POTW personnel, equipment, processes or operations, or
cause sludge contamination, resulting in increased disposal costs.
When a user's noncompliance harms the POTW, the City of Lower
Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington will assess a larger penalty.
(7) Savings to the user as a result of violation. A user which fails to
comply with pretreatment standards and requirements in a timely
manner may accrue a significant economic benefit. A penalty
assessed against the violator will be fixed at a level to at least
negate this economic benefit and make it unprofitable for the user
to ignore or violate pretreatment requirements. These
requirements include installation of pretreatment equipment, one
time expenditures (e.g., land), and operation and maintenance
(O&M) or other annual costs. The economic benefit calculation
described in this article will be applied to any or all types of
pollution control costs.
(8) History of past violation.
(a) The City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority
of the City of New Kensington will consider each violation in
assessing the significance of user noncompliance. Violations of
average effluent limitations will be considered a violation for
each day of the averaging period. Therefore, a monthly
average violation will be counted as 30 days of violation, a
weekly average violation as seven days of violation, and a four-
§ 238-29 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-29
1:208
day average should be counted as four violations. Violations
of different parameters at the same discharge point or outfall
are counted separately, and violations at different discharge
points or outfalls or indirect discharges are counted separately.
The amount of the penalty will be increased as the number
of violations increases. However, as provided in the Penalty
Law, a single operational upset shall only be considered as one
violation, even though it may result in simultaneous violations
of more than one pretreatment standard.
(b) The City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority
of the City of New Kensington shall consider increasing penalty
amounts for continuing, long-term violations. Generally, a longterm
violation is one that continues for three or more
consecutive months. In addition, penalties will be higher for
violations that have continued for three years than for
violations that have only occurred for six months.
(c) Significant noneffluent violations will be considered in
assessing penalties. Violations included in this category
include failure to report, late reporting, schedule violations,
failure to implement an approved pretreatment program,
laboratory analysis deficiencies, unauthorized discharge,
operation and maintenance (O&M) deficiencies, and sludge
handling violations.
(d) The City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority
of the City of New Kensington will consider increasing the
penalty amount when the violating user appears to be acting in
"bad faith" (e.g., by not cooperating with the City of Lower
Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington in effecting a timely correction of the violation);
when the user experiences unjustified delays in preventing,
correcting, or mitigating violations; when the user has already
violated prior administrative orders, compliance agreements,
or consent decrees; or when the user fails to provide timely
and full information. This recalcitrance factor also may be
increased during negotiation if the user continues to resist
efforts to settle.
(e) When a user demonstrates that it is unable to pay a settlement
penalty, the City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington will independently
evaluate the user's ability to pay. When it is determined that
the user cannot afford to pay the penalty or that payment of all
or part of the penalty will preclude the violator from achieving
compliance, the City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington may consider
other options. For example, the City of Lower Burrell or the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
may consider an installment payment plan with the user paying
§ 238-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-29
1:209
interest. Only as a last recourse, the City of Lower Burrell or
the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
may consider reducing the penalty amount. If the user's
behavior has been exceptionally culpable, recalcitrant, or
threatening to human health and the environment, inability to
pay will be disregarded.
(9) Deterrence of future violations.
(a) A user shall install the appropriate pollution control equipment
to comply with applicable pretreatment regulations,
maintaining compliance, required continuing O&M and other
annual expenditures. For users which fail to comply with
pretreatment requirements, the City of Lower Burrell or the
Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington
will set its penalties at a level to remove, at a minimum, the
economic benefit from avoided annual costs during its period
of violations. The City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington hereby
determines that assessing a penalty which, as a minimum,
eliminates the economic benefit of noncompliance (or makes
noncompliance more expensive than compliance) will
encourage users to remain in compliance.
(b) The intent of these penalties is to deter noncompliance so that
pollutant discharges by a user do not have significant negative
impacts on the POTW, collection system, or receiving waters.
The City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority
of the City of New Kensington's policy will be not to assess a
penalty that is too small (e.g., less than the economic benefit of
noncomplying), so that the violating user and other users may
determine that noncompliance is more expensive than
compliance.
(c) The EPA or DEP can take enforcement action against a user
violating the Clean Water Act, including federal pretreatment
standards and regulations. Citizens or citizen groups can also
bring civil suits against a user for violating environmental
regulations. If the violating user has been sued by the EPA,
state regulatory agency, or citizens or citizen groups, and
penalties were imposed upon the user from these actions, the
City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the
City of New Kensington may consider reducing the penalty by
an amount equal to that which the user already paid for the
same violation.76
(10) Other relevant factors.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-29 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-29
1:210
(a) In order to treat all users fairly and equitably, the City of Lower
Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington will use its best efforts to assess penalties using a
consistent methodology. Thus, it will avoid allowing one user to
realize an economic benefit from noncompliance which would
potentially enable it to gain an economic advantage over the
complying users. By assessing a penalty based on economic
benefit, the City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary
Authority of the City of New Kensington will strive to eliminate
or remove any financial advantage the violator gains.
(b) By exercising a consistent penalty methodology, the City of
Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington ensure that all violators are treated equitably.
While the amount of the penalty will vary from case to case, the
methods used to develop the penalty will be consistent.
C. EPA policy followed.
(1) The City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the
City of New Kensington will take into account the policies of EPA in
setting penalties. EPA defines "significant noncompliance" in its
revisions to the general pretreatment regulations [40 CFR
403.8(f)(2)(vii)] as violations which meet one or more of the
following criteria:
(a) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily
maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant
parameter.
(b) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for
each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period
equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit (TRC =
1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH).
(c) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily
maximum or longer-term average) that the City of Lower
Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New
Kensington determines has caused, alone or in combination
with other dischargers, interferences or pass through
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public).
(d) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment
or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency
authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent
such a discharge.
§ 238-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-29
1:211
(e) Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance.
(f) Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day
compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and
reports on compliance with compliance schedules.
(g) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(h) Any other violation or group of violations which the City of
Lower Burrell or the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of
New Kensington determines will adversely affect the operation
or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(2) Violation of the pretreatment standards and requirements which
constitute significant noncompliance are considered to be the most
serious violation and require a strong and immediate response.
Assessment of civil penalties may occur for significant
noncompliance.
(3) In addition to assessing appropriate penalties commensurate with
the factors listed above, the City of Lower Burrell or the Municipal
Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington shall consider
assessing larger penalties in cases of repeat violations, including
all violations of permit effluent limitations, monitoring and
reporting requirements and other standard and special discharge
conditions. This consideration produces flexibility in assessing
penalties for multiple violations.
D. Criminal penalties. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representation or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this article, or pretreatment permit, or who falsifies,
tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device
or method required under this article, shall upon conviction, be
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
30 days. Each occurrence shall be a separate offense. This section shall
not preclude prosecution under the Crimes Code.
E. Remedies cumulative and concurrent. The remedies provided for in this
article are intended to be concurrent and cumulative, and the
provisions of this article, shall not abridge or later any right of action or
remedy, now or hereafter existing in law, or under the common law or
statutory law, criminal or civil, available to the City of Lower Burrell or
the Municipal Sanitary Authority of the City of New Kensington.
§ 238-29 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-30
1:212
§ 238-30. Industrial sewer connection application.
The Industrial Sewer Connection Application is included as an attachment
to this chapter.
§ 238-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-30
1:213

ARTICLE V
Covering Manholes
[Adopted 9-11-2000 by Ord. No. 5-2000]
§ 238-31. Covering manhole or manhole cover prohibited.
No person or legal entity shall permit or cause to be covered, in any manner
or to any extent whatsoever, any sanitary or storm sewer manhole or
otherwise render the same inaccessible in any manner to the City of Lower
Burrell, the Lower Burrell Municipal Authority or the entity which operates
the sanitary or storm sewer systems or any of their agents, servants,
workmen, employees or any other persons legally authorized to have access
to the sanitary or storm sewer system.
§ 238-32. Request to cover manhole.
In the event that any person or legal entity desires to cover a manhole of
the sanitary or storm sewer systems whether by fill, grading or any other
method, they shall first present their request to the Mayor and Council of
Lower Burrell or any successor entity which operates the sewer systems. If
Council approves the request, Council may require the person, legal entity
or owner of the property to pay for, either in whole or in part or install a
means of access to the manholes in question.
§ 238-33. Failure to provide access; cost.
Upon the failure of any person, legal entity or owner to pay for or provide
access to the manholes, the same may be done or caused to be done by the
City and the cost thereof to be levied and collected from them by any and
all legal proceedings available to the City, including but not limited to a lien
on the property.
§ 238-34. Violations and penalties.
Any person or legal entity, which jointly or severally violates any provision
of this article shall, upon conviction before a Magisterial District Judge or
other court, be subjected to a fine of not more than $1,000 including costs.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. In default of
payment of such fine and costs, such person or legal entity may be subject
to imprisonment in the county jail.
§ 238-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-34
1:215

ARTICLE VI
On-Lot Subsurface Sewage Disposal Facilities
[Adopted 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1-2001]
§ 238-35. Short title; introduction; purpose.
§ 238-36. Definitions.
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as "An ordinance providing
for a Sewage Management Program for the City of Lower Burrell."
B. In accordance with municipal codes, the Clean Streams Law (Act of
June 27, 1937, P.L. 1987, No. 394 as amended, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to
691.1001), and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of January
24, 1966, P.L. 1535 as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., known as "Act
537"), it is the power and the duty of the City of Lower Burrell to
provide for adequate sewage treatment facilities and the for the
protection of the public health by preventing the discharge of untreated
or inadequately treated sewage. The Official Sewage Facilities Plan for
the City of Lower Burrell indicates that it is necessary to formulate and
implement a sewage management program to effectively prevent and
abate water pollution and hazards to the public health caused by
improper treatment and disposal of sewage.
C. The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation, inspection,
maintenance and rehabilitation of on-lot sewage disposal systems; to
further permit intervention in situations which may constitute a public
nuisance or hazard to the public health; and to establish penalties and
appeal procedures necessary for the proper administration of a sewage
management program.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A sewage enforcement officer, employee of
the City, professional engineer, Plumbing Inspector, or any other
qualified or licensed person who is authorized to function within
specified limits as an agent of the City of Lower Burrell to administer or
enforce the provisions of this article.
CITY — The City of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection of sewage from two or more lots, and
the treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on one or more lots or at
any other site.
COUNCIL — The Council of the City of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland
County, Pennsylvania.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (DEP).
§ 238-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-36
1:217
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in
whole or in part into the soil or into any waters of this commonwealth.
MALFUNCTION — A condition which occurs when an on-lot sewage
disposal system discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground,
into ground waters of this commonwealth, into surface waters of this
commonwealth, backs up into a building connected to the system or
in any manner causes a nuisance or hazard to the public health or
pollution of ground or surface water or contamination of public or
private drinking water wells. Systems shall be considered to be
malfunctioning if any condition noted above occurs for any length of
time during any period of the year.
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — A Comprehensive Plan for the
provision of adequate sewage disposal systems, adopted by the Council
and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.77
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system for disposal of
domestic sewage involving pretreatment and subsequent disposal of
the clarified sewage into a subsurface soil absorption area or retaining
tank; this term includes both individual sewage systems and community
sewage systems.
PERSON — Any individual, association, public or private corporation
for profit or not for profit, partnership, firm, trust, estate, department,
board, bureau of agency of the commonwealth, political subdivision,
municipality, district, authority, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty or
imposing a fine or imprisonment, the term "person" shall include the
members of an association, partnership or firm and the officers of any
local agency or municipal, public or private corporation for profit or not
for profit.
REHABILITATION — Work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge or
replace an existing on-lot sewage disposal system.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or
animals and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or
inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of
water for domestic water supply or for recreation or which constitutes
pollution under the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as
"The Clean Streams Law," as amended.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — A person certified by
DEP who is employed by the City. Such person is authorized to conduct
investigations and inspections, review permit applications, issue or
deny permits and do all other activities as may be provided for such
77.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 238-36 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-36
1:218
§ 238-37. Applicability.
From the effective date of this article, its provisions shall apply in any
portion of the City identified in the Official Sewage Facilities Plan as a
sewage management district. Within such as area or areas, the provisions
of this article shall apply to all persons owning any property serviced by an
on-lot sewage disposal system and to all persons installing or rehabilitating
on-lot sewage disposal systems.
§ 238-38. Permit requirements.
person in the Sewage Facilities Act,78 the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder and this or any other ordinance adopted by the
City.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Any area or areas of the City
designated in the Official Sewage Facilities Plan adopted by the Council
as an area for which a sewage management program is to be
implemented.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — A comprehensive set of legal
and administrative requirements encompassing the requirements of
this article, the Sewage Facilities Act,79 the Clean Streams Law,80 the
regulations promulgated thereunder and such other requirements
adopted by the Council to effectively enforce and administer this
article.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or other parcel
of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines. The enumerating of lots shall
include as a lot that portion of the original tract or tracts remaining
after other lots have been subdivided therefrom.
B. For the purposes of this article, any term which is not defined herein
shall have that meaning attributed to it under Sewage Facilities Act81
and regulations promulgated thereto.
A. No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for
construction, or alter an individual sewage system or community
sewage system or construct or request bid proposals for construction or
install or occupy any building or structure for which an individual
sewage system or community sewage system is to be installed without
first obtaining a permit from the sewage enforcement officer which
permit shall indicate that the site and the plans and specifications of
such system are in compliance with the provisions of the Clean Streams
Law (35 P.S. §§ 691.1 through 691.1001) and the Pennsylvania Sewage
78.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
79.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
80.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
81.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 238-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-38
1:219
§ 238-39. Inspections.
Facilities Act (35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.) and the regulations adopted
pursuant to those Acts.
B. No system or structure designed to provide individual or community
sewage disposal shall be covered from view until approval to cover the
same has been given by a sewage enforcement officer. If 72 hours have
elapsed, excepting Sundays and holidays, since the sewage
enforcement office issuing the permit received notification of
completion of construction, the applicant may cover said system or
structure unless permission has been specifically refused by the sewage
enforcement officer.
C. Applicants for sewage permits may be required to notify the sewage
enforcement officer of the schedule for construction of the permitted
on-lot sewage disposal system so that inspection(s) in addition to the
final inspection required by the Sewage Facilities Act may be scheduled
and performed by a sewage enforcement officer.
D. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for a new building
which will contain sewage-generating facilities until a valid sewage
permit has been obtained from a sewage enforcement officer.
E. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if said
alteration or conversion will result in the increase or potential increase
in sewage flows from the structure, until either the structure's owner
receives a permit for alteration or replacement of the existing sewage
disposal system or until the structure's owner and the appropriate
officials of the City receive written notification from a sewage
enforcement officer that such a permit will not be required. The sewage
enforcement officer shall determine whether the proposed alteration or
conversion of the structure will result in increased sewage flows.
F. Sewage permits may be issued only by a sewage enforcement officer
employed by the City. DEP shall be notified as to the identity of each
sewage enforcement officer employed by the City.
A. Any on-lot sewage disposal system may be inspected by an authorized
agent at any reasonable time as of the effective date of this article.
B. Such inspection may include a physical tour of the property, the taking
of samples from surface water, wells, other groundwater sources, the
sampling of the contents of the sewage disposal system itself and/or the
introduction of a traceable substance into the interior plumbing of the
structure served to ascertain the path and ultimate destination of
wastewater generated in the structure.
C. An authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon land for the
purposes of inspections described in this section.
§ 238-38 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-39
1:220
§ 238-40. Prohibited discharges.
Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into any on-lot sewage
disposal system. The following shall not be discharged into the system:
§ 238-41. Maintenance.
D. An initial inspection shall be conducted by an authorized agent within
one year of the effective date of this article for the purpose of
determining the type and functional status of each sewage disposal
system in the sewage management district. A written report shall be
furnished to the owner of each property inspected and a copy of said
report shall be maintained in the City records.
E. A schedule of routine inspections may be established to assure the
proper functioning of the sewage systems in the sewage management
district.
F. An authorized agent shall inspect systems known to be, or alleged to be,
malfunctioning. Should said inspections reveal that the system is
indeed malfunctioning, the authorized agent shall order action to be
taken to correct the malfunction. If total correction cannot be done in
accordance with the regulations of DEP including, but not limited to,
those outlined in Chapter 73 of Title 25 of Pennsylvania Code; or, is not
technically or financially feasible in the opinion of the authorized agent
and a representative of DEP; then action by the property owner to
mitigate the malfunction shall be required.
G. If there arises a geographic area where numerous on-lot sewage
disposal systems are malfunctioning, a resolution of these areawide
problems may necessitate detailed planning and a revision to the
portion of the Sewage Facilities Plan pertaining to areas affected by
such malfunctions. If a DEP authorized Official Sewage Facilities Plan
Revision has been undertaken, repair or replacement of individual
malfunctioning sewage disposal systems within the area affected by the
revision may be delayed, pending the outcome of the plan revision
process. However, immediate corrective action will be compelled
whenever a malfunction, as determined by City officials and/or the
Department, represents a serious public health or environmental
threat.
A. Industrial waste.
B. Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
C. Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including, but not limited
to, pesticides, disinfectants (excluding household cleaners), acids,
paints, paint thinners, herbicides, gasoline and other solvents.
D. Clean surface or groundwater, including water from roof or cellar
drains, springs, basement sump pumps and french drains.
§ 238-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-41
1:221
§ 238-42. System rehabilitation.
A. Each person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system which contains a septic tank shall have the septic tank pumped
by a qualified pumper/hauler within six months of the effective date of
this article. Thereafter, that person shall have the tank pumped at least
once every three years or whenever an inspection reveals that the
septic tank is filled with solids or with scum in excess of 1/3 of the liquid
depth of the tank. Receipts from the pumper/hauler shall be submitted
to the City within the prescribed six-month and three-year pumping
periods.
B. The required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion of
an authorized agent if the septic tank is undersized, if solids buildup in
the tank is above average, if the hydraulic load on the system increases
significantly above average, if a garbage grinder is used in the building,
if the system malfunctions or for other good cause shown. If any person
can prove that such person's septic tank had been pumped within three
years of the six-month anniversary of the effective date of this article,
then that person's initial required pumping may be delayed to conform
to the general three-year frequency requirement except where an
inspection reveals a need for more frequent pumping frequencies.
C. Any person owning a property served by a septic tank shall submit, with
each required pumping receipt, a written statement, from the pumper/
hauler or from any other qualified individual acceptable to the City, that
the baffles in the septic tank have been inspected and found to be in
good working order. Any person whose septic tank baffles are
determined to require repair or replacement shall first contact a
sewage enforcement officer for approval of the necessary repair.
D. Any person owning or building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system which contains an aerobic treatment tank shall follow the
operation and maintenance recommendations of the equipment
manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer's recommendations and a
copy of the service agreement shall be submitted to the City within six
months of the effective date of this article. Thereafter, service receipts
shall be submitted to the City at the intervals specified by the
manufacturer's recommendations. In no case may the service or
pumping intervals for aerobic treatment tanks exceed those required
for septic tanks.
E. Additional maintenance activity may be required as needed including,
but not necessarily limited to, cleaning and unclogging of piping,
servicing and the repair of mechanical equipment, leveling of
distribution boxes, tanks and lines, removal of obstructing roots or
trees, the diversion of surface water away from the disposal area, etc.
A. No person shall operate or maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system
in such a manner that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including
kitchen and laundry wastes and water softener backwash, shall be
§ 238-41 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-42
1:222
discharged to a treatment tank. No sewage system shall discharge
untreated or partially treated sewage to the surface of the ground
or into the waters of the commonwealth unless a permit for such
discharge has been obtained from DEP.
B. A written notice of violation shall be issued to any person who is the
owner of any property which is found to be served by a malfunctioning
on-lot sewage disposal system or which is discharging sewage without a
permit.
C. Within seven days of notification by the City that a malfunction has
been identified, the property owner shall make application to the
sewage enforcement officer for a permit to repair or replace the
malfunctioning system. Within 30 days of initial notification by the City,
construction of the permitted repair or replacement shall commence.
Within 60 days of the original notification by the City, the construction
shall be completed unless seasonal or unique conditions mandate a
longer period, in which case, the City shall set an extended completion
date.
D. A sewage enforcement officer shall have the authority to require the
repair of any malfunction by the following methods: cleaning, repair or
replacement of components of the existing system, adding capacity or
otherwise altering or replacing the system's treatment tank, expanding
the existing disposal areas, replacing the existing disposal area,
replacing a gravity distribution system with a pressurized system,
replacing the system with a holding tank, or any other alternative
appropriate for the specific site.
E. In lieu of, or in combination with, the remedies described in Subsection
D above, a sewage enforcement officer may require the installation of
water conservation equipment and the institution of water conservation
practices in structures served. Water-using devices and appliances in
the structure may be required to be retrofitted with water-saving
appurtenances or they may be required to be replaced by waterconserving
devices.
F. In the event that the rehabilitation measures in Subsections A through
E are not feasible or effective, the owner may be required to apply for a
permit to install an individual spray irrigation treatment system or to
DEP for a single residence treatment and discharge system. Upon
receipt of said permit, the owner shall complete construction of the
system within 30 days.
G. Should none of the remedies described in this section be totally
effective in eliminating the malfunction of an existing on-lot sewage
disposal system, the property owner is not absolved of responsibility for
that malfunction. The City may require whatever action is necessary to
lessen or mitigate the malfunction to the extent necessary.
§ 238-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-43
1:223
§ 238-43. Liens.
The City, upon written notice from a sewage enforcement officer that an
imminent health hazard exists due to failure of property owner to maintain,
repair or replace an on-lot sewage disposal system as provided under the
terms of this article, shall have the authority to perform, or contract to
have performed, the work required by the sewage enforcement officer. The
owner shall be charged for the work performed and, if necessary, a lien shall
be entered therefore in accordance with law.
§ 238-44. Disposal of septage.
§ 238-45. Administration.
A. All septage originating within the sewage management district shall be
disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Solid Waste
Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 et seq.) and all
other applicable laws and at sites or facilities approved by DEP.
Approved sites or facilities shall include the following: septage
treatment facilities, wastewater treatment plants, composting sites,
and approved farm lands.
B. Pumper/haulers of septage operating within the sewage management
district shall operate in a manner consistent with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S.
§§ 6018.101 through 6018.1003) and all other applicable laws.
A. The City shall fully utilize those power it possesses through enabling
statutes and ordinances to effect the purposes of this article.
B. The City shall employ qualified individuals to carry out the provisions of
this article. Those employees shall include a sewage enforcement
officer and may include an administrator and such other persons as may
be necessary. The City may also contract with private qualified persons
or firms as necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.
C. All permits, records, reports, files and other written materials relating
to the installation, operation and maintenance and malfunction of on-lot
sewage disposal systems in the sewage management district shall
become the property of, and be maintained by, the City. Existing and
future records shall be available for public inspection during regular
business hours at the official office of the City. All records pertaining to
sewage permits, building permits, occupancy permits and all other
aspects of the sewage management program shall be made available,
upon request, for inspection by representatives of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
D. The City Council shall establish all administrative procedures necessary
to properly carry out the provisions of this article.
§ 238-43 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-45
1:224
§ 238-46. Appeals.
§ 238-47. Violations and penalties.
Any person failing to comply with any provision of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $500 and costs, and not more than $5,000
and costs, or in default thereof shall be confined in the county jail for a
period of not more than 90 days. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute
a separate offense.
E. The City Council may establish a fee schedule, and authorize the
collection of fees, to cover the cost to the City of administering this
program.
A. Appeals from final decisions of the City or any of its authorized agents
under this article shall be made to the City Council in writing within 30
days from the date of written notification of the decision in question.
B. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the City Council at its
next regularly scheduled meeting, if a written appeal is received at
least 14 days prior to that meeting. If the appeal is received within 14
days of the next regularly scheduled meeting, the appeal shall be heard
at the next regularly scheduled meeting. The municipality shall
thereafter affirm, modify, or reverse the aforesaid decision. The hearing
may be postponed for a good cause shown by the appellant or the City.
Additional evidence may be introduced at the hearing provided that it is
submitted with the written notice of appeal.
C. A decision shall be rendered in writing within 30 days of the date of the
hearing.
§ 238-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-47
1:225

ARTICLE VII
Testing of Sanitary Sewer Compliance
[Adopted 7-8-2002 by Ord. No. 2-2002]
§ 238-48. Definitions.
The following terms shall be defined as follows:
TEST — Any commonly accepted method of testing, including but not
limited to dye, cameras, and/or smoke, of the storm or surface water
collection system and downspouts of real estate property to determine if
illegal stormwater or surface water is entering the sanitary sewer system.
PLUMBER'S INSPECTION REPORT — An official report from a plumber or
testing agency, subject to the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, verifying and
affirming there are no illegal storm or surface water connections into the
sanitary sewer system on the specific property which is being sold.
ILLEGAL STORM OR SURFACE WATER CONNECTIONS — The connection
of any basement seepage, surface water, downspouts, interior and exterior
french drains, roof drainage or surface areaway drainage into the sanitary
sewer system.82
MUNICIPAL LIEN AND PROPERTY TAX VERIFICATION LETTER — A
written letter from the proper official of the City of Lower Burrell
concerning municipal liens and property taxes.
PERSON — Any person, syndicate, associate, partnership, firm, corporation,
institution, agency, Authority, estate personal representative, fiduciary, or
other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PROPERTY TAPPED INTO THE SEWER SYSTEM OF LOWER BURRELL
— Any real property, inside or outside City boundaries, which generates
sanitary sewage transported through the sanitary sewer line owned or
maintained by Lower Burrell, including, but not limited to, real property.
TEMPORARY PLUMBER'S INSPECTION REPORT — A temporary report
from a plumber or testing agency, issued pursuant to the terms of § 238-51
of this article.
§ 238-49. Testing.
A. No owner or occupant of property tapped into the City sewer system
shall discharge, or permit the discharge, of any stormwater, surface
water, roof runoff, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process
waters into said sanitary sewer system.
B. The City employees or its designated agents are hereby authorized to
conduct periodic tests, and any other appropriate test or inspection, of
all existing sewer systems, laterals, and structures tapped into the City
sewer system for compliance with this article and other laws pertaining
to sewer systems and structures.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 238-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-49
1:227
§ 238-50. Sale without evidence of compliance prohibited;
application.
C. Every owner of occupant of property tapped into the City sewer system
shall submit to a test. Testing will not be required when the owner,
lessee, or occupier of the land produces a valid plumber's inspection
report issued by a plumber or testing agency, which shall be sufficient
proof of compliance for purposes of this section for a period of one year
from the date of issuance.
D. When illegal stormwater or surface water connections have been
discovered, all necessary remedial work to correct such connection
shall be completed by the owner of occupant of the premises, weather
permitting, within two months of the date they receive notification of
the illegal connection.
(1) In the event the necessary remedial work would create severe
economic hardship for the owner or occupant of the premises,
application may be made to the City Treasurer for one extension of
up to an additional six months to complete said remedial work.
(2) In the event the owner or occupant of the premises fails to effect
the necessary remedial work within the time permitted, including
any extension thereof, the City Council may undertake to have the
necessary remedial work completed at the expense of the owner or
occupant of the premises, and to make any necessary
arrangements for the payment of said work by the owner or
occupant of the premises on an installment basis, which
arrangements shall be mutually satisfactory to the owner or
occupant. Under such circumstances, in the event satisfactory
arrangements are not agreed upon by the City Treasurer and the
owner or occupant, the City Council may do any or all of the
following:
(a) File, pursuant to 53 P.S. § 7101, a lien against such property for
the expense incurred by the City to perform the work plus 6%
interest per annum plus penalty of 5% of the amount due,
which lien shall remain in effect until payment in full or sale of
the property occurs, which lien shall also include all City legal
fees and costs incurred in connection with such lien; or
(b) The City Council may, pursuant to 53 P.S. § 39601, sue the
property owner or occupant in a civil action to recover the
amount due, plus interest, plus costs, plus City attorney's fees
as permitted by law.
A. Any person selling, conveying or transferring property tapped into the
sewer system of the City ("applicant") shall make application on a form
furnished by the City, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $25 or
such other fee as may be set from time to time by resolution of the City
Council, at least 14 days before the date of the sale. The applicant shall
§ 238-49 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-50
1:228
§ 238-51. Temporary plumber's inspection report.
A temporary plumber's inspection report may be accepted by the City
Treasurer, in his/her discretion, only under the following circumstances:
then have a plumber or testing agency perform tests on the property to
be sold. The plumber or testing agency shall complete the appropriate
portions on the form that the property has been tested, and verify and
affirm the results of such tests.
B. When an illegal storm or surface water connection is discovered by the
means of the above-mentioned testing, a notice will be issued to the
applicant informing the applicant of the illegal connection and that a
municipal lien and property tax verification letter will not be issued
until the illegal connections are removed.
A. When in the opinion of the City Engineer, such testing cannot be
performed because of weather conditions, the applicant shall provide
the City Treasurer with:
(1) Security in the amount of $200 or such other amount as may be set
from time to time by resolution of the City Council, to guarantee
that the present and/or future property owner will submit to
performance of the tests required on the City form, Plumber's
Inspection Report. The City Treasurer will require the appropriate
tests to be made at such time as weather conditions are deemed
appropriate by the City Engineer. Upon performance of such tests
and certification of test results to the City Treasurer by the tester,
the $200 security will be disbursed by the City Treasurer to the
applicant.
(2) A signed written acknowledgement from the purchaser of the real
estate, agreeing to correct any violations that may be discovered as
the result of subsequent tests and agreeing that no building or
occupancy or land use approval of any kind will be issued for the
said property until all required corrective work has been
completed.
B. Nothing in this article shall prohibit any purchaser from requiring the
applicant to reimburse the purchaser for any costs incurred; provided,
nevertheless, that primary liability shall run with the land and no such
agreement shall affect the City's enforcement powers or excuse the
current owner from performance.
C. When illegal stormwater or surface water connections have been
discovered and the necessary remedial activities to correct such illegal
connection would require a length of time, in excess of two months,
such as to create a practical hardship for the applicant, the applicant
may ask the City Council to accept a temporary plumber's inspection
report, which may only be accepted when the applicant provides the
City with all of the following:
§ 238-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-51
1:229
§ 238-52. Rules and regulations.
The City Council may make reasonable rules and regulations for the
operation and enforcement of this article as they deem necessary, which
shall include, but not limited to:
§ 238-53. No conflict with general police powers.
Nothing in this article shall limit, in any fashion whatsoever, the City
Council's right to enforce its ordinances or the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. Nothing in this article shall be a defense to any citation
issued by any municipal corporation or the commonwealth pursuant to any
other law or ordinance.
§ 238-54. Violation and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, and any person
refusing to permit to testing as required herein, shall, upon conviction
thereof before any Magisterial District Judge or other issuing authority, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 for each and every offense,
and costs, and in default of payment of said fine and costs, to be imprisoned
for a period not exceeding 90 days. Whenever such person shall have
(1) A copy of an executed contract entered into by the property owner
and a qualified contractor providing for the performance of the
necessary corrective work;
(2) Security in the amount of the contract for the completion of the
necessary remedial work is posted with the City Treasurer; and
(3) An agreement by the purchaser to be responsible for all costs of the
remedial work in excess of the contract amount, together with a
license to the City to enter upon the property to complete such
work in case of default by the contractor and an agreement by the
purchaser that no building or occupancy permit or land use
approval of any kind will be issued for said property until all
required corrective work is completed. The City Council shall
determine when such temporary plumber's inspection report shall
expire, at which time the security shall be forfeited, and the City
Council may use the security to have the necessary remedial work
completed.
A. Establishing acceptable forms of security or guarantees;
B. Establishing the forms of application, fees and purchaser
acknowledgements;
C. Limit the time of year in which temporary plumber's inspection reports
are available for reasons of weather;
D. Such other rules and regulations as are necessary for the operation and
enforcement of this article.
§ 238-51 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-54
1:230
been notified in writing by first class mail, by the City, that such person is
violating this article, each day that such person shall continue such violation
shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine hereunder upon
conviction thereof. A person may also be prosecuted under the Pennsylvania
Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, in addition to this article, if the plumber's
inspection report is not true.
§ 238-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-54
1:231
Chapter 247
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 221. Abandoned and junked vehicles — See Ch.
278.
§ 238-54 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 238-54
1:232
ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 8-3-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
§ 247-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
RECYCLABLES — Material having an economic value in the secondary
materials market. The following materials have such economic value:
aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, clear glass, colored glass, newsprint,
plastics, high-grade office paper, and corrugated paper.
§ 247-2. Establishment.
There is hereby established a mandatory program for the separate
collection of recyclable materials from residential and commercial premises
within the City of Lower Burrell.
§ 247-3. Separation of recyclables and placement for removal.
A. Each residential entity within the City of Lower Burrell shall, at a
minimum, separate recyclable aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans,
both clear and colored glass containers and PETE and HDPE plastics
from other refuse and shall prepare the same for collection in
accordance with the instructions to be provided by the City or, under
subcontract, by its designated agent. These materials shall be stored
commingled in a recycling container and shall be placed at the curbside
to be collected at times designated by the City or its agent. Items
designated as recyclables shall not be placed in the same container as
or otherwise mixed with other forms of solid waste for collection,
removal or disposal. Nothing stated herein is intended to discourage or
prohibit residents from separating for collection any additional
recyclables as defined in this article. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 6-2016]
B. Residents shall separate leaf waste from other municipal waste
generated at their homes, apartments and other residential
establishments and shall utilize the leaf composting site at City Hall.
[Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 6-2016]
C. High-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated paper, PETE and HDPE
plastics and leaf waste generated at commercial, municipal or
institutional establishments and from community activities shall be
separated and stored until collection. Those establishments who have
otherwise provided for the recycling of these materials shall be exempt
from the requirements of this article, provided written documentation
§ 247-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-3
1:233
§ 247-4. Collection by unauthorized person.
§ 247-5. Sale or donation.
Notwithstanding any provision of this article, any person having ownership
of the same may sell or donate recyclables to any person, partnership
or corporation, whether operating for profit or not for profit; provided,
however, that such materials may not be placed for collection at, nor
collected from the curbside.
§ 247-6. Recycling fees. [Added 12-13-2010 by Ord. No. 6-2010]
A collection charge is hereby established for recyclables in the amount
of $24 semiannually, or on a basis as determined by the City Council,
payable within 30 days or a 5% per month penalty, in order to recover the
cost of collection. The collection charge, penalty amounts, or fines may be
amended or changed from time to time by resolution.
§ 247-7. Violations and penalties.83
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
of the total number of tons recycled is submitted annually to the City.
[Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 6-2016]
D. The City or its agent is empowered to designate the days of the month
on which recyclables shall be collected and removed from a particular
area.
A. From the time of placement of recyclable items at the curb for
collection in accordance with the terms hereof, such items shall be and
become the property of the City or its authorized agent. It shall be a
violation of this article for any person unauthorized by the City of Lower
Burrell to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any
such items. Any and each collection in violation hereof from one or
more locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of solid
waste which contains designated recyclables combined with other
forms of solid waste.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 247-3 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 247-7
1:234
ARTICLE II
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 13-1992]
§ 247-8. Short title.
This article shall be known and referred to as the "Municipal Solid Waste
Ordinance." The recitals set forth above are incorporated herein by
reference.
§ 247-9. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the
meaning ascribed herein, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980 (P.L.
380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).84
ACT 101 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act of 1988 (Act 101).85
BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste including, but not limited
to, appliances, furniture, large auto parts, trees, branches or stumps
which may require special handling due to size, shape or weight.
COLLECTOR or WASTE HAULER — Any person, firm, partnership,
corporation or public agency engaged in the collection and/or
transportation of municipal waste.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including restaurants,
shopping centers and theaters.
CONTAINER — A portable device in which waste is held temporarily for
storage or transportation.
COUNTY — The County of Westmoreland or the Westmoreland County
Board of Commissioners.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or
placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that
the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted into the air or is
discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste, comprised
of garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential
private household or apartment house.
84.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 247-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-9
1:235
GARBAGE — Any solid waste derived from animal, grain, fruit or
vegetable matter that is capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity to cause such nuisance as
odors, gases or vectors.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing including, but not limited to, factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and
slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree
trimmings and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
LICENSED COLLECTOR or LICENSED WASTE HAULER — Any
municipal waste collector or hauler possessing a current, valid county
license issued by the Westmoreland County Department of Planning
and Development pursuant to County Ordinance No. 2 of 1992.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities; and any sludge not meeting the definition of
residual or hazardous waste under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial
or institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment
plant or air pollution control facility. The term does not include source
separated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal
government or agency, state institution and agency or any other legal
entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In
any provision of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty,
or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the
officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having
officers and directors.
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible municipal waste except garbage and
other decomposable matter. This category includes, but is not limited
to, ashes, bedding, cardboard, cans, crockery, glass, paper, wood and
yard cleanings.
SALVAGING — The controlled removal or recycling of material from a
solid waste processing or disposal facility.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material.
§ 247-9 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 247-9
1:236
§ 247-10. Prohibited activities.
§ 247-11. Standards for storage of solid waste.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in
such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be
presumed that the containment of any waste in excess of one year shall
constitute disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any solid waste at any
time after generation.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or permit to
accumulate upon any public or private property within the City, any
garbage, rubbish, bulky waste, or any other municipal or residual waste
except in accordance with all applicable Department rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 or Act 101.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any solid waste, including
leaf waste, within the City except in accordance with all applicable
Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97, Act 101
and Westmoreland County requirements.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to process and/or dispose any solid
waste in the City except in accordance with all applicable Department
rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, haul, transport or remove
any solid waste from public or private property within the City without a
current, valid license to do so issued by the Westmoreland County
Department of Planning and Development.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any
solid waste that is stored or deposited for collection within the City
without prior written approval from the City.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to salvage or reclaim any solid
wastes within the City except at an approved and permitted resource
recovery facility under any applicable Department rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any used lead acid battery in
mixed municipal solid waste for collection, or to discard or dispose of
any lead acid battery except by delivery to a secondary lead smelter
permitted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or a collection
or recycling facility approved by the Department.
A. The storage of all solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents, and to eliminate
§ 247-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-11
1:237
§ 247-12. Standards and regulations for collection.
§ 247-13. Licensing requirements.
No person shall collect, remove, haul or transport any solid waste upon or
through any streets or alleys of the City without first obtaining a license
from the Westmoreland County Department of Planning and Development
pursuant to the requirements of County Ordinance No. 2 of 1992.
§ 247-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 6-2016]
Any person who violates any provision of this article may be subject to
any fines and penalties imposed by Westmoreland County, the applicable
Westmoreland County ordinances as well as any fines and penalties which
may be imposed by DEP under Act 101.
conditions harmful to public health or which create safety hazards,
odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
B. Any person producing municipal waste shall provide a sufficient
number of approved containers to store all waste materials generated
during periods between regularly scheduled collections and shall place
and stored all waste materials therein.
C. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
minimum standards for the storage of municipal waste set forth in the
Department's Title 25, Chapter 285, Subchapter A, "Regulations for the
Storage of Municipal Waste."
A. All household and homeowners shall utilize the services of a licensed
collector of their choice for disposal of their domestic waste or
household waste, unless they can demonstrate that the waste is
properly disposed in a manner consistent with this article and all
applicable Department rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Act
97 and Act 101.
B. All licensed collectors and licensed waste haulers shall comply with the
minimum standards for collection and transportation of municipal
waste set forth in the Department's Title 25, Chapter 285, Subchapter
B, "Regulations for Collection and Transportation of Municipal Waste."
C. All municipal waste collected within the City shall only be conveyed or
transported to the following landfills: BFI Landfill, Imperial, Pa., Valley
Landfill, Chamber's of Monroeville Landfill, which are the countydesignated
disposal facilities in accordance with the Municipal Waste
Management Plan for Westmoreland County.
§ 247-11 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 247-14
1:238
ARTICLE III
Accumulation of Waste Materials; Dumps
[Adopted 6-9-1992 by Ord. No. 7-1992]
§ 247-15. Accomulation of waste materials prohibited.
No person, association, firm, partnership or corporation shall keep or suffer
to remain upon his or her premises, or on any private property, any garbage,
refuse, rubbish, waste material, offal, carcass, putrid matter or other
offensive or unwholesome matter, or cast the same upon any lot or piece of
ground within the City, or upon the source or margin of any stream or body
of water, or into any sewer inlet or upon any sidewalk in the City.
§ 247-16. Dumps.
No person, firm or corporation may use or permit to be used any spot or
place within the City as a public or private dump for garbage, refuse, water
materials or rubbish.
§ 247-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, association, firm, partnership, or corporation who or which
shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and the
cost of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to imprisonment of not more than 10 days, provided that each day's
continuance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 247-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 247-17
1:239
Chapter 252
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 140.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 154.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 170.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
260.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 247-17 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 247-17
1:240
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 252-1. Introduction.
Stormwater management consists of the planning, design, and control of
the conveyance and storage of surface waters resulting from precipitation.
Major objectives are the protection of water quality, the prevention of
flooding and erosion, and the promotion of the natural recharge of
groundwater. The Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act86 was enacted
in 1978 to address these crucial issues. The intent of the Act is to encourage
stormwater runoff planning and management, with the program
administered locally, consistent with the commonwealth's duty as trustee of
natural resources and the people's constitutional right to the preservation
of the environment. The Act places major responsibility for managing
stormwater on the landowner or developer.
§ 252-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Lower Burrell
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 252-3. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases runoff volumes,
flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation,
overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood-control efforts in
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens
public health and safety, and increases non-point-source pollution of
water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM),
including reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater
recharge for water supplies and supports the base flow of streams.
D. Green infrastructure.
(1) The use of green infrastructure and low-impact development (LID)
are intended to address the root cause of water quality impairment
86.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 252-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-3
1:241
§ 252-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 252-3 of this chapter, through provisions
designed to:
by using systems and practices which use or mimic natural
processes to:
(a) Infiltrate and recharge;
(b) Evapotranspire; and/or
(c) Harvest and use precipitation near where it falls to earth.
(2) Green infrastructure practices and LID contribute to the
restoration or maintenance of predevelopment hydrology.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) program.
A. To the extent practicable, meet legal water quality requirements under
state law, including regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 to protect,
maintain, reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the
waters of the commonwealth.
B. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems
close to their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
C. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
D. Maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water resources.
E. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
F. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and prevent
scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source with a minimum
of structures and a maximum use of natural processes.
H. Provide procedures, performance standards, and design criteria for
stormwater planning and management.
I. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities and best management
practices (BMPs) that are constructed and implemented.
J. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
§ 252-3 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-5
1:242
§ 252-5. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,87 and/or the Act of
October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the
Stormwater Management Act.
§ 252-6. Applicability.
§ 252-7. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
A. In the City of Lower Burrell, all regulated activities and all activities
that may affect stormwater runoff, including land development and
earth disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by this chapter.
B. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and other
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
C. "Regulated activities" are any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff. Regulated activities include, but are
not limited to, the following listed items:
(1) Earth disturbance activities.
(2) Land development.
(3) Subdivision.
(4) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces.
(5) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(6) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
D. See § 252-17 of this chapter for exemption/modification criteria.
87.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 252-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-8
1:243
§ 252-8. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 252-9. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance. To the
extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent requirements
for stormwater management, the specific requirements contained in this
chapter shall be followed.
§ 252-10. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the municipality
purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 252-11. Minimum standards; waivers.
A. The provisions of this chapter are the minimum standards for the
protection of the public welfare.
B. General requirements.
(1) All waiver requests must meet the provisions of Subsections G and
H of this section. Waivers shall not be issued from implementing
such measures as necessary to:
(a) Protect health, safety, and property.
(b) Meet special requirements for high-quality (HQ) and
exceptional-value (EV) watersheds.
(2) Municipalities will then consider waivers in accordance with
§ 252-16C.
C. If an applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the governing body of
the municipality that any mandatory provision of this chapter is
unreasonable or causes unique or undue hardship as it applies to the
proposed project, or that an alternate design may result in a superior
result within the context of §§ 252-3 and 252-4 of this chapter, the
governing body of the municipality, upon obtaining the comments and
recommendations of the Municipal Engineer, may grant a waiver or
relief so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest is
§ 252-8 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-11
1:244
secured; provided that such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and purpose of this chapter.
D. The applicant shall submit all requests for waivers in writing and shall
include such requests as a part of the plan review and approval process.
The applicant shall state in full the facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions of
this chapter that are involved, and the minimum waiver or relief that is
necessary. The applicant shall state how the requested waiver and how
the applicant's proposal shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the intent or purpose and general principles of this
chapter.
E. The municipality shall keep a written record of all actions on waiver
requests.
F. All waiver requests must be accompanied by a fee set by resolution by
the City of Lower Burrell, the fee being designed to cover the
administrative costs of reviewing the waiver request. The applicant
shall also agree to reimburse the municipality for reasonable and
necessary fees that may be incurred by the Municipal Engineer and
Solicitor in any review of a waiver request.
G. In granting waivers, the municipality may impose reasonable conditions
that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards or requirements that are to be modified.
H. The municipality may grant applications for waivers when the following
findings are made, as relevant, that:
(1) The waiver shall result in an equal or better means of complying
with the intent of this chapter.
(2) The waiver is the minimum necessary to provide relief.
(3) The applicant is not requesting a waiver based on cost
considerations.
(4) Existing down-gradient stormwater problems will not be
exacerbated.
(5) Increased flooding or ponding on off-site properties or roadways
will not occur.
(6) Potential icing conditions will not occur.
(7) Increase of peak flow or volume from the site will not occur.
(8) Erosive conditions due to increased peak flows or volume will not
occur.
(9) Adverse impact to water quality will not result.
(10) Increased one-hundred-year floodplain levels will not result.
§ 252-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-11
1:245
§ 252-12. Duties of developers.
Any landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of
land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall, unless an
exemption is granted, implement such measures as are required by this
chapter to prevent injury to health, safety, or other property. Such measures
also shall include actions as are required to manage the rate, volume,
direction and, where practicable, quality of resulting stormwater runoff in
a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property, and water
quality.
§ 252-13. Municipal liability.
(11) Increased or unusual municipal maintenance expenses will not
result from the waiver.
(12) Infiltration of runoff throughout the proposed site has been
provided where practicable and predevelopment groundwater
recharge protected.
(13) Peak flow attenuation of runoff has been provided.
(14) Long-term operation and maintenance activities are established.
(15) The receiving streams and/or water bodies will not be adversely
impacted in flood-carrying capacity, aquatic habitat, channel
stability and erosion and sedimentation.
I. No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity
involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one acre may be
granted by the municipality unless that action is approved in advance
by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) or the delegated
county conservation district.
A. Neither the granting of any approval under this chapter, nor the
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, nor with any condition
imposed by a municipal official hereunder, shall relieve any person from
any responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting
therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon
the municipality for damages to persons or property.
B. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management
facilities shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of
any kind by the municipality, or by an official or employee thereof, of the
practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed, and
shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public
body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant
thereto.
§ 252-11 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-13
1:246
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 252-14. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 252-15. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture, such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy-use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops, including tillage, land clearing,
plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and
raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction
of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural
activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: "structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, "nonstructural
BMPs or measures" refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas "structural BMPs or measures" are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
D. These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in
pertinent regulations or statutes and are intended for this chapter only.
§ 252-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-15
1:247
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in Section
3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)] that has the authority
under a delegation agreement executed with the DEP to administer and
enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn
away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being
a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that comprise Group 13
soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania DEP Technical Manual for
Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by
the DEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided
by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence
to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from
the top of the bank of the stream.
§ 252-15 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-15
1:248
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include conducting
a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE — Systems and practices that use or mimic
natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspire, or reuse stormwater on the
site where it is generated.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the
soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area
of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can
be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils
become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that prevents
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas)
shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor living spaces,
patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures; and any new streets
or sidewalks.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such
as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of the
following meanings:
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Site design approaches and smallscale
stormwater management practices that promote the use of natural
systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of rainwater. LID can
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features;
(2)
A.
B. Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.88
C.
88.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503.
§ 252-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-15
1:249
be applied to new development, urban retrofits, and revitalization projects.
LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate, filter, evaporate, and store
runoff close to its source. Rather than rely on costly large-scale conveyance
and treatment systems, LID addresses stormwater through a variety of
small, cost-effective landscape features located on-site.
MUNICIPALITY — City of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.89
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A permanent area of trees and shrubs located
adjacent to streams, lakes, ponds and wetlands.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.90
89.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
90.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 252-15 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-15
1:250
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and retention basins;
open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the development site in accordance with this chapter.
Stormwater Management Site Plan will be designated as "SWM site plan"
throughout this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.91
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
surface water of this commonwealth.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
91.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 252-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-15
1:251

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 252-16. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 252-17:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with
§ 252-30, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. The municipality may, after consultation with the DEP, approve
measures for meeting the state water quality requirements other than
those in this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law, including, but not
limited to, the Clean Streams Law.
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual),92 Technical Guidance No.
363-2134-008, as amended and updated.
E. Impervious areas.
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter; except that the volume controls in § 252-18 and the peak
rate controls of § 252-19 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
92.Editor's Note: See Article IX of this chapter, Reference 4.
§ 252-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-16
1:253
F. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will result from the
concentrated discharge.
(1) Applicant must obtain an easement for proposed concentrated flow
across adjacent properties to a drainageway or public right-of-way.
(2) Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
G. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes,
existing native vegetation and woodlands.
(b) Encourage the creation, maintenance and extension of riparian
buffers and the protection of existing forested buffers.
(c) Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(d) Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the Commonwealth and promote
groundwater recharge.
(e) Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways,
vegetation, soils, and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as
possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
(f) Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors,
mature forests) as design elements.
(g) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(h) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(i) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
(j) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible, and decentralize and manage
stormwater at its source.
(3) Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual).93
93.Editor's Note: See Article IX of this chapter, Reference 3.
§ 252-16 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-16
1:254
H. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects.
I. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
located at least a minimum distance of 10 feet away from basements
and foundations, and located to maximize use of natural on-site
infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this
chapter.
J. Normally dry, open-top, storage facilities should completely drain both
the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not
less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design
storm.
K. The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge should be obtained from the latest version of the
Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.94
L. NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
M. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the
Stormwater Management Act.
N. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual.95
O. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
P. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements
with a minimum width of 20 feet and which include the one-hundredyear
water surface shall be provided conforming to the center line of
such watercourses. Excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any
alterations that may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any
portion of the drainage area shall be prohibited. Also, maintenance,
including mowing of vegetation within the drainage area, may be
required, except as approved by the appropriate governing authority.
Q. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
94.Editor's Note: See Article IX of this chapter, Reference 5.
95.Editor's Note: See Article IX of this chapter, Reference 3.
§ 252-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-16
1:255
§ 252-17. Exemptions.
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by the PA DEP under regulations at 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process or,
where deemed appropriate by the PA DEP, through the general permit
process.
R. Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute
water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream
enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this chapter, that will be located
in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (including wetlands),
shall be subject to approval by the PA DEP under regulations at 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 105 through the joint permit application process or,
where deemed appropriate by the PA DEP, the general permit process.
When there is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the
responsibility of the applicant or his agent to show that the land in
question cannot be classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work
in the area must be obtained from the PA DEP.
S. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under Pa. Code Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105
concerning dam safety.
T. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located on, or discharged onto, state highway rights-of-way shall
be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT).
U. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil
conditions and geology permit, to reduce the size of or eliminate the
need for detention facilities.
V. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where it is advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
the municipality shall permit it on a case-by-case basis.
W. Applicants are encouraged to use low-impact development practices to
reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter and
the state water quality requirements.
X. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream municipality, the developer shall notify the
downstream municipality and provide a copy of the SWM site plan, if
requested, for review and comment.
A. Under no circumstance shall the applicant be exempt from
implementing such measures as necessary to:
§ 252-16 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-17
1:256
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet special requirements for high-quality (HQ) and exceptionalvalue
(EV) watersheds.
B. The applicant must demonstrate that the following BMPs are being
utilized to the maximum extent practicable to receive consideration for
an exemption:
(1) Design around and limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands,
natural slopes over 15%, existing native vegetation, and other
sensitive and special value features.
(2) Maintain riparian and forested buffers.
(3) Limit grading and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural
flow paths.
(4) Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas.
(5) Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation.
(6) Direct runoff to pervious areas.
C. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed development/
additional impervious area will not adversely impact the following:
(1) Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems.
(2) Velocities and erosion.
(3) Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed.
(4) Existing known problem areas.
(5) Safe conveyance of the additional runoff.
(6) Downstream property owners.
D. An applicant proposing regulated activities may be eligible for
exemption from rate control, volume control, or SWM site plan
requirements in this chapter according to the following table:
Table 17.1
Exemptions and Submission Requirements
New Impervious Area
(square feet) Applicant Must Provide
0 to <5,000 Documentation of new impervious
surfaces
5,000 and greater Rate controls, volume controls
and SWM site plan
§ 252-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-17
1:257
NOTES:
1. New impervious area since the date of adoption of this chapter.
2. Gravel in existing condition shall be considered pervious and gravel
in proposed condition shall be considered impervious.
E. Single-family residential activities are exempt from these requirements,
provided that the construction:
(1) Complies with § 252-16F and Subsections A, B and C of this
section; and
(2) Driveways.
(a) Runoff must discharge onto pervious surface with a gravel
strip or other spreading device.
(b) No more than 1,000 square feet of paved surface may
discharge to any one point as a concentrated discharge.
(c) The length of flow on the pervious surface must exceed the
length of flow on the paved surface.
(3) The municipality can require more information or require
mitigation of certain impacts through installation of stormwater
management BMPs if there is a threat to property, health, or safety.
F. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with Subsections A, B and C of this section, may be
exempted from various requirements of this chapter if documentation
can be provided that a downstream man-made water body (i.e.,
reservoir, lake, or man-made wetlands) has been designed or modified
to address the potential stormwater flooding impacts of the proposed
development.
G. The purpose of this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater
management planning between local ordinances and NPDES permitting
(when required) and to ensure that the applicant has a single and clear
set of stormwater management standards to which the applicant is
subject. The municipality may accept alternative stormwater
management controls under this section, provided that:
(1) The municipality, in consultation with the PA DEP (or delegated
authority), determines that meeting the volume control
requirements (see § 252-18) is not possible or places an undue
hardship on the applicant.
(2) The alternative controls are documented to be acceptable to the PA
DEP (or delegated authority) for NPDES requirements pertaining
to post-construction stormwater management requirements.
§ 252-17 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-17
1:258
§ 252-18. Volume controls.
(3) The alternative controls are in compliance with all other sections of
this chapter, including, but not limited to, § 252-16C and
Subsections A, B and C of this section.
H. Agricultural activities are exempt from the rate control and SWM site
plan preparation requirements of this chapter, provided that the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
I. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate
and volume control requirement and SWM site plan preparation
requirement of this chapter, provided that the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
J. The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
K. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 252-16D through M.
A. The low-impact development practices provided in the Pennsylvania
SWM BMP Manual shall be utilized for all regulated activities to the
maximum extent practicable.
B. Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the
Design Storm Method or the Simplified Method, as defined below. For
regulated activity areas equal or less than one acre that do not require
hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter
establishes no preference for either method; therefore, the applicant
may select either method on the basis of economic considerations, the
intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures
associated with each methodology, and other factors.
(1) The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable
to any size regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions.
(a) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume
when compared to the predevelopment total runoff volume for
the two-year/twenty-four-hour storm event.
(b) For hydrologic modeling purposes:
[1] Existing nonforested pervious areas must be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations.
[2] Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present
within the proposed project site, shall be considered
§ 252-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-18
1:259
§ 252-19. Rate controls.
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations for redevelopment.
(2) The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) is independent of
site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is
not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities
greater than one acre or for projects that require detailed design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(a) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(b) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e., it shall not be released into surface waters of the
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(c) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases, at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(d) Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed
elevation of the stormwater BMPs are required. Infiltration
tests shall be conducted in accordance with the BMP Manual.
Notification of the municipality shall be provided to allow
witnessing of the testing.
C. The applicable worksheets from the BMP Manual must be used in
calculations to establish volume control.
A. For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan:
(1) Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed predevelopment
discharge rates for the two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour storm events. If it is shown that the
peak rates of discharge indicated by the post-development analysis
are less than or equal to the peak rates of discharge indicated by
the predevelopment analysis for two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and
one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storms, then the requirements
of this section have been met. Otherwise, the applicant shall
provide additional controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate of
discharge requirement.
B. For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan:
§ 252-18 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-19
1:260
§ 252-20. Sensitive areas and stormwater hotspots.
(1) For the two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year,
twenty-four-hour storm events, the post-development peak
discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate
maps. For any areas not shown on the release rate maps, the postdevelopment
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates.
A. Sensitive areas and water-quality-sensitive developments, as defined
below, which require special consideration with regard to stormwater
management.
(1) "Sensitive areas" are defined as those areas that, if developed, have
the potential to endanger a water supply. These areas consist of the
delineated one-year zone of contribution and direct upslope areas
tributary to the water supply wells. The City of Lower Burrell may
update the sensitive area boundaries based on new research or
studies as required.
(2) "Stormwater hotspots" are defined as a land development project
that has a high potential to endanger local water quality and could
potentially threaten groundwater reservoirs. The Municipal
Engineer will determine what constitutes these classifications on a
case-by-case basis. The PA DEP wellhead protection contaminant
source list shall be used as a guide in these determinations.
Industrial manufacturing site and hazardous material storage
areas must provide NPDES SIC codes.
B. Performance standards.
(1) The location of the boundaries of sensitive areas is set by drainage
areas tributary to any public water supply. The exact location of
these boundaries, as they apply to a given development site, shall
be determined using mapping at a scale which accurately defines
the limits of the sensitive area. If the project site is within the
sensitive area (in whole or in part), two-foot contour interval
mapping shall be provided to define the limits of the sensitive area.
If the project site is adjacent to but within 500 linear feet of a
defined sensitive area, a five-foot contour interval map defining the
limits of the sensitive area shall be included in the stormwater
management plan to document the site's location relative to the
sensitive area.
(2) Stormwater hotspots may be required to prepare and implement a
stormwater pollution prevention plan and file notice of intent as
required under the provision of the EPA industrial stormwater
NPDES permit requirements.
(3) Stormwater hotspots must use an acceptable pretreatment BMP
prior to volume control and/or rate control BMPs. Acceptable
§ 252-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-20
1:261
§ 252-21. Protected watersheds.
For any regulated activity within a protected watershed (high-quality or
exceptional-value), the applicant shall meet requirements as contained in
25 Pa. Code Chapter 93 as required and applicable.
§ 252-22. Design criteria.
pretreatment BMPs for these developments include those based
on filtering, settling, or chemical reaction processes such as
coagulation.
A. General design guidelines.
(1) Stormwater shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another, unless:
(a) The watersheds are subwatersheds of a common watershed
which join together within the perimeter of the property;
(b) The effect of the transfer does not alter the peak rate discharge
onto adjacent lands; or
(c) Easements from the affected landowner(s) are provided.
(2) Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the drainage pattern of the watershed. A concentrated
discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an
existing watercourse or confined in an easement or returned to a
predevelopment flow-type condition.
(3) Innovative stormwater BMPs and recharge facilities are
encouraged (e.g., rooftop storage, dry wells, cisterns, recreation
area ponding, diversion structures, porous pavements, holding
tanks, infiltration systems, in-line storage in storm sewers, and
grading patterns). They shall be located, designed, and constructed
in accordance with the latest technical guidance published by the
PA DEP, provided that they are accompanied by detailed
engineering plans and performance capabilities and supporting
site-specific soils, geology, runoff and groundwater and infiltration
rate data to verify proposed designs. Additional guidance from
other sources may be accepted at the discretion of the Municipal
Engineer. (A preapplication meeting is suggested.)
(4) All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems
and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in
their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the
appropriate regulatory agency.
(5) The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. The
municipality shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that
§ 252-20 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-22
1:262
would result in the continuation or exacerbation of a documented
adverse hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the watershed, as
identified in the plan.
(6) The design and construction of multiple-use stormwater detention
facilities are strongly encouraged. In addition to stormwater
management, facilities should, where appropriate, allow for
recreational uses, including ball fields, play areas, picnic grounds,
etc. Consultation with the municipality and prior approval are
required before design. Provision for permanent wet ponds with
stormwater management capabilities may also be appropriate.
(a) Multiple-use basins should be constructed so that potentially
dangerous conditions are not created.
(b) Water quality basins or recharge basins that are designed for a
slow release of water or other extended detention ponds are
not permitted for recreational uses, unless the ponded areas
are clearly separated and secure.
(7) Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under Pa. Code Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter
105 concerning dam safety.
B. Stormwater management facility design considerations. All stormwater
management facilities shall meet the following design requirements:
(1) All areas of a subdivision, land development plan or mobile home
park to be developed with streets, residential lots or sites,
recreation areas or other uses shall be graded to assure positive
drainage.
(2) Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided
to ensure the controlled flow of natural watercourses and to
guarantee the drainage of all low points along the curb- or gutter
lines, as well as at intervals related to the slope of all streets in or
adjacent to the plan. Where driveways cross curb- or gutter lines, a
pipe below the driveway entrance of the type and size required by
the City of Lower Burrell Engineer shall be required.
(3) In designing the stormwater management facility, the developer
shall use as his guide the publication "Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds," Technical Release No. 55, United States Department
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, June 1986, and as
amended.96
(a) The predevelopment condition shall be as defined in § 252-15,
Definitions, regarding "existing condition." If the property has
been partially or completely developed at the time of purchase,
96.Editor's Note: See Article IX of this chapter, Reference 2.
§ 252-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-22
1:263
the City Council, at its option, may require the new owner,
if he proposes to redevelop or further develop the property,
to take remedial action for compliance with the requirements
of this subsection. If remedial action is required, regardless
of the condition of the surface, the design runoff shall not
exceed curve number 75 applied to Class C "good meadow"
soils. (See Tables 2-1 and 2-2 of TR-55.) The developer may
pass through stormwater originating upstream of his property,
but if he elects to control it, bypass devices he installs shall
be capable of handling the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour
peak flow. If a property is to be laid out in lots, no reduction
in lot size shall be permitted to accommodate storm drainage
detention structures.
(b) The developer shall consult with the Westmoreland County
Conservation District before developing his/her stormwater
management plans. The municipality and others reviewing a
stormwater control plan will use discretion in considering
unusual conditions such as drainage from several basins on the
same property under development.
(4) The stormwater management plan of a subdivision, land
development plan or mobile home park shall be designed to assure
that, after development, stormwater does not leave the property at
a greater velocity or volume per second than before development
commenced.
(a) Outlet works shall be designed so as to store water and control
runoff for all storms of frequency up to and including the onehundred-
year storm.
(b) Vertical riser pipes with trash racks and anti-vortex devices
shall be provided in detention basins, unless an alternate
design is approved by the municipality.
(c) No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility, or
swale, shall discharge directly onto a municipal or state
roadway without approval from the municipality or PennDOT.
(5) Detention areas, where required to impede runoff, shall be
designed to meet or exceed the following standards:
(a) Except where a permanent pond is approved by the
municipality, detention areas shall be designed to drain
completely.
(b) The height of the embankment shall be not more than 10 feet
measured between the top of the embankment and the toe of
the slope on the downstream side of the embankment. The
level of water within the impoundment shall not exceed nine
feet measured between the lowest point in the impoundment
§ 252-22 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-22
1:264
area behind the embankment and the top of the emergency
spillway.
(c) The area to be occupied by the embankment shall be cleared of
all topsoil and organic materials prior to construction. The
embankment shall be built up in layers not to exceed six inches
in depth with equipment providing 95% compaction at
optimum moisture conditions.
(d) The settled elevation of the top of the embankment at its lowest
point shall be not less than one foot above the maximum water
level to be impounded behind the embankment and not less
than two feet above the elevation of the emergency spillway.
(e) The surfaces of the embankment shall be planted in a mixture
of perennial quick-catching grasses.
(f) The interior and exterior side slopes of the embankment shall
not slope on either side less than one foot vertical rise for each
two feet of horizontal run and not more than a total on both
sides of one foot vertical rise for each five feet of horizontal
run.
(g) The horizontal drain pipe passing through the embankment
shall be reinforced concrete pipe or equivalent. Anti-seepage
collars shall be placed in accordance with proper design
procedures. The design and spacing of the collars shall be
submitted for review.
(h) The top of the riser pipe to drain the pond shall be not less than
three feet in height above the invert elevation of the horizontal
pipe, shall be not less than six inches in diameter and shall be
fitted with an anti-vortex device and a trash rack.
(i) The emergency spillway shall be capable of passing the flow
created by the unattenuated one-hundred-year storm.
(j) The low edge of a parking area, curbed or not, may serve the
purpose of an emergency spillway to pass the overflow from a
stormwater detention area, provided that the embankment
below the edge is well stabilized with planting materials and
the angle of the slope will not encourage erosion, in the opinion
of the municipality and other reviewing agencies. Parking
areas shall not be used to store stormwater.
(k) Unless specifically designed as a volume control facility, stone
low-flow channels with underdrains shall be installed in all
aboveground earthen detention facilities. Side slopes and
channel slopes within the basin shall be 2% minimum.
(6) The invert of all stormwater management facilities and
underground infiltration/storage facilities shall be located a
§ 252-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-22
1:265
minimum of two feet above the seasonal high groundwater table.
The invert of stormwater facilities may be lowered if adequate
subsurface drainage is provided. Flows from underdrains need not
be accounted for in volume or rate control calculations.
(7) Unless specifically designed as a volume control facility, all
stormwater management facilities shall have a minimum slope of
2% extending radially out from the principal outlet structure.
Facilities designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs may have a
bottom slope of zero.
(8) Landscaping and planting specifications must be provided for all
stormwater management basins and be specific for each type of
basin.
(a) Minimal maintenance, saturation-tolerant vegetation must be
provided in basins designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs.
(9) Written design reports and calculations shall be submitted for
review and approval by the municipality. Routing calculations using
modified PULS methodology shall be included to assure outflow
rates are in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
Calculations for storm pipe sizing shall also be included using the
Rational Method and Manning's Formula for a ten-year storm
unless conditions warrant otherwise using PennDOT intensityduration-
frequency curves from the Engineering Design Manual
(latest edition).
(10) The owner or developer shall enter into a legal agreement
approved by the Municipal Solicitor which shall hold the
municipality harmless from any and all liability relating to storm
drainage collection and its discharge during construction of the
system and thereafter. The owner or developer shall secure, where
necessary, off-site easements for storm drainage.
(11) The costs of review and inspection by the Municipal Engineer of
the stormwater management system as proposed by the developer
shall be borne by the developer, whether or not the plan is
ultimately approved. The Engineer shall review any changes as the
developer may make in his plan for compliance with the Engineer's
recommendations and shall advise the City Council whether the
revised plan is in compliance or not. The Council shall direct the
Engineer to inspect an approved embankment or any other
proposed design element during its various stages of construction
and to point out to the contractor, the developer and Council any
deviations from the design as approved.
(12) Catch basins shall meet the municipal standards and shall have
inverts poured to allow self-cleaning. Catch basins shall be located
no further apart than 300 feet, measured between catch basins on
the same side of the street.
§ 252-22 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-22
1:266
§ 252-23. Calculation methodology.
(13) Graded areas shall be stabilized with erosion-resisting plantings
placed immediately after the completion of grading. Graded slopes
produced by placing fill earth over the preexisting surface shall be
keyed in accordance with sound geotechnical practices.
(14) Grades for embankments shall not exceed one foot vertical rise for
every two feet of horizontal run for fill slopes or one foot vertical
rise for every 1 1/2 feet horizontal run for slopes created by
excavating in areas that have lain dormant for at least two years.
Steeper slopes may be permitted in areas where, in the opinion of a
professional engineer, as evidenced in a written report, concurred
with by the Municipal Engineer, conditions are such as to allow
slopes up to a maximum grade determined by the engineers.
(15)No grading shall occur within five feet of any subdivision or
development plan boundary, except as is needed for the entrance of
streets or to grade off land immediately adjacent to a street to the
street's elevation.
(16) All persons, partnerships or corporations intending to excavate, fill
or grade land in the municipality shall be required to undertake all
work in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and
applicable regulations of Westmoreland County.
A. All calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the
BMP Manual, as amended herein.
B. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or the NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Methodology.
Other methods shall be selected by the design professional based on
the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
C. Rainfall values.
(1) Rational Method. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Drainage Manual, Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves,
Publication 584, Chapter 7A, latest edition, shall be used in
conjunction with the appropriate time of concentration and return
period.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. The Natural Resources
Conservation Service Type II, twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution
shall be used in conjunction with rainfall depths from NOAA Atlas
14. A copy of the rainfall data from NOAA Atlas 14 shall accompany
the SWM report for review.
D. Runoff volume.
(1) Rational Method. Not to be used to calculate runoff volume.
§ 252-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-23
1:267
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. This method shall be used to
estimate the change in volume due to regulated activities.
Combining curve numbers for land areas proposed for development
with curve numbers for areas unaffected by the proposed
development into a single weighted curve number is not
acceptable.
E. Peak flow rates.
(1) Rational Method. This method may be used for design of
conveyance facilities. Extreme caution should be used by the
design professional if the watershed has more than one main
drainage channel, if the watershed is divided so that hydrologic
properties are significantly different in one versus the other, if the
time of concentration exceeds 60 minutes, or if stormwater runoff
volume is an important factor. The combination of Rational Method
hydrographs based on timing shall be prohibited.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method.
(a) This method is recommended for design of stormwater
management facilities and where stormwater runoff volume
must be taken into consideration. The following provides
guidance on the model applicability:
[1] NRCS's TR-55: limited to 100 acres in size.
[2] NRCS's TR-20, WinTR-20, WinTR-55, HEC-HMS: no
watershed size limitations.
[3] Other models as preapproved by the Municipal Engineer.
(b) The NRCS Antecedent Runoff Condition II (ARC II, previously
AMC II) must be used for all simulations. The use of continuous
simulation models that vary the ARC are not permitted for
stormwater management purposes.
(c) For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a
tenth of a cubic foot per second (cfs).
F. Runoff coefficients.
(1) Rational Method. Use Table B-1 (Appendix B).97
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. Use Table B-2 (Appendix B). Curve
numbers (CN) should be rounded to tenths for use in hydrologic
models as they are a design tool with statistical variability. For
large sites, CNs should realistically be rounded to the nearest
whole number.
97.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 252-23 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-23
1:268
(3) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing nonforested pervious area conditions shall
be considered as meadow (good condition).
(4) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, 20% of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow (good condition).
G. Design storm.
(1) All stormwater management facilities shall be verified by routing
the proposed two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year
hydrographs through the facility using the storage indication
method or modified PULS method. The design storm hydrograph
shall be computed using a calculation method that produces a full
hydrograph.
(2) The stormwater management and drainage system shall be
designed to safely convey the post-development one-hundred-year
storm event to stormwater detention facilities, for the purpose of
meeting peak rate control.
(3) All structures (culverts or bridges) proposed to convey runoff under
a municipal road shall be designed to pass the twenty-five-year
design storm with a minimum one foot of freeboard measured
below the lowest point along the top of the roadway.
H. Time of concentration.
(1) The time of concentration is to represent the average condition that
best reflects the hydrologic response of the area. The following
time of concentration (Tc) computational methodologies shall be
used unless another method is preapproved by the Municipal
Engineer:
(a) Predevelopment; NRCS's Lag Equation:
Time of concentration = Tc
Tc = (T\0.6) * 60 (minutes)
T = l0.8 (S + 1)0.7\1900Y5
Where:
T = Lag time (hours).
l = Hydraulic length of watershed (feet).
Y = Average overland slope of watershed (percent).
S = Maximum retention in watershed as defined by:
S = [(1,000/CN) - 10].
CN = NRCS curve number for watershed.
§ 252-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-23
1:269
(b) Post-development; commercial, industrial, or other areas with
large impervious areas (> 20% impervious area) - NRCS
Segmental Method. The length of sheet flow shall be limited to
100 feet. Tc for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using
Manning's Equation.
(c) Post-development; residential, cluster, or other low-impact
designs less than or equal to 20% impervious area: NRCS Lag
Equation or NRCS Segmental Method.
(2) Additionally, the following provisions shall apply to calculations for
time of concentration:
(a) The post-development Tc shall never be greater than the
predevelopment Tc for any watershed or subwatershed. This
includes when the designer has specifically used swales to
reduce flow velocities. In the event that the designer believes
that the post-development Tc is greater, it will still be set by
default equal to the predevelopment Tc for modeling purposes.
(b) The minimum Tc for any watershed shall be five minutes.
(c) The designer may choose to assume a five-minute Tc for any
post-development watershed or subwatershed without
providing any computations.
(d) The designer must provide computations for all
predevelopment Tc paths. A five-minute Tc cannot be assumed
for predevelopment.
I. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning's Equation shall be
used for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. The Manning's Equation should not
be used for analysis of pipes under pressure flow or for analysis of
culverts. Manning's "n" values shall be obtained from PennDOT's
Drainage Manual, Publication 584. Inlet control shall be checked at all
inlet boxes to ensure the headwater depth during the ten-year design
event is contained below the top of grate for each inlet box.
J. The municipality has the authority to require that computed existing
runoff rates be reconciled with field observations, conditions and site
history. If the designer can substantiate, through actual physical
calibration, that more appropriate runoff and time of concentration
values should be utilized at a particular site, then appropriate
variations may be made upon review and recommendation of the
municipality.
§ 252-23 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-23
1:270
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan and Report
Requirements
§ 252-24. Approval of plan required.
For any activities regulated by this chapter and not eligible for the
exemptions provided herein, the final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit, or the
commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed until the
applicant has received written approval of a SWM site plan from the City.
§ 252-25. Contents of plan and report.
The SWM site plan and SWM report shall consist of all applicable
calculations, maps and plans. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to the City in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat and
well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be rejected. All other
applicable local and county ordinances shall be followed in preparing the
SWM site plan.
A. SWM site plan shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Plans shall be of one size and in a form that meets the requirements
for recording in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Westmoreland County.
(a) Plans for tracts of less than 20 acres shall be drawn at a scale
of one inch equals no more than 50 feet;
(b) Plans for tracts of 20 acres or more shall be drawn at a scale of
one inch equals no more than 100 feet;
(c) Lettering shall be drawn to a size to be legible if the plans are
reduced to half size.
(2) The name of the development; name and location address of the
property site; name, address and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, email address, and engineering seal of the individual
preparing the SWM site plan.
(3) The date of submission and dates of all revisions.
(4) A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps.
(5) A North arrow on all drawings and maps.
(6) A location map at a minimum scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet
that illustrates the project location relative to highways,
municipalities or other identifiable landmarks.
(7) Metes and bounds description of the entire tract perimeter.
§ 252-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-25
1:271
(8) Existing and final contours at intervals:
(a) Slopes less than 5%: no greater than one foot.
(b) Slopes between five and 15%: no greater than two feet.
(c) Steep slopes (greater than 15%): five-foot contour intervals
may be used.
(9) Perimeters of existing water bodies within the project area,
including stream banks, lakes, ponds, springs, field-delineated
wetlands or other bodies of water, sinkholes, flood hazard
boundaries (FEMA-delineated floodplains and floodways), areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved, the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site, and overland drainage paths. In
addition, any areas necessary to determine downstream impacts,
where required for proposed stormwater management facilities,
must be shown.
(10) The location of all existing and proposed utilities, on-lot
wastewater facilities, water supply wells, sanitary sewers, and
water lines on and within 50 feet of the property lines, including
inlets, manholes, valves, meters, poles, chambers, junction boxes,
and other utility system components.
(11) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project.
(12) Soil names and boundaries with identification of the hydraulic soil
group classification, including rock outcroppings.
(13) Proposed impervious surfaces (structures, roads, paved areas and
buildings), including plans and profiles of roads and paved areas
and floor elevations of buildings.
(14) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(15) Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles, and cross sections of all
open channels, pipes, swales and other BMPs where required by
the City Engineer.
(16) The location and clear identification of the nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(17) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities,
shown on a separate drawing from the SWM site plan (typically an
E&S plan).
(18) A minimum twenty-foot wide access easement around all
stormwater management facilities or facilities to be considered
that would provide ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
(19) Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs.
§ 252-25 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-25
1:272
(20) Construction sequence.
(21) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operations
and maintenance responsibilities.
(22) Notes and statements:
(a) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or
removed without prior approval from the municipality.
(b) A statement referencing the operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement and stating that the O&M agreement is part
of the SWM site plan.
(c) At the discretion of the City Engineer, a note indicating that
record drawings will be provided for all stormwater facilities
prior to occupancy, or release of the surety bond.
(d) The following signature block for the registered professional
preparing the stormwater management plan:
I, __________, hereby certify that the stormwater management
plan meets all design standards and criteria of the City of
Lower Burrell Stormwater Management Ordinance.
(e) The following signature block for the Municipal Engineer
reviewing the stormwater management plan:
I, __________, have reviewed this stormwater management plan
in accordance with the design standards and criteria of the
City of Lower Burrell Stormwater Management Ordinance.
B. SWM report shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) General date, including:
(a) Project name.
(b) Project location and address of the property site (if available).
(c) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant/owner
of the property.
(d) Name, address, telephone number, email address and
engineering seal of the individual preparing the SWM report.
(e) Date of submission and any revisions.
(2) Project description narrative that clearly discusses the project and
provides the following information, where applicable:
(a) Narrative:
§ 252-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-25
1:273
[1] Statement of the regulated activity describing what is
being proposed. Overall stormwater management concept
with description of permanent techniques, including
construction specifications and materials to be used for
stormwater management facilities.
[2] Expected project schedule.
[3] Location map showing the project site and its location
relative to its overall surroundings.
[4] Detailed description of the existing site conditions,
including a site evaluation completed for projects
proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas
such as brownfields.
[5] A watershed map of the total site area, pre- and post-,
which must be equal or have an explanation as to why they
are not. This map must also show the time of concentration
that is representative of site conditions for pre- and postdevelopment
areas.
[6] Total site impervious area.
[7] Total off-site areas.
[8] Number and description of stormwater management
facilities.
[9] Type of development.
[10] Predevelopment land use.
[11] Whether the site is located in a high-quality or exceptionalvalue
watershed.
[12] The Chapter 93 stream classification of any watercourses
present on site.
[13] Types of water quality and recharge systems used, if
applicable.
[14] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural
computations for all stormwater management facilities.
[15] A written maintenance plan for all stormwater features,
including detention facilities and other stormwater
management facilities.
[16] Other pertinent information as required.
(b) Summary tables:
[1] Predevelopment/existing conditions:
§ 252-25 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-25
1:274
[a] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions.
[b] Curve numbers (CN).
[c] Time of concentration.
[d] Runoff volume and peak rate of runoff for each storm
interval.
[2] Post-development/proposed conditions:
[a] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions.
[b] Curve numbers (CN).
[c] Time of concentration.
[d] Runoff volume and peak rate of runoff for each storm
interval.
[3] Detention facility (pond) routing analysis:
[a] Undetained areas that drain to the proposed
stormwater facilities.
[b] Runoff volume and peak rate as released from the
proposed detention facility for each storm interval.
[4] Detention facility (pond):
[a] Maximum water surface elevation for each storm
interval.
[b] Berm elevation.
[c] Emergency spillway elevation.
[d] Outlet structure: orifice and weir size and elevation.
[5] Water quality volume and depth requirements (where
applicable).
(c) Calculations:
[1] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural
computations, calculations, assumptions, and criteria for
the design of all stormwater BMPs.
[2] Details of the berm embankment and outlet structure
indicating the embankment top elevation, embankment
side slopes, the width of all embankments, emergency
spillway elevation, outlet structure dimensions, discharge
barrel dimensions and slope as well as spacing of anti-seep
collars.
§ 252-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-25
1:275
[3] Design computations for the control structure (discharge
barrel and outlet structure, etc.).
[4] A plot or table of the stage-storage (volume vs. elevation)
and all supporting computations.
[5] Routing computations.
(d) Drawings:
[1] Drainage area maps for all watersheds and inlets depicting
the time of concentration path for both existing conditions
and post-development conditions.
[2] All stormwater management facilities must be located on a
plan and described in detail, including easements and
buffer boundaries.
(3) Reports that do not clearly contain the above information may be
rejected for review by the municipality and will be returned to the
applicant.
(4) Description of, justification, and actual field results for infiltration
testing with respect to the type of test and test location for the
design of infiltration BMPs.
(5) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing municipal stormwater collection system that
may receive runoff from the project site.
(6) Description of the proposed changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover, including the type and amount of impervious area
to be added.
(7) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operation
and maintenance responsibilities, as well as schedules and costs
for inspection and maintenance activities for each permanent
stormwater or drainage BMP, including provisions for permanent
access and maintenance easements.
C. Supplemental information to be provided prior to final approval of the
SWM site plan, as requested by the City:
(1) Signed and executed operations and maintenance agreement
(Appendix A).98
(2) Signed and executed easements, as required for all on-site and offsite
work.
(3) An erosion and sedimentation control plan.
98.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 252-25 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-25
1:276
§ 252-26. Plan submission.
§ 252-27. Plan review.
(4) Approval letter from the Westmoreland County Conservation
District for those projects which require an NPDES permit.
(5) Applicable permits from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PA DEP) and Army Corps of Engineers
(ACOE), for those projects which require permits from the PA DEP
and/or the ACOE.
(6) Soils investigation report, including boring logs, compaction
requirements, and recommendation for construction of detention
basins.
(7) A highway occupancy permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) when utilization of a PennDOT storm
drainage system is proposed or when the proposed development
would encroach onto a PennDOT right-of-way.
(8) Cost estimate of the proposed improvements.
D. The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when an SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the municipality may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission, or, in the case of minor deficiencies, the
municipality may accept submission of modifications.
A. The applicant shall submit the SWM site plan and report for the
regulated activity at least two weeks prior to the regularly scheduled
Council meeting.
B. Five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
(1) Two copies to the municipality.
(2) One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
(3) Submission to the County Conservation District (if applicable).
(4) One copy to the County Planning Commission/Office.
C. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the municipality or
PA DEP.
A. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the municipality for consistency
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant, in writing, within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM site
plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification
shall occur within the time period allowed by the Municipalities
§ 252-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-27
1:277
§ 252-28. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM
BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM
BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated
on the SWM site plan as determined by the municipality shall require a
resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this article.
§ 252-29. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the municipality's concerns, to the municipality in accordance
with this article. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission
of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 252-30. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The municipality may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the municipality
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is
not completed according to § 252-31 within the term of validity, then the
municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by
the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 252-28 of this
chapter.
§ 252-31. As-built plans, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
Planning Code (90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by
other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified
by the municipality.
C. If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the municipality will
state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The municipality also
may approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide
the acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
D. The Municipal Building Permit Office shall not issue a building permit
for any regulated activity if the SWM site plan and report has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the
municipality. All required permits from the PA DEP must be obtained
prior to issuance of a building permit.
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans
shall be submitted to the municipality.
§ 252-27 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-31
1:278
B. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications. The latitude and longitude coordinates for all permanent
SWM BMPs must also be submitted, at the central location of the BMPs.
If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the construction
plans, then a licensed qualified professional must sign the completion
certificate.
C. After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the
municipality may conduct a final inspection.
D. As-built drawings. Upon completion of the construction within a land
development or construction of improvements in a subdivision, the
applicant shall furnish the City with the electronic file in PDF format of
the plan. Such as-built drawings shall include the following items where
applicable:
(1) Scale, North arrow and date.
(2) Tract boundary and lot lines.
(3) Road access, public and private internal roads and walks.
(4) Plan view and vertical profiles of new public streets.
(5) Stormwater management to include:
(a) Location of detention facilities, including measurements as
required to verify as-built volume.
(b) Location of outflow structures, including measurements of
controls.
(c) Location and size of emergency spillway(s).
(d) Location of all best management practices (BMPs), including,
but not limited to sumps, vegetative swales, bioswales, ditches
and sediment forebays.
(6) Locations of drainage structures and pipes, including type and
profile.
(7) Utility easements, including sanitary sewer.
(8) Parking area and number of spaces.
(9) Location of all buildings.
(10) Statement to the effect that all utilities are located within the
proper rights-of-way for roads to be considered for acceptance by
the City.
(11) Landscaping.
§ 252-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-31
1:279
§ 252-32. Easement agreements.
§ 252-33. Scope of easements.
(12) Lighting.
(13) Location of trash facilities.
(14) Seal of the registered professional who prepared the drawing(s).
A. At the developer's option, the developer may grant to the City of Lower
Burrell an easement for drainage. The developer should consider
granting the following easements:
(1) Easements to accommodate existing drainageways.
(2) Easements for planned infiltration facilities, drainage swales, and
drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes, etc.).
(3) Easements where the tract is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream.
B. In lieu of granting an easement to the City of Lower Burrell for
drainage, the developer shall enter into a legal agreement approved by
the Solicitor which shall hold the City harmless from any and all liability
relating to storm drainage collection and its discharge during
construction of the stormwater system and thereafter.
C. The owner or developer shall secure, where necessary, all off-site
easements for storm drainage (i.e., downstream properties).
D. All easement agreements will be recorded with a reference to the
recorded development plan.
A. Where the developer grants an easement for a drainageway, drainage
swale, watercourse, channel or stream, the easement should be a
minimum of 20 feet wide and paralleling the center line of such
drainageway, drainage swale, watercourse, channel or stream; and to
the extent possible, such drainage easements should encompass the
one-hundred-year floodplain.
B. The City of Lower Burrell may refuse acceptance of any easement that
in the opinion of the Municipal Engineer is of insufficient width to allow
for proper maintenance and servicing of the drainageway, drainage
swale, watercourse, channel or stream.
C. The City of Lower Burrell may refuse acceptance of any easement that
in the opinion of the Municipal Engineer does not provide for a means
of ingress, regress and egress to the drainageway, drainage swale,
watercourse, channel or stream.
§ 252-31 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-33
1:280
ARTICLE V
Operation and Maintenance
§ 252-34. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 252-35. Operation and Maintenance Agreements.
A. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part
of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the municipality will accept the
facilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated
as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed
restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.
C. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
D. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see
Appendix A)99 covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
agreement.
(2) The owner shall convey to the municipality conservation easements
to assure access for periodic inspections by the municipality and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the municipality the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change,
new information shall be submitted by the owner to the
municipality within 10 working days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
municipality may perform the services required and charge the owner
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
99.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 252-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-36
1:281
§ 252-36. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter equal
to 110% of the total cost of construction of the required facilities/controls
in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.100
§ 252-37. Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund.
A. If stormwater facilities/controls are accepted by the City for dedication,
the applicant/developer/property owner may be required to pay a
specified amount to the City to be deposited in a Municipal Stormwater
Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of periodic inspections and
maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit shall be determined
as follows:
If the stormwater management facility/control(s) are to be owned and
maintained by the City, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 10 years. The Municipal Engineer will
establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted to the City
by the applicant/property owner(s).
B. If, after 10 years, there is any amount remaining in the Municipal
Stormwater Maintenance Fund less the cost of inspection over the
previous 10 years, the unused portion of the Maintenance Fund deposit
will be returned to the depositor upon written request.
100. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509, 10510 and 10511.
§ 252-36 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-37
1:282
ARTICLE VI
Fees, Expenses and Recording Requirements
§ 252-38. Municipal review fee.
The fee required by this chapter is the municipal review fee. The municipal
review fee shall be established by the municipality from time to time by
resolution of the City Council to defray review costs incurred by the
municipality and the Municipal Engineer. The applicant shall pay all fees.
§ 252-39. Recording of plans and related documents.
A. Administrative and clerical costs.
B. Review of the SWM site plan and report by the municipality.
C. Preconstruction meetings.
D. Inspection of stormwater management facilities/BMPs and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities/BMPs and drainage improvements presented in the SWM site
plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed, or implemented, as described in the SWM site plan, shall
record the following documents in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Westmoreland County, within 90 days of approval of the SWM site plan
by the municipality:
(1) The SWM site plan.
(2) Operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement (Appendix A).101
(3) Easements under § 252-32.
(4) Riparian buffers.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
101. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 252-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-39
1:283

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 252-40. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the surface waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4 or discharges into waters of this commonwealth which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in Subsection C below; and
(2) Discharges authorized under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to a regulated small MS4 or to
the waters of this commonwealth:
(1) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.
(2) Discharges from potable water sources including waterline
flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain
detectable concentrations of total residual chlorine (TRC).
(3) Noncontaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance,
landscape drainage and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(4) Diverted stream flows and springs.
(5) Noncontaminated pumped groundwater and water from foundation
and footing drains and crawl space pumps.
(6) Noncontaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal
systems.
(7) Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where
cleaning agents are not utilized.
(8) Noncontaminated hydrostatic test water discharges, if such
discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.
D. In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 252-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-41
1:285
§ 252-41. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs wherever feasible.
§ 252-42. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures that were installed as a requirement of this
chapter without the written approval of the municipality.
§ 252-41 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-42
1:286
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 252-43. Right-of-entry.
§ 252-44. Inspections.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times, upon
any property within the municipality, to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operations and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of the municipality ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater BMP in the municipality such
devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
discharges from such stormwater BMP.
D. Unreasonable delay, as determined by an authorized representative of
the municipality, in allowing the municipality access to a stormwater
BMP is a violation of this chapter.
A. The PA DEP or its designees normally ensure compliance with any
permits issued, including those for stormwater management. In
addition to PA DEP compliance programs, the municipality or their
municipal assignee may inspect all phases of the installation of
temporary or permanent stormwater management facilities.
B. During any stage of earth disturbance activities, if the municipality
determines that the stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the
municipality shall revoke any existing permits or approvals until a
revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved as specified in this
chapter.
C. If required by the City of Lower Burrell, stormwater BMPs shall be
inspected by a professional engineer registered in Pennsylvania
according to the inspection schedule described on the SWM site plan
for each BMP.
(1) The municipality may require copies of the inspection reports, in a
form as stipulated by the municipality.
(2) If such inspections are not conducted or inspection reports not
submitted as scheduled, the municipality, or their designee, may
conduct such inspections and charge the owner appropriate fees.
Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
§ 252-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-44
1:287
§ 252-45. Notice of violation; failure to comply.
§ 252-46. Availability of plan at project site; adherence to plan.
§ 252-47. Violation deemed public nuisance.
§ 252-48. Enforcement.
(a) Prior to conducting such inspections, the municipality shall
inform the owner of its intent to conduct such inspections. The
owner shall be given 30 days to conduct required inspections
and submit the required inspection reports to the municipality.
A. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, an approved SWM site plan, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, the
municipality shall provide written notification of the violation. Such
notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a
time limit for correction of these violation(s).
B. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to
enforcement as set forth in this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is
proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the
terms and conditions of this chapter.
A. The approved SWM site plan shall be on file at the project site
throughout the duration of the construction activity. The municipality or
their designee may make periodic inspections during construction.
B. Adherence to approved SWM site plan.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity on any property except as
provided for by an approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure
required by the SWM site plan pursuant to this chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful to allow a property to remain in a condition that
does not conform to an approved SWM site plan.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 252-17.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate § 252-42 of this chapter.
§ 252-44 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-48
1:288
§ 252-49. Suspension and revocation.
§ 252-50. Violations and penalties.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the municipality.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the municipality may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $_____ for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties
shall be cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute an injunctive, mandamus, or
any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 252-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-51
1:289
§ 252-51. Enforcement remedies.
Where a violation of this chapter has occurred and remains uncured after
notice from the municipality or its designee, the municipality may institute
a legal action against the violator to restrain, prevent, abate, or enjoin the
violation of this chapter or any stormwater management plan together with
expenses and costs of suit, including attorney fees.
§ 252-52. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to the
provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas
in the county where the activity has taken place within 30 days of the
municipality's decision.
§ 252-51 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-52
1:290
ARTICLE IX
References
§ 252-53. References.
1. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology,
1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
2. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
3. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
4. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
5. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
§ 252-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-53
1:291
Chapter 256
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 154.
Sewers — See Ch. 238.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
260.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 285.
§ 252-53 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 252-53
1:292
ARTICLE I
Installation of Gaslines Underground
[Adopted 2-23-1962 by Ord. No. 6-1962]
§ 256-1. Gas lines to be underground.
All lines which carry natural gas or gaseous substances for any purpose in
the City of Lower Burrell shall be placed underground.
§ 256-2. Pipeline requirements. [Amended 5-6-2019 by Ord. No.
2-2019]
All pipelines and other parts of any underground system of any person, firm
or corporation in the City of Lower Burrell shall be not less than 2 1/2 feet
beneath the surface of the ground. Every person, firm or corporation who or
which shall remove or take up, displace or disturb any portion of the surface
of any street, highway, alley, sidewalk or trail shall first be required to apply
for a street opening permit and shall promptly renew or replace said portion
in as good condition as the same was before the work was commenced.
§ 256-3. Inspection and maintenance.
Every person, firm or corporation maintaining any underground pipeline in
accordance with the requirements of this article shall be responsible for the
regular inspection and maintenance of said line.
§ 256-4. Regulations.
All existing pipelines for the transportation of natural gas or other gaseous
substances within the City of Lower Burrell which do not comply with the
regulations set forth in this article shall, immediately after the date of
approval of this article, be removed and installed in compliance herewith.
§ 256-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
6-2016]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 256-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-5
1:293

ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 5-18-1977 by Ord. No. 7-1977; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 256-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUSINESS DAY — Any day not a Sunday or a national holiday.
BUSINESS HOURS — Hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any
business day.
CARTWAY — Portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
CORPORATION — Natural person, partnership, corporation, association, or
any other legal entity.
SIDEWALK — Portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral
lines of a cartway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by
pedestrians.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
a way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
TRAIL — A path, track or unpaved lane intended for use by pedestrians and
bicycles.[Added 5-6-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
§ 256-7. Responsibility for removal of snow and ice from sidewalks.
[Amended 5-6-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
Every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land fronting or
abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee,
or otherwise, shall remove and clear away or cause to be removed or
cleared away, snow and/or ice from a path of at least 36 inches in width
from so much of said sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on said commercial
and school buildings only or lot of land.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B hereof, snow and ice shall be
removed from sidewalks within 24 hours after the cessation of any fall
of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
B. In the event snow and/or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in
Subsection A hereof, cause enough sand or other abrasive to be put on
the sidewalk to make travel reasonably safe; and shall, as soon
thereafter as weather permits, cause to be cleared a path in said
sidewalk of at least 36 inches in width.
§ 256-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-8
1:295
§ 256-8. Responsibility for removal from roofs. [Amended 5-6-2019
by Ord. No. 2-2019]
Every person in charge or control of any commercial building or other
structure roofs overhanging public sidewalks, whether as owner, tenant,
occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall remove and clear away, or cause to
be removed and cleared away, any accumulation of snow and ice on said
building or other structure which is liable to fall on any sidewalk, roadway,
or other public way. Such work shall be completed within a reasonable time,
but not later than 24 hours after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet, or
freezing rain.
§ 256-9. Depositing of snow and ice restricted.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on or
immediately next to a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway, or loading
and unloading areas of a public transportation system, except that snow
and ice may be mounded by the City on public cartways incident to the
cleaning thereof or mounded on curbs incident to the clearing of sidewalks
in business districts.
§ 256-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-6-2019 by Ord. No.
2-2019]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City, and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted
by law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall
arise for each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this article
is found to exist and for each section of this article found to have been
violated. All fines and penalties collected for violations of this article shall
be paid to the City Treasurer. The initial determination of article violation
is hereby delegated to the City Administrator, the Police Department, the
Public Works/Park Director, the Code Official, the authorized designee of
the City Administrator, and to any other officer or agent that the City
Administrator or the City of Lower Burrell Council shall deem appropriate.
§ 256-8 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 256-10
1:296
ARTICLE III
Excavations
[Adopted 4-11-1988 by Ord. No. 2-1988]
§ 256-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, association or corporation applying for and
to whom a permit to make an excavation may be issued.
EXCAVATION — The digging of any trench or excavating through or under
the limits of any ordained or dedicated street in the City, or any public
sidewalk or trail, or the cutting into or opening and removal of any public
pavement surfaces within the City.[Amended 5-6-2019 by Ord. No.
2-2019]
§ 256-12. Permit required.
§ 256-13. Permit application. [Amended 5-6-2019 by Ord. No.
2-2019]
Application for an excavation permit shall be made to the City. Each
applicant shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer or Public Works
and Parks Director.
§ 256-14. Bond and financial security. [Amended 5-6-2019 by Ord.
No. 2-2019]
A. No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation within the
City without first obtaining a permit therefor.
B. No permit shall be granted to any applicant unless such applicant has
paid to the City any and all monies then due to the City for prior
excavations made or for any loss, damage or expense in any manner
occasioned by or arising from the opening of streets, alleys, sidewalks,
or trails of the City under prior permits. [Amended 5-6-2019 by Ord.
No. 2-2019]
A. No permit shall be issued under this article until such person, firm,
association or corporation shall have deposited and filed with the City
Administrator and/or Public Works/Parks Director an indemnity bond or
financial security, with approved corporate surety, in an amount of not
less than 110% of the estimated restoration cost of City street, highway,
alley, sidewalk, or trail to be affected, such bond or security to
guarantee against subsidence or damage of the City street, highway,
alley, sidewalk, or trail for a period of one year from the date of final
restoration of the street, highway, alley, sidewalk, or trail. Final
restoration must be completed within 30 days of backfilling unless
other arrangements are requested by the permittee, in writing, and
§ 256-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-14
1:297
§ 256-15. Permit fee. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 6-2016;
5-6-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
The applicant, prior to issuance of the permit, shall pay a permit fee, as
established from time to time by resolution of City Council, and actual cost
of review fees by the City Engineer.
§ 256-16. Refilling and surfacing. [Amended 9-13-1993 by Ord. No.
13-1993; 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010; 5-6-2019 by Ord. No.
2-2019]
Streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, and trails shall conform to the
construction drawings attached as prepared by the City Engineer.
approved by the City Engineer. Utility companies may complete final
restoration of multiple openings using the following schedule.
(1) Any and all excavations completed between October and March
must have final restoration completed in April.
(2) Any and all excavations completed between April and September
must have final restoration completed in October.
B. An annual bond for utilities may be requested by the City. Public
utilities will be permitted to post an annual bond with the City, at the
discretion of the Public Works/Parks Director and City Engineer. The
form and amount of the annual bond shall be determined by the Public
Works Foreman or City Engineer based on the amount, nature and
frequency of road openings and the permittee's prior experience.
C. In the event the Public Works/Parks Director, Working Foreman or City
Engineer determines that there has been default in the performance of
the work, it shall give written notice of the default to the permittee and
its corporate surety. The notice shall state the action which is to be
taken to correct the default, the estimated cost of the correction and
the time required for its completion. If a notice of default is issued, the
City may deny issuance of additional permits in a case where timely
correction of default was not performed.
A. All excavations shall be backfilled with dry, compactable material in
accordance with PennDOT specifications, Publication 408, latest
edition, and such material shall be thoroughly compacted by proper
tamping or rolling. The surface of the excavated area shall be restored
in accordance with the construction drawings in Appendix A or to its
original condition if greater than construction drawings.
B. Existing pavement which is removed during excavation shall be
removed for a distance of at least one foot beyond the outer limits of the
subgrade that is disturbed, to prevent settlement. The wearing course,
or top bituminous layer, shall be removed to the nearest joint or
pavement edge for the length of excavation as shown in attached
construction drawings.
§ 256-14 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 256-16
1:298
§ 256-17. Supervision and inspection. [Amended 5-6-2019 by Ord.
No. 2-2019]
All work shall be subject to supervision and inspection of the Public Works/
Parks Director, Working Foreman or the City Engineer, and shall be done to
his satisfaction and approval.
§ 256-18. Safety precautions.
The applicant shall provide such barriers, lighting devices and refill as
necessary to make the excavation safe at all times until the one-year bond
is released.
§ 256-19. Unlawful discharge. [Added 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 5-1993]
It is unlawful for any person to discharge or place or allow to be discharged
or placed any stones, gravel, mud, petroleum products, road salt, dirt, water
(other than incidental surface water) or other substances or other loose
debris from private roads, driveways or lands onto or into any City road, any
road for which the City has maintenance responsibilities or any City storm
sewer.
§ 256-20. Remedies. [Added 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 5-1993]
The City may require any activity under § 256-19 to be removed or remedied
within 24 hours after notice, by the owner or occupier of the property or
person responsible for the discharge or placement, in default of which the
City may cause the same to be done and collect the cost thereof from said
owner, occupier or responsible party, together with a 10% penalty in the
manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 256-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-8-1993 by Ord. No.
5-1993; 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 6-2016; 5-6-2019 by Ord. No.
2-2019]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, plus
costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City, and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment to
the extent permitted by law for the punishment of summary offenses. A
C. If the street or alley surface consists of bituminous surface treatment, it
shall be refilled in accordance with Subsection A, above, except the top
three inches at the surface shall be filled with bituminous "cold patch."
D. In all cases of Subsections A and B, the limits of repair work may be
extended by the City Engineer if it is determined that drainage
problems will result.
§ 256-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-21
1:299
separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a
violation of this article is found to exist and for each section of this article
found to have been violated. All fines and penalties collected for violations
of this article shall be paid to the City Treasurer.
§ 256-22. Additional remedies. [Added 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 5-1993]
The fines, penalties and remedies provided under this article are intended
to allow additional remedies to the City, and nothing contained herein shall
abridge, alter or limit rights of action or remedies available to the City in or
hereafter existing in law.
§ 256-21 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 256-22
1:300
ARTICLE IV
Road Bonding
[Adopted 5-9-1988 by Ord. No. 3-1988]
§ 256-23. General provisions.
A. Statement of findings. The City Council of the City of Lower Burrell
finds that inadequate regulation of highway weight restrictions, such as
those authorized under § 4902 of the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902)
by vehicles and combinations having a gross weight in excess of the
posted weight limit results in increased consumption of public assets
for restoration designed to support heavy truck loads. Consequently,
many are being badly damaged. A comprehensive program of posting
and bonding policies is needed to address this problem by requiring
heavy haulers to be financially responsible for excessive maintenance
on roads they use.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote the public health,
safety and welfare by minimizing the damages described in Subsection
A of this section by provisions designed to:
(1) Control accelerated maintenance of roadways due to frequent or
excessively heavy loads at their source by regulating the activities
which cause such problems.
(2) Utilize and preserve existing roadway structures and bridges in
such a way to reduce excessive maintenance.
(3) Cause heavy haulers to be financially responsible for excessive
maintenance through posting and bonding policies.
(4) Maintaining existing roadways and drainage structures in a
condition suitable to insure public health, safety and welfare.
(5) Preserve and restore carrying capacities to municipal roadways
and thereby maintain such roads for simultaneous use by both
passenger vehicles which are not subject to bonding and heavy
haulers.
C. Statutory authority. The City of Lower Burrell is empowered to regulate
these activities by the authority of §§ 4902 and 6103 of the Vehicle Code
(75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 4902 and 6103).
(1) The provisions of this chapter apply to bridges located on posted
roads but do not apply to bridges posted independently of these
roads.
(2) The posting authority for municipal roads in the City of Lower
Burrell is the City Council or their appointed representative.
D. Applicability.
§ 256-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-23
1:301
(1) Exemptions. All local traffic as defined in § 256-24 is exempt unless
it is determined by the posting authority they excessively damage
the road.
(2) Bond haulers responsibility. The hauler must pay for all excess
maintenance repair costs on the bonded section of road. The
company can choose from one of two options to repair road. They
include:
(a) The hauler or its contractor can make repairs to City specs.
(b) The posting authority or its contractor can repair the road and
bill the hauler for the work. The option in Subsection D(2)(a) is
preferred.
(c) If two or more haulers are using the same posted road, they
should determine how the responsibility for the road should be
split. One hauler should contact the other hauler and try to
mutually agree on sharing responsibility for bonding and
repairing of the road. If the haulers cannot come to a mutual
agreement, the posting authority will determine the relative
responsibility for each hauler. In either case, written
agreements will then be executed between the bonding
authority and each hauler.
(d) Recourse among haulers. One hauler should contact the other
hauler and try to mutually agree on sharing responsibility for
bonding and repairing of the road. If a hauler is unwilling to
share the responsibility and continues to haul on the road, the
City Engineer should be contacted. The City and the police are
responsible for enforcing the program and they will contact
any haulers committing possible violations.
(e) The hauler's truck may not exceed the established gross
weight and actual limits on the bonded highway because the
Vehicle Code authorizes the City to waive only the weight in
excess of restrictions. The regular gross and actual weight
laws must be observed.
(f) The regulations applies only to posted highways and to bridges
on posted highways unless the bridge has a posted limit of its
own. If a bridge has its own weight restrictions, a permit may
be issued separately in accordance with Chapter 191 of the
Department of Transportation Regulations. See Chapter 285,
Article III, for listing of weight limits on various streets.
E. Compatibility with other permit ordinance requirements. Permits and
approvals issued pursuant to this article do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance. If more
stringent requirements concerning regulation of weight limits are
§ 256-23 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 256-23
1:302
§ 256-24. Definitions.
The following words and terms when used in this article shall have the
following meaning unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
EXCESS MAINTENANCE — Maintenance or restoration or both, but not
betterment of the posted highway in excess of normal maintenance caused
by use of over-posted-weight vehicles. Excessive maintenance is
maintenance required due to heavy hauling in excess of usual and routine
activities. Normal maintenance activities include minor patching, cutting
shoulders and repairing worn-out pipes. Excess maintenance activities
include, but are not limited to, excessive patching and base repair, shaping
of shoulders that are pushed and heaved due to heavy hauling, and
replacement of crushed pipes. The existence of damage requiring excess
maintenance and the scope of that excess maintenance will be handled in
accordance with § 256-25B(3), Excessive maintenance agreement.
LOCAL TRAFFIC — The following shall be regarded as local traffic for the
purpose of this article:
NORMAL MAINTENANCE — Usual and typical activities necessary to
maintain a roadway, shoulders and drainage facilities in the state of repair
existing at the date of inspection prescribed in § 256-14B(6).
OVER-POSTED-WEIGHT VEHICLE — A vehicle or combination having a
gross weight in excess of the posted weight limit.
POSTED HIGHWAY — A roadway having a posted weight limit.
POSTED WEIGHT LIMIT — A restricted weight limit posted on a roadway
under authority of § 256-23.
POSTING AUTHORITY — The Mayor and Council of the City of Lower
Burrell or their designee.
§ 256-25. Road bonding regulations.
contained in another code, rule, act or ordinance, the more stringent
regulation shall apply.
A. Fire and emergency vehicles.
B. School buses.
Vehicles and combinations of governmental agencies and utilities or
other contractors engaged in construction or maintenance on a posted
roadway or in a location which can be reached only by a posted
roadway.
C.
Vehicles and combinations going to or coming from a residence,
commercial establishment or farm located on a posted roadway or
which can be reached only by a posted roadway.
D.
A. General requirements; local traffic.
§ 256-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-25
1:303
(1) General rule. Over-posted-weight local traffic may exceed posted
weight limits unless the posting authority determines that an overposted-
weight vehicle or vehicles being driven to or from a
particular destination or destinations are likely to damage the
highway.
(2) Vehicles determined likely to damage highway. If the posting
authority determines that one or more over-posted-weight vehicles
are likely to damage the highway, the posting authority will so
notify the registrants of the over-posted-weight vehicles or owners
of the destination or destinations, or both, and will also notify state
and/or local police, as applicable. After two business days following
delivery of the notice, or after five days following mailing of notice,
such over-posted-weight vehicles shall not exceed the posted
weight limits except in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection B of this section (relating to use under permit).
(3) Proof of local traffic status. The following types of documents will
constitute evidence that a vehicle is local traffic:
(a) A bill of lading, shipping order, or similar document which
shows a destination on the posted highway.
(b) Certification by the permittee or an official of a permittee
company on the company letterhead describing the local traffic
nature of the activity which the vehicle is engaged in.
B. Use under permit.
(1) General rule. No over-posted-weight vehicle, except local traffic
authorized under Subsection A(1) of this section (relating to local
traffic), shall be driven on a posted highway with a gross weight in
excess of the posted weight limit unless the posting authority has
issued a permit for the vehicle or vehicles in accordance with this
section.
(2) Type of permits. Types of permits shall include the following:
(a) A Type 1 permit authorizes use of a particular posted highway
or portion thereof by an over-posted-weight vehicle. It is valid
only when carried in the over-posted-weight vehicle.
(b) A Type 2 permit authorizes use of a particular posted highway
or portion thereof by any number of over-posted-weight
vehicles being driven to or from a common destination.
[1] Documents of the type set forth in Subsection A(3) of this
section (relating to local traffic) will constitute evidence of
a vehicle's destination.
[2] A Type 2 permit will be issued only upon request of the
permittee and, if the posting authority determines that it is
not feasible to issue a Type 1 permit for each vehicle, for
§ 256-25 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 256-25
1:304
example, most over-posted-weight vehicles hauling to and
from the place of business of the permittee belong to or
are hauling under contract with customers or suppliers of
the permittee.
(c) A Type 3 permit authorizes use of a number of specified posted
highways or portions thereof by an over-posted-weight vehicle.
[1] A Type 3 permit is valid only when carried in the overposted-
weight vehicle.
[2] A Type 3 permit is issued only if the posting authority
determines that damage to the posted highway covered by
the permit will be minimal because of the limited number
of moves by over-posted-weight vehicles and short-term
use of the highways anticipated by the permittee.
(3) Excess maintenance agreement. Issuance of a permit to exceed a
posted weight limit or limits will be conditioned on the agreement
by the permittee to accept financial responsibility for excess
maintenance of the posted highway or portion thereof to be used by
the permittee. The agreement may provide for the work to be
performed by the posting authority or its contractor or by the
permittee or its contractor, except that in the case of self-bonded
agreement, the City will require that all work be performed by the
permittee or its contractor. The bonding agreement shall be
executed after the posting authority and the hauler conduct an onsite
inspection of the posted roadway. During this inspection,
municipal officials and representatives from the hauling company
will complete a detailed report documenting the exact condition of
the road. In many cases, photographs will also be taken to
substantiate the report. Copies of the inspection report and
photographs will be made available to the hauler. A similar
inspection will be made following the hauling activity. In the event
of a disagreement between haulers and the City relative to scope
and extent of damages requiring excess maintenance or the quality
of repair work, the decision of the posting authority will govern.
The City will continue to be responsible for normal maintenance
work.
(4) Security. Except as provided in Subsection B(4)(d) of this section,
the permittee shall be required to provide security in favor of the
posting authority to assure compliance with the maintenance
construction agreement.
(a) Amount of security. Amount of security shall be as follows:
[1] Type 1 and 2 permits. Type 1 and Type 2 permits shall
include:
§ 256-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-25
1:305
[a] Six thousand dollars per linear mile for unpaved
highways to be maintained at a level consistent with
the type of highway.
[b] Twelve thousand five hundred dollars per linear mile
for paved highways to be maintained at a level
consistent with the type of highway.
[c] Fifty thousand dollars per linear mile for any highway
which the posting authority allows to be maintained
below a level consistent with the type of highway.
[2] Schedule of bonding amounts. The City will from time to
time, but not more often than annually, publish a revised
schedule of bonding amounts based on increased or
decreased maintenance costs.
(b) Form of security. The security may be in the form of a
performance bond with surety by a company authorized to do
business in the commonwealth; or, at the option of the
permittee, in the form of a certified or cashier's check, or
irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the posting authority; or
in some other form of security acceptable to the posting
authority.
(c) Additional security. When the amount of damage in excess of
normal maintenance to a posted highway is estimated by the
posting authority to constitute 75% or more of the amount of
the security, the posting authority may require the highway to
be maintained or reconstructed within 30 days unless the
permittee agrees to provide such additional security as the
posting authority shall determine.
(d) Self-bonding. The posting authority may authorize self-bonding
if it determines, on the basis of the financial ability of the
permittee, that it is unlikely that the posting authority will be
unable to collect a judgement rendered against the permittee
for failure to comply with the maintenance agreement.
[1] The posting authority may require corporate officers and
stockholders and their spouses to execute a self-bond, if
the financial ability of a corporation is insufficient in itself
to justify self-bonding.
[2] The posting authority may require the permittee to
execute liens on real or personal property, or both, as a
condition for authorizing self-bonding.
[3] In order to be considered for self-bonding by the posting
authority, a permittee shall file a contractor's financial
statement. The financial statement shall be updated
annually, and within 30 days of any request for an update.
§ 256-25 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 256-25
1:306
(5) Multiple permittees. Multiple permittees shall conform with the
following:
(a) Agreement to share excess maintenance responsibility. If two
or more persons wish to obtain Type 1 or Type 2 permits to
operate over-posted-weight vehicles on the same posted
highway or portion thereof, they may agree among themselves
as to their relative responsibility for the cost of themselves as
to their relative responsibility for the cost of excess
maintenance and the posting authority will enter into
agreements and accept security on the basis of the agreed
shares.
(b) Determination by posting authority. If multiple applicants for
Type 1 and Type 2 permits cannot agree on their relative
responsibility, the posting authority will determine their
relative shares, and will enter into agreements with and accept
security from any person agreeing to such determination.
(c) Subsequent permit applicants. Subsection B(5)(a) and (b) of
this subsection shall apply even if one or more persons have
already entered into a Type 1 or Type 2 permit agreement and
posted security when another person expresses the desire to
obtain a Type 1 or Type 2 permit to operate over-posted-weight
vehicles on the same posted highway.
(6) Determination of highway condition. Determination of highway
condition shall consist of the following:
(a) Inspection. Representatives of the posting authority and of the
permittee or permittees will make an on-site inspection of the
posted highway immediately before issuance of each permit in
order to determine its condition.
(b) Reinspection. The posted highway will be reinspected:
[1] Upon issuance of any new permit.
[2] From time to time and the posting authority determines
repairs may be required.
[3] Upon termination of any permit, in order to determine the
amount of damage for which the permittee or permittees
are responsible.
(c) Type 3 permits. Before and after using a Type 3 permit on any
posted highway specified in the permit, the representatives of
the permittee and the posting authority will make an on-site
inspection to determine the relative condition of the highway
before and after the use and to assess any excess maintenance
caused by the permittee.
§ 256-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-25
1:307
§ 256-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 6-2016; 5-6-2019 by Ord. No. 2-2019]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof,
upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District
Judge in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, plus costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the City, and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by
law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise
for each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this article is found
to exist and for each section of this article found to have been violated. All
fines and penalties collected for violations of this article shall be paid to the
City Treasurer.
(d) Notification of inspections and reinspections. All Type 1 and
Type 2 permittees on a posted highway or portion thereof will
be notified of all inspections and reinspections on the highway
or portion, any may participate in the inspections and
reinspections.
(e) Inspection costs. The inspection costs of the posting authority
shall be paid by the permittee or permittees. Inspection costs
related to a Citywide Type 3 permit will be paid solely by the
Type 3 permittee.
(7) Administrative fees. The posting authority will charge a fee as
established from time to time by resolution of City Council for
issuance of each permit. [Amended 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
6-2016]
§ 256-25 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 256-26
1:308
Chapter 260
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 140.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 154.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 170.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 252.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 256-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-26
1:309

ARTICLE I
Purpose and Jurisdiction
§ 260-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the resolution establishing the Lower Burrell subdivision
regulations is to promote efficient, logical, orderly and harmonious future
development in the City of Lower Burrell, and to further promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the City, and finally to assure the integration
of all subdivision plans into the overall elements of the Lower Burrell
Comprehensive Master Plan.
§ 260-2. Jurisdiction.
A. The Lower Burrell Planning Commission shall have jurisdiction and
control of the subdivision of land located within the City limits with
approval of Council. Every plan, plot and replot of land laid out in
building lots, and the streets, highways, alleys or other portions of the
same intended to be dedicated to public use or use by the purchasers or
owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, located within the
City limits, shall be submitted to the Planning Commission, and
approved by it, before same shall be recorded.
B. Before the approval of a plot by the Planning Commission, such
Commission shall transmit a copy of the proposed plot to the County
Planning Department, and the Department shall make a report thereon
to such local authority. Pending the receipt and consideration of such
report, such local authority shall defer action thereon, but if such report
is not received by the local authority within 45 days from the
submission of the plot to the County Planning Department, or within
such further time as may be agreed upon by the local authorities, such
local authority may proceed to final action thereon.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-2
1:311

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 260-3. Word usage.
As used in these subdivision regulations, words in the singular include
the plural and those in the plural include the singular; the word "may" is
permissive; the words "shall" and "will" are mandatory.
§ 260-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLEY — A minor public way, having a right-of-way width between property
lines of 20 feet, for secondary service access to the back or side of
properties otherwise abutting on a street.
BLOCK — An area bounded by existing or proposed streets. Property
abutting on one side of a street, and lying between the two nearest
intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest intersecting or intercepting
street and railroad right-of-way, or other definite physical or natural barrier.
BUILDING — Any structure, or part thereof, affixed to the land.
BUILDING OR SETBACK LINE — A line parallel to a street or alley between
which line and the street right-of-way line no buildings or structure may
project.
CITY — The City of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of street center lines.
COMMISSION — The Lower Burrell Planning Commission.
COMPLETION GUARANTEE — A deposit of cash, bond, certified check or
negotiable securities and an agreement to the effect that the subdivider will
install required improvements.
CROSSWALK — A public right-of-way having a width of 10 feet or more
within a block intended for pedestrian use and from which motor vehicles
are excluded.
COUNTY — Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
CUL-DE-SAC — A dead-end street having a suitable turnaround.
DEVELOPMENT — The act, process or state of erecting all structures
except farm dwellings and structures.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
§ 260-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-4
1:313
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A single structure intended for occupancy
by two or more families, including row houses, apartment buildings and
apartment-hotels.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or part of a structure intended for
occupancy by a single family.
EASEMENT — A grant by the owner of land for the use by others, including
the public.
FILING, PLAT — A plat shall be deemed to be filed with the Planning
Commission when it has been received and properly receipted by the
Commission secretary. The secretary may refuse to receive a plat if the
procedures under these Subdivision Regulations or Planning Act 247102
have not been fully observed. The secretary shall transmit plats to the
official bodies concerned.
IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC — Any or all of the following: grading, paving,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water lines, sanitary and storm sewer lines and
structures, drainage channels and structures, curb returns, sidewalk and
driveway entrances within rights-of-way, guard rails, traffic signals and
devices, retaining walls, sodding and planting.
LOT — A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit
for transfer or ownership or for development or both. In determining the
area of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a street, alley or crosswalk may
be included.
LOT DEPTH — The average dimension between front and rear property
lines and measured perpendicular to or along the radius of the street rightof-
way line.
LOT WIDTH — The average dimension between side property lines and
measured parallel to the street right-of-way line or tangent line.
OWNER — Any person or legal entity having a proprietary interest in the
land to be subdivided but not including a mortgagee, lienor, lessee or
contract purchaser.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, unincorporated association, firm or
partnership.
PLAT, FINAL — The final map of the subdivision which is filed for Planning
Commission and Council approval and which, if approved, shall be filed with
the County Recorder of Deeds.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision which is filed for Planning Commission consideration.
PUBLIC — Open to public use, whether or not public ownership is involved.
RESIDENTIAL AREA, HIGH-DENSITY — A tract of land in which there is an
average of one or more dwelling units per 10,000 square feet of lot area.
102. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 260-4 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 260-4
1:314
RESIDENTIAL AREA, LOW-DENSITY — A tract of land in which there is an
average of less than one dwelling per 10,000 square feet of lot area.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as a street, alley, crosswalk or
other public purpose.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The maximum distance of unobstructed vision, in a
horizontal or vertical plane, along a street from a vehicle located at any
given point on the street which shall take into account the visibility over
a crest vertical curve and the extent of headlight illumination across a sag
vertical curve.
STREET — A right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to the
abutting property. "Street" may be used for pedestrian and vehicular traffic,
and may be so designated as a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard,
road, avenue, lane, drive, place or other appropriate name so affixed.
MAJOR STREET — A street intended for large volumes of traffic.
MINOR STREET — A street intended primarily to provide access to abutting
residential properties. Certain minor streets may be culs-de-sac.
WATERCOURSE — A channel, creek, ditch, drain, dry run, spring or stream.
THOROUGHFARE PLAN — The part of the Master Plan, now adopted,
which sets forth the general location, alignment and dimensions, and the
identification, and classification of existing and proposed public streets,
highways and other thoroughfares.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person who undertakes the subdivision of land as
defined below. The subdivider may be the owner of the authorized agent of
the owner of the land to be subdivided.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a single lot, tract or parcel of land into
three or more lots, including all changes in street or lot lines for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for
building development. "Subdivision" also includes resubdivision of land,
whether by lots or by metes and bounds.
§ 260-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-4
1:315

ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 260-5. Granting of variances.
§ 260-6. Severability.
Should any article, section or part of a section of these Subdivision
Regulations be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the Subdivision Regulations as a
whole or of any other part thereof.
§ 260-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which being the owner
or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall lay out,
construct, open or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water
main or other improvements for public use, travel or other purposes or
for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, or who
sells, transfers or agrees or enters into an agreement to sell any land in a
subdivision or land development whether by reference to or by other use
of a plat of such subdivision or land development or erect any building
thereon, unless and until a final plat has been prepared in full compliance
with the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations and has been recorded
as provided herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and such person,
or the members of such partnership, or the officers of such corporation,
or the agent of any of them, responsible for such violation pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000 per lot or parcel or per dwelling within each lot or parcel.
The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt
the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the remedies herein
provided.
A. The Planning Commission may grant a variance to a subdivider from
the terms of these Subdivision Regulations by the affirmative vote of 2/3
of the Commissioners whenever, owing to special conditions, the literal
enforcement of the terms of these Subdivision Regulations will result in
serious practical difficulty, provided that such variance will not have the
effect of circumventing the intent and purpose of these regulations and
that substantial justice may be done.
B. In granting a variance, the Planning Commission may impose such
conditions on the subdivider that will in its judgment secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied
or modified.
§ 260-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-7
1:317

ARTICLE IV
Procedure for Plat Approval
§ 260-8. Preliminary considerations.
§ 260-9. Presenting application.
A person or corporation desiring approval of a plat of a subdivision of
any land lying within the jurisdiction of the Planning Commission shall
submit a written application to the Commission at least 10 days prior to the
A. Regulatory.
(1) Grading; recording deeds. No person, firm or corporation
proposing to make or having made a subdivision within the area of
jurisdiction of these Subdivision Regulations shall proceed with any
grading for roads or alleys before obtaining from the Planning
Commission the approval of the preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision, and no deeds shall be recorded for lots in any
subdivision, before obtaining from the Commission the approval of
the final plat of the proposed subdivision.
(2) Conformity with master plan. The layout of the proposed
subdivision shall be in general conformity with the Master Plan of
the City.
(3) Access; drainage; geology. No land shall be subdivided for
residential use:
(a) Unless adequate access to the land over adequate streets or
thoroughfares exists or will be provided by the subdivider; or
(b) If such land is considered by the Planning Commission to be
unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or improper
drainage, objectionable earth and rock formation, topography
or any other feature harmful to the health and safety of
possible residents and the community as a whole.
B. Advisory. In order to make the most of the opportunities related to the
subdivision and to conserve time, effort and expense, the owner or
subdivider should consult with the Planning Commission, the Engineer
and other relevant public officials prior to the preparation of the
tentative plan of the subdivision; this informal review should prevent
unnecessary and costly revisions. The Master Plan should be reviewed
to determine how the proposed subdivision will fit into that plan.
Requirements for thoroughfares, school and recreational sites;
shopping centers, community facilities; sanitation, water supply and
drainage and relationship to other developments, existing and
proposed, in the vicinity, should be determined in advance of the
preparation of the subdivision plat. A thorough estimate of the situation
will result in sound decisions with respect to the form, character and
extent of the proposed subdivision.
§ 260-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-9
1:319
date of a regular or special Commission meeting. Such application shall be
accompanied by the following information and plans:
A. A location map showing.
(1) Subdivision name and location.
(2) Major existing thoroughfares related to the subdivision, including
the distance therefrom.
(3) Title, graphic scale, north point and date. The location map need
not be a special drawing. The data may be shown by notations on
available maps, or by small sketch on the preliminary plan.
B. A site map showing:
(1) A land inspection sketch showing terrain features, wooded areas,
buildings and other natural or artificial features which would affect
the plan of the subdivision.
(2) Tract boundary lines, showing dimensions, bearings and corners.
(3) Streets and rights-of-way, on or adjoining the site, including
dedicated widths, roadway widths, approximate gradients, types
and widths of pavements, curbs, sidewalks and other pertinent
data.
(4) Easements: location, widths and purposes.
(5) Utilities, including sanitary and storm sewers, other drainage
facilities; water lines; gas mains; electric utilities and other
facilities. Size or capacity of each should be shown and the
locations of or distance of each existing utility indicated.
(6) Existing platting of adjacent land: 500 feet of all adjacent area to be
shown and areas subject to periodic overflow of flood or
stormwaters.
(7) Other features or conditions which would affect the subdivision
favorably or adversely.
(8) Title, graphic scale, North point and data.
C. Preliminary plat. A preliminary plat of the subdivision, drawn to scale of
50 feet to one inch or 100 feet to one inch. The preliminary plat shall be
18 inches by 22 1/2 inches in size, or made in multiples of this size and
cut along match lines, and shall show:
(1) Proposed names of the subdivision.
(2) Names and addresses of owner and subdivider and the City
planner, land planning consultant, engineer or surveyor who
prepared the plan.
§ 260-9 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 260-9
1:320
§ 260-10. Preliminary plat approval.
After an application for approval of a preliminary plat of a subdivision,
together with five copies of all maps and data, has been filed, the Planning
Commission will send one copy each to the County Planning Department
and the State Department of Health. Upon receipt of recommendations
from the County Planning Department and the Health Department, if the
same has been received within a period of 45 days of such transmittal, or
such reasonable further time as may be requested by the County Planning
Department or Health Department, the Commission shall review the
application and shall approve the plat proposed in the application subject
to its receipt of an acceptable final plat, as described in these Subdivision
Regulations or shall conditionally approve or disapprove the plat, setting
(3) Street pattern, showing the names (which, when not extensions of
existing streets, shall not duplicate other names of streets in the
City) and widths of rights-of-way of streets, and widths of
easements or alleys.
(4) Layout of lots, showing dimensions and numbers.
(5) Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds or other public, semipublic or community
purposes.
(6) Key plan, legend and notes.
(7) Building setback or front yard lines.
(8) Graphic scale north point and date.
Note: The information called for in Subsections B and C hereof
may be submitted as one or two maps or plans.
D. Engineering plans showing:
(1) Profiles, typical cross-sections and specifications for proposed
street improvements.
(2) Profiles and other explanatory data concerning the installation of
sanitary and storm sewerage systems and water distribution
systems.
E. Protective covenants. A description of the protective covenants or
private restrictions to be incorporated in the subdivision plat.
F. Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a certified check or
money order for $10 plus $0.25 for each lot in the proposed subdivision,
with a minimum total charge of $15 to cover the cost of checking and
verifying the proposed plat, and such amount shall be deposited in the
escrow fund of the Planning Commission under the General Fund
account of the City.
§ 260-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-10
1:321
forth its reasons in its own records and providing the applicant with a copy.
If it is disapproved, the subdivider shall submit a new preliminary plat.
§ 260-11. Final plat considerations.
The final plat shall meet the following specifications:
A. The plat may include all or only a part of the plat as proposed in the
application.
B. The original drawing of the plat of the subdivision shall be 18 inches by
22 1/2 inches, or made in multiples of this size and cut along match
lines. It shall be drawn at a scale of 50 or 100 feet to the inch. Four
black or blue line prints and one reproducible print shall be submitted
with the original final plat or in order to conform to modern drafting
and reproduction methods, lettering may be applied to the final plat in a
manner which will permit the plat to be reproduced by film, litholoid or
other suitable photographic process at the designated scale, and in
such case, four black line prints and two reproducible prints shall be
submitted.
C. The following basic information shall be shown:
(1) Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and angles which
provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of not more than
one foot in 5,000 feet.
(2) Accurate distances and directions to the nearest established street
corners or official monuments. Reference corners shall be
accurately described on the plan.
(3) Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets intersecting
the boundaries of the tract.
(4) Source of title to the land as shown by the books of the County
Recorder.
(5) Street names.
(6) Complete curve date for all curves included in the plan.
(7) Street lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of
feet, with angles to the nearest 10 seconds to street, alley and lot
lines.
(8) Lot numbers and dimensions.
(9) Easements for utilities and any limitations on such easements.
(10) Accurate dimensions of any property to be dedicated or reserved
for public, semipublic or community use.
(11) Location, type, material and size of all monuments and lot markers.
§ 260-10 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 260-11
1:322
§ 260-12. Final plat approval.
(12) Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become
covenants in the deeds for lots.
(13) Name of the subdivision.
(14) Name and address of the owner and subdivider.
(15) North point, graphic scale and date.
(16) Certification by a registered professional engineer or registered
land surveyor.
(17) Certificate of dedication of streets and other public property.
(18) Certificate for approval by the Planning Commission.
(19) Front yard setback lines, the minimum as fixed by the applicable
Zoning Ordinance, and any other setback or street lines established
by these Subdivision Regulations, or by public authority and those
specifications in the deed restrictions.
D. In submitting the final plat to the Planning Commission, it shall be
accompanied by one of the following:
(1) A certificate that all improvements and installations to the
subdivision required in corresponding sections of these Subdivision
Regulations have been made or installed in accordance with
specifications; or
(2) A bond which shall:
(a) Run to the proper authority of the City.
(b) Be in an amount determined by the Commission to be sufficient
to complete the improvements and installations in compliance
with these Subdivision Regulations.
(c) Be with surety satisfactory to the Commission.
(d) Specify the time for the completion of the improvements and
installations.
A. Upon a finding by the Planning Commission that the final plat submitted
is in accordance with the requirements of these Subdivision
Regulations, it shall affix the Commission's seal upon the plat together
with the certifying signature of its Chairman.
B. The approval of the final plat by the Commission shall be deemed an
acceptance of the proposed dedication, but shall not impose any duty
upon the City concerning maintenance or improvement of any such
dedicated streets, highways, alleys or other portions of the same, until
the City has made actual appropriation of the same by entry, use or
§ 260-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-12
1:323
§ 260-13. Commission seal and signatures.
All plans and maps submitted to the Planning Commission under these
Subdivision Regulations shall have the Planning Commission seal and
approval affixed thereto and shall be properly signed by the Planning
Commission members in space provided in the lower left-hand corner
before transmission of the documents to any other agencies.
improvement, and shall have accepted such streets, etc., as part of the
City road system, in accordance with existing law.
C. Immediately upon approval of a subdivision, the subdivider shall
present the subdivision as approved by the Commission, to the
Recorder of Deeds of the County, who shall file the original in a book
and shall keep the same accessible to the public.
§ 260-12 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 260-13
1:324
ARTICLE V
Design Standards and Improvements
§ 260-14. General conditions.
A. In subdividing land, it shall be done in a manner that will not have the
effect of debarring adjacent property from access to the streets and
ways of the allotment.
B. All restrictions affecting the use of the property shall be detailed upon
the plan, unless the same are covered by existing municipal zoning
ordinances.
C. In districts where desirable or expedient, adequate public recreation
areas shall be provided and dedicated as such.
D. Easements for utilities; sewer system connections.
(1) Where in the judgment of the Planning Commission it is desirable
or expedient, adequate easements or dedications for public service
utilities shall be provided for sewer, water, electric power and gas
lines and similar services; and no structure or obstruction of any
kind shall be placed or allowed to be placed where it will interfere
in any way with an easement.
(2) Where possible and feasible, easements for utilities shall be
provided with a minimum width of 15 feet.
(3) Within that portion of the City having the municipal sewer system
reasonably accessible to the subdivision, the subdivider shall
provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system,
including collector lines, to be connected to the City/Authority
sanitary sewer system, and it must become a public system,
constructed in accordance with the sewage manual procedures and
requirements, with inspection by and approved by the Lower
Burrell Municipal Authority. Collector lines/branches or whatever
term is applied to them (e.g., multiple laterals connected to a
private sanitary sewage collection line, which is then tapped into
the public sanitary sewage collection facilities) is not permitted.
Each residential unit must be individually tapped into the public
sanitary sewage facilities. This does not apply to "high-rise"
buildings or "garden apartments" style buildings or whatever
vernacular term is applied to them. Within that portion of the City
not having the municipal sewer system or where it is not physically
possible or feasible for the subdivider to connect to this system, an
approved private sewage disposal system such as a septic tank and
tile absorption fields shall be provided with minimum standards as
established and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection. [Amended 9-10-2012 by Ord. No.
1-2012]
§ 260-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-14
1:325
§ 260-15. Street design and width.103
Streets and ways, etc., shall meet the following standards:
(4) The minimum diameter of any sewer pipe shall be eight inches.
Storm sewers shall not be connected with sanitary sewers.
A. Streets and ways already established will be continued at not less than
the existing width.
B. Streets and ways, alleys, etc., already planned, though not established,
will be continued, at not less than the width as planned.
C. Streets, ways, alleys, etc., will have grades of not less than 1/2% nor
more than 10%; except that grades in excess of 10% may be approved
at a hearing before the Planning Commissioners, where it is made clear
that no traffic hazard is, or will be created thereby.
D. Dead-end streets shall be permitted when it is clear that through traffic
at such a street end is not essential to the street system in the district,
and under such conditions, a dead-end street must have a circular rightof-
way (cul-de-sac) with adequate turning space for vehicles with a
minimum diameter of 100 feet.
E. The center lines of streets shall intersect as nearly at right angles as
possible.
F. Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided.
G. Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land so as to
produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.
H. No street in a subdivision, plot or replot of land shall have a width of
less than 50 feet.
I. When subdivisions, plots or replots abut on county or state highways, or
the aforesaid highways run through the property to be subdivided, a
minimum right-of-way of 60 feet will be required for all such highways
included in the major highway system, as approved by the Planning
Commission.
J. A minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet will be required for all City
roads that abut or run through a subdivision.
K. No ways or lanes will be permitted to have a width of less than 20 feet.
L. Alleys shall ordinarily not be provided in residential districts but shall
be included in commercial and industrial areas where they are
necessary for loading and unloading or access purposes, and where
plotted, they shall be at least 20 feet in width.
103. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1-2010, adopted 5-10-2010, stated that this section may be
amended from time to time by resolution. Said ordinance also ratified a resolution passed
10-9-1969, which added Subsection L to this section.
§ 260-14 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 260-16
1:326
§ 260-16. Minimum street paving requirements. [Amended
5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010104]
§ 260-17. Blocks.
Blocks in subdivisions shall meet the following standards:
§ 260-18. Lots in R-1 District.
Lots in subdivisions shall meet the following standards:
A. Cartway widths.
(1) Sixty feet right-of-way: minimum 30 feet cartway.
(2) Fifty feet right-of-way: minimum 24 feet cartway.
B. Base, wearing surface, crown and curb shall conform with the
Construction Standards for Minor Access Streets and Major Streets set
forth in Appendix A as prepared by the City Engineer, Alpha
Engineering Company.105
A. All blocks of lots in a subdivision shall ordinarily not exceed 1, 200 feet
in length.
B. Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth except where an interior street parallels a limited
access highway or arterial street, or except where it is adjacent to a
railroad, creek or some other natural barrier.
A. All lots shall abut on a street.
B. Lot boundary lines shall be perpendicular to, parallel to, or concentric
with street lines, as the case may be, except where otherwise allowed
by the Planning Commission because it is desirable or expedient.
C. Lots shall be at least 70 feet wide and shall contain a minimum area of
not less than 10,000 square feet, except where topographic conditions
make a change desirable.
D. In a subdivision, a minimum building line of 30 feet will be required on a
highway, street, lane, etc., with a fifty-foot right-of-way, and 40 feet will
be required on a highway, street, lane, etc., with a sixty-foot right-ofway,
and the building line shall be established from the required
minimum right-of-way (or side line) of all present or proposed, streets,
roads or ways, etc.
E. Corner lots shall, in addition to the above required building line,
provide a building line parallel to the existing or proposed side street of
104. Editor's Note: This ordinance further stated that this section may be amended from time
to time by resolution. Said ordinance also ratified a resolution passed 10-9-1969, which
added Subsection L to this section.
105. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 260-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-18
1:327
§ 260-19. Monuments and markers.
Monuments and markers:
§ 260-20. Water.
The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water main
supply system which shall be connected to a municipal water supply, or a
community water supply approved by the engineer and the Pennsylvania
State Department of Environmental Protection with satisfactory provision
for the maintenance thereof; except that when such municipal or
community water supply is not available, the subdivider shall provide an
individual water supply on each lot in the subdivision in accordance with
minimum standards approved by the Pennsylvania State Department of
Environmental Protection. The plans for the installation of a water main
supply system shall be prepared by the subdivider with the cooperation of
the applicable water utility company and approved by the Engineer. Upon
the completion of the water supply installation, one copy each of the plans
for such system as built shall be filed with the Planning Commission and the
City.
not less than 30 feet. This being the case, corner residential lots shall
be wider than interior lots to permit appropriate setbacks from both
streets.
F. Double-frontage lots shall not be plotted, except where desired along
arterial limited access highways or streets; lots may face on an interior
street and back on such thoroughfares or other prevailable natural
barriers.
A. Shall be placed so that the scored or marked point shall coincide
exactly with the intersection of lines to be marked, and shall be set so
that the top of the monument or marker is level with the surface of the
surrounding ground.
B. Monuments shall be set at the intersection of all lines forming angles in
the boundary of the subdivision.
C. Markers shall be set at the beginning and ending of all curves along
street property lines; at all points where lot lines intersect curves,
either front or rear; at all angles in property lines of lots; and at all
other lot corners.
D. Monuments shall be of concrete or stone with a minimum size of six
inches by six inches by 30 inches, and shall be marked on top with a
copper dowel. Markers shall consist of iron pipes or iron or steel bars at
least 15 inches long, and not less than 1/2 inch in diameter.
E. Any monuments or markers that are removed shall be replaced by a
competent engineer at the expense of the person removing them.
§ 260-18 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 260-20
1:328
Chapter 266
TAXATION
§ 260-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-20
1:329

ARTICLE I
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 5-19-1961 by Ord. No. 10-1961; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 266-1. Authority for enactment.
This article is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L.
1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania.
§ 266-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
RESIDENT — Every adult 18 years of age or older who lives within the City.
§ 266-3. Imposition of tax.
Every resident shall pay $5 for the present calendar year and each year
hereafter.
§ 266-4. Collection.
All taxes, interests, costs and penalties imposed by this article shall be
collected by the City Tax Collector.
§ 266-5. Violations and penalties.
Any resident or inhabitant who fails or refuses to pay the tax or to render
accurate information to an Assessor concerning his residence or age shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days.
§ 266-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-5
1:331

ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 11-8-1968 by Ord. No. 7-1968; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 266-6. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance" of the
City of Lower Burrell.
§ 266-7. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the City,
regardless of where the documents making the transfer are made, executed
or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such transfer took place, as
authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-C
et seq.
§ 266-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CITY — The City of Lower Burrell.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title of
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 266-7.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
§ 266-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-8
1:333
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation, whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both. The term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this City, including
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 266-8 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-8
1:334
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consist of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against real estate;
provided, that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
D.
§ 266-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-8
1:335
§ 266-9. Imposition of tax; interest.
§ 266-10. Exempt parties.
The United States, the Commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 266-11. Excluded transactions.
The tax imposed by § 266-9 shall not be imposed upon:
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer, then the tax levied by the City Council under the authority of
that Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax exists, except
as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and such 1/2 shall
become effective without any action on the part of the City Council;
provided, however, that the City and any other political subdivision
which impose such tax on the same person or transfer may agree that,
instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein
provided, they will impose respectively different rates, the total of
which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted under "The Local
Tax Enabling Act."
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
§ 266-8 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-11
1:336
A. A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed or confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body
of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time of
condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made within one year from
the date of condemnation.
B. A document which the City is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
C. A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school district or
county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau
sale.
D. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or
limit existing record legal title or interest.
E. A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of
property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
covenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value
than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
F. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided
the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired
by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the
final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of such
child, between brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister, and
between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such
grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one
year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
G. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by
testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
H. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt
if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the
Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of the trust instrument that
clearly identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
I. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
§ 266-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-11
1:337
J. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
K. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party where, if the
agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under
this article.
L. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by
the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal, there is a
rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of the grantee
in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from
taxation under this section.
M. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a
corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except
where the department reasonably determines that the primary intent
for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax
imposed by this article.
N. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record
in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the
association has been held by the grantee for more than two years.
O. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a
nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
P. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: the grantee shall
directly use such real estate for the primary purpose of manufacturing,
fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing, research and
development, transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and the agency or
authority has the full ownership interest in the real estate transferred.
Q. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage,
unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
R. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons
holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being
or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
S. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 [68A Stat.
§ 266-11 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-11
1:338
§ 266-12. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 266-11, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this section,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders and shareholders.
§ 266-13. Acquired company.
3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or
open space opportunities.
T. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly
owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
U. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
V. A transaction wherein the tax is $1 or less.
W. Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof. In order to exercise any exclusion
provided in this section, the true, full and complete value of the transfer
shall be shown on the statement of value. A copy of the Pennsylvania
Realty Transfer Tax Statement of Value may be submitted for this
purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement
of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document
is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
§ 266-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-13
1:339
§ 266-14. Credits against tax.
§ 266-15. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 266-16. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or
other officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of
the first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as a consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of the tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 266-13 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-16
1:340
sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser
shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 266-17. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 266-18. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 266-19. Civil penalties.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to City based on
a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax, without
compensation from the City.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of the taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the tenth of each month, the recorder shall pay over to the
City all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission shall be paid to
the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the recorder shall rerecord the deed or
record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the state
and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 266-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-19
1:341
§ 266-20. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the City, which lands, tenements,
hereditaments or interest therein, are described in or conveyed by or
transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed
and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the tax under
this article is due and payable, and continue until discharged by payment, or
in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is authorized to file a municipal
or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Westmoreland County, in
accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 266-21. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 266-22. Regulations.
The Recorder of Deeds of Westmoreland County is charged with
enforcement and collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and
enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax.
The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
A. If any part of any underpayment of taxes imposed by this article is due
to fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 266-19 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-22
1:342
ARTICLE III
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 5-18-1977 by Ord. No. 5-1977]
§ 266-23. Incorporation of statute.
The provisions of § 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act of December 31,
1965 (P.L. 1257), its supplements and amendments (53 P.S. § 6913), are
incorporated herein by reference, except where hereinafter specifically
otherwise provided. Where options are available to the City under § 13, this
article designates the option selected.
§ 266-24. Imposition of tax.
§ 266-25. Declaration, return and payment of tax.
A. A tax of 1/2% is hereby imposed for general purposes:
(1) In case of a taxpayer on a calendar-year basis for each calendar
year beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
(2) In case of a taxpayer on a fiscal-year basis other than a calendar
year, for each taxpayer's fiscal year beginning at the beginning of
the taxpayer's fiscal year and ending at the ending thereof, upon
the following:
(a) Salaries, wages and commissions, and other compensation
earned for activities or services, wherever performed or
rendered, by individual residents of the City.
(b) Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation, earned
by individual nonresidents of the City, for work or services
performed or rendered in the City.
(c) Net profits earned from the operation of a business, profession
or other activity, wherever conducted by the residents of the
City.
(d) Net profits earned from the operation of a business, profession
or other activity conducted in the City by nonresidents.
B. The taxes levied under Subsection A(2)(a) and (b) hereof shall relate to
and be imposed upon salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation paid by an employer or on his behalf to a person who is
employed by him. The taxes levied under Subsection A(2)(c) and (d)
hereof shall relate to and be imposed upon the net profits of any
business, profession or other activity conducted by any person or
persons.
A. Net profits. Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April
30 of the current year, make and file with the Tax Collector on a form
approved by the Tax Collector a declaration of his estimated net profits
§ 266-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-25
1:343
§ 266-26. Administration of tax.
Council may from time to time, designate any person, public employee or
private agency to collect and administer the tax on earned income and net
profits and also, may from time to time, determine the amounts for which
such person, public employee or private agency shall be bonded.
§ 266-27. Violations and penalties.106
during the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
the current year and pay to the Tax Collector in four equal quarterly
installments the tax due thereon as follows: the first installment at the
time of the filing the declaration, and the other installments before July
31 and October 31 of the current year, and January 31 of the succeeding
year, respectively.
B. Earned income. Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation and who received any earned
income not subject to the provisions relating to collection at source,
shall make and file with the Tax Collector on a form prescribed or
approved by the Tax Collector, a quarterly return before May 1, August
1 and November 1 of the current year and February 1 of the succeeding
year, set forth the aggregate amount of earned income tax not subject
to withholding by him during the three months periods ending March
31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of the current year,
respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the Tax Collector may require. Every taxpayer making
such a return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the Tax Collector
the amount of tax shown as due thereon.
A. Any person who fails, neglects, or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the tax deducted from his employees, or
fails, neglects or refuses to permit the officer or any agent designated
by him to examine his books, records and papers, and any person who
knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or
attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the
amount of his net profits or earned income in order to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to a fine of not more than $500
for each offense plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to a fine of not more than $500 for each offense plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
106. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 266-25 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-27
1:344
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or return required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
E. Copies of rules and regulations are available in the Treasurer's office or
through the mail upon payment of a fee in an amount as established
from time to time by resolution of City Council.
F. Council may amend the rules and regulations for the administration of
this article by resolution.
§ 266-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-27
1:345

ARTICLE IV
Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 6-8-1981 by Ord. No. 3-1981]
§ 266-28. Discounts.
On and after the effective date of this article, all taxpayers subject to the
payment of taxes assessed by and in the City of Lower Burrell shall be
entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of such tax, upon making
payment of the whole amount thereof, within two months after the date of
the tax notice.
§ 266-29. Violations and penalties.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes assessed by the City of Lower
Burrell, who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes charged against
them, for four months after the date of the tax notice, shall be charged
a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the Tax
Collector, and shall be collected by him.
§ 266-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-29
1:347

ARTICLE V
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 9-12-1988 by Ord. No. 4-1988]
§ 266-30. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Business Privilege Tax
Ordinance."
§ 266-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context indicates clearly a different
meaning, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth
below:
BUSINESS —
CITY — The City of Lower Burrell.
FINANCIAL BUSINESS — The services and transactions of banks and
bankers, trust, credit and investment companies where not prohibited by
law, holding companies, dealers and brokers in money, credits, commercial
paper, bonds, notes, securities and stocks, monetary metals, factors and
commission merchants.
GROSS RECEIPT — Includes both cash and credit transactions.
GROSS RECEIPTS — Cash, credits, property of any kind or nature received
in or allowable or attributable to the City of Lower Burrell from any business
or by reason of any sale made, including resale of goods, wares or
merchandise or services rendered or commercial or business transaction
had within the City of Lower Burrell, without labor, service or other cost,
interest or discount paid, or any other expense. Gross receipts shall not
include:
Carrying on or exercising, whether for gain or profit or otherwise
within the City of Lower Burrell, any trade, business, including but
not limited to financial business as hereinafter defined, profession,
vocation, service, construction, communication or commercial activity
or making sales to persons or rendering services from or attributable to
a Lower Burrell office or place of business.
A.
Shall not include the following: the business of any political subdivision;
any employment for a wage or salary; any business upon which the
power to levy a tax is withheld by law.
B.
The amount of any allowance made for goods, wares or merchandise
taken by a dealer as a trade-in or as part payment for other goods,
wares, and merchandise in the usual and ordinary course of his
business.
A.
In the case of a financial business, the cost of securities and other
property sold, exchanged, paid at maturity or redeemed and moneys or
B.
§ 266-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-31
1:349
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, unincorporated association
or corporation, nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever used in any provision
prescribing a fine or a penalty, the word "person," as applied to
partnerships, shall mean the partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations and unincorporated associations, shall mean the officers
thereof.
TAX COLLECTOR — The person, firm or corporation designated by the
Council of the City of Lower Burrell as the collector of this tax.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period from January 1 to December 31.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar days.
§ 266-32. Imposition and rate of tax.
Beginning with the tax year 1989, and annually thereafter, every person
engaging in any business in the City of Lower Burrell shall pay an annual
tax at the rate of one mill of the gross annual receipts thereof, for wholesale
businesses, and at 1 1/2 mills of the gross annual receipts thereof, for retail
and all other businesses.
§ 266-33. Computation of gross annual receipts.
credits received in repayment of advances, credits and loans and shall
also exclude deposits.
In the case of a broker or commissions paid him to another broker on
account of a purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared in
conjunction with such other broker.
C.
Receipts by dealers from sales to other dealers in the same line where
the dealer transfers title or possession at the same price for which he
acquired the goods, wares or merchandise, as long as said dealers are
not the parent or subsidiary organization of the vendor or have no other
affiliation or cooperative arrangement with the vendor.
D.
Receipts or that portion thereof attributable to interstate or foreign
commerce or to an office or place of business regularly maintained by
the taxpayer outside the limits of the City of Lower Burrell and not for
the purpose of evading payment of this tax and those receipts which the
City is prohibited from taxing by law. Such receipts shall be segregated
as set forth in § 266-33C of this article.
E.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning
of any tax year, shall compute his annual gross receipts upon the actual
receipts received by him during the preceding calendar year.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
has commenced or who commences his business less than one full year
prior to the beginning of any tax year, shall compute his annual gross
§ 266-31 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-33
1:350
receipts for such tax year upon the gross receipts generated by the
business transacted within the City during the first month he engages
in such business activity, multiplied by 12.
C. Where a receipt in its entirety cannot be subject to the tax imposed by
this article by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United
States, or any other provision of law, including the exemptions within
this article, the Tax Collector shall establish rules and regulations and
methods of allocation and evaluation so that only that part of such
receipt which is properly attributable and allocable to the doing of
business in the City of Lower Burrell shall be taxed hereunder. The Tax
Collector may make such allocation with due regard to the nature of the
business concerned on the basis of millage division of the receipt
according to the number of jurisdictions in which it may be taxed, the
ratio of the value of the property or assets of the taxpayer owned and
situated in the City of Lower Burrell to the total property or assets of
the taxpayer wherever owned and situated, or any other method or
methods of calculation, other than the foregoing, calculated to effect a
fair and proper allocation.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed, who
engages in a business, temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its nature,
shall compute his annual gross receipts upon the actual gross receipts
received by him during such tax year.
E. Every person who ceases to carry on a business during any tax year
after having paid the business privilege tax for the entire year shall,
upon making proper application to the Tax Collector, be entitled to
receive a refund of the pro rata amount of the tax paid based upon the
period of time he was not in business during the license year. In the
event that a person who discontinues business during any tax year does
so before payment of his tax becomes due for such tax year, he shall be
permitted to apportion his tax for such tax year and shall pay an amount
to be computed by multiplying his gross receipts for the preceding full
calendar year by a fraction whose numerator shall be the number of
months such person was in business during the tax year and who
denominator shall be 12.
F. Every person subject to the payment of tax hereby imposed by this
article shall, on or before April 15 of each year, make and file with the
Tax Collector an estimate of annual gross volume of business to be
transacted by him during that calendar year and subject to said tax,
together with such other pertinent information as the Tax Collector may
require. A person making said return shall, at the time of filing thereof,
pay to the Tax Collector the estimated amount of tax shown as due
thereon; provided, however, that the taxpayer shall have the right to
pay the estimated tax, or the balance of the estimated tax as shown on
the return in four quarterly installments, the first installment thereof at
the time of the filing of the return on or before April 15 and the other
installments thereof on or before June 15, September 15 and January
15, respectively, thereafter.
§ 266-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-33
1:351
§ 266-34. Returns and registrations.
G. Every individual subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed and
who is also subject to and has paid occupational privilege tax levied by
the City of Lower Burrell, may deduct said occupational privilege tax
payment from the amount of tax due and owing under the provisions of
this article.
A. Every person subject to the payment of tax hereby imposed by this
article shall on or before April 15 of each year, make and file with the
Tax Collector an estimate of annual gross volume of business to be
transacted by him during that calendar year and subject to said tax,
together with such other pertinent information as the Tax Collector may
require. A person making said return shall, at the time of filing thereof,
pay to the Tax Collector the estimated amount of tax shown as due
thereon; provided, however, that the taxpayer shall have the right to
pay the estimated tax, or the balance of the estimated tax as shown on
the return, in four quarterly installments, the first installment thereof at
the time of the filing of the return on or before April 15 and the other
installments thereof on or before June 15, September 15 and January
15, respectively, thereafter.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall forthwith
register with the Tax Collector and set forth his name, address,
business address and the nature of the business activity in which he is
engaged.
C. Every return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax Collector.
Every person making a return shall certify the correctness thereof.
D. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business at least one full year prior to the beginning of
any tax year shall, on or before the 15th day of April following, and
annually thereafter, file with the Tax Collector a return setting forth his
name, his business address and such other information as may be
necessary in arriving at the annual gross volume of business transacted
by him during the preceding year and the amount of the tax due.
E. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who has
commenced his business less than one full year prior to the beginning
of the tax year shall, on or before the 15th day of April following, file
with the Tax Collector a return setting forth his name, his residence, his
business address, and such other information as may be necessary in
arriving at the actual volume of business transacted by him during the
period of operation prior to January 1 of that tax year, and the amount of
the tax due.
F. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of the tax year shall within 40
days from the date of commencing such business, file a return with the
Tax Collector setting forth his name, his business, his business address
§ 266-33 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-34
1:352
§ 266-35. Final return.
§ 266-36. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
and other such information as may be necessary in arriving at the
actual volume of business transacted by him during the first month of
business and the amount of tax due.
G. Every person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this article
who engages in a business, temporary, seasonal or itinerant by its
nature, shall, within seven days from the day he completes such
business, file a return with the Tax Collector setting forth his name, his
business, his business address and such other information as may be
necessary in arriving at the actual gross volume of business during the
tax period and the amount of the tax due.
A. Every final return shall be made upon a form furnished by the Tax
Collector. Every person making a return shall certify the correctness
thereof by affidavit or affirmation.
B. On or before April 15 of each succeeding year, every person subject to
the tax imposed by this article shall file a complete return of his gross
volume of business transacted by him during the preceding tax year and
the amount of tax due also setting forth his name, his business and
business address and such other information as may be necessary by
the Tax Collector. If the person has overpaid his tax, a refund shall be
made to said person by the Tax Collector within 30 days from the time
of filing said final return; or if the person has underpaid, the balance
due shall be payable at the time of filing the said final return.
A. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to collect and receive the taxes,
fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his duty to
keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person
paying the tax and the date of such receipts.
B. The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article, and is hereby empowered
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of the provisions of this article, including provisions for the
reexamination and correction of returns and payments alleged or found
to have occurred, and to make refunds where necessary. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector shall have the right to
appeal to court in other cases provided.
C. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to compel the production of
books, papers and records, and the attendance of all persons before
him, whether as parties or witnesses whom he believes to have
knowledge of such receipts.
§ 266-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-36
1:353
§ 266-37. Suit on collection; penalty.
§ 266-38. Violations and penalties.107
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on his return, or who refuses
to permit inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business in
his custody or control when the right to make such inspection by the Tax
Collector is requested, and whoever fails or refuses to file a return by this
article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
D. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers
and records of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer, in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax due. Every such taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed
and required to give the Tax Collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
A. The Tax Collector may sue for the recovery of taxes dues and unpaid
under this article.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due in each year, interest at
the rate of 6% per annum, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1% of the
amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit
is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor
shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest
and penalties herein imposed.
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 266-36 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-38
1:354
ARTICLE VI
Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 2-8-1999 by Ord. No. 3-1990]
§ 266-39. Rules and regulations.
A. Taxpayer Bill of Rights and forms attached hereto as Schedule 1 and
incorporated herein are hereby approved and adopted.
B. The City Council hereby determines that Administrative Appeal
Procedures relating to petitions for appeal and refund submitted by
taxpayers in connection with the assessment, determination or refund
of an eligible tax under the LTBR shall be undertaken by Hearing
Officer or collection service center for delinquent taxes, where
applicable.
C. The City Council hereby appoints the City Clerk as Hearing Officer.
D. The Administrative Appeal Procedures set forth in the Taxpayer Bill of
Rights and Forms attached hereto and incorporated herein, are hereby
approved and adopted.
E. This article shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of
law and shall be applicable to eligible taxes as of January 1, 1999.
F. Council may change any form, procedure, Hearing Officer or Tax
Collection Agency at any time by motion or resolution.
§ 266-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-39
1:355

ARTICLE VII
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-10-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007]
§ 266-40. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
[relating to earned income taxes] of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession; or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 [relating
to earned income taxes] of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31,
1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the City
of Lower Burrell.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 266-41. Levy of tax.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, commencing January 1, 2008; upon the privilege of engaging
in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the City of
§ 266-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-41
1:357
§ 266-42. Exemption and refunds.
Lower Burrell during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises
such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the
tax for that year in the amount of $52 assessed on a pro rata basis,
in accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax may be used
solely for the following purposes as the same may be allocated by the
Council of the City of Lower Burrell from time to time:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(3) Reduction of property taxes; or
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 85, Subch. F
(relating to homestead property exclusion).
B. The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived
from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political
subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each
calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed. City Council may amend the
amount of the tax from time to time by resolution as permitted by law.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
§ 266-41 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-42
1:358
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may pursue
collection under this article.
§ 266-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-42
1:359
§ 266-43. Duty of employers to collect.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Council of the City of Lower Burrell, in consultation with
the Collector and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing
of refund claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for
exemption, which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the
general municipal law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest
on overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or
75 days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for
the last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be
subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1: The Council of the City of Lower
Burrell or the Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and
provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll-period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
§ 266-42 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-43
1:360
§ 266-44. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 266-45. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 266-46. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and
a statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer, and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivisions shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or plates of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of this article and
this section and remits the amount so withheld in accordance with this
article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 266-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-47
1:361
§ 266-47. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 266-48. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 266-49. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer of self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
§ 266-47 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-49
1:362
§ 266-50. Suits for collection.
§ 266-51. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 266-52. Construal of provisions.
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of 1998
(municipalities may detail their appeal processes).
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 266-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-52
1:363
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 266-52 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-52
1:364
ARTICLE VIII
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
[Adopted 2-13-2017 by Ord. No. 5-2016]
§ 266-53. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT or LERTA — The Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act of
the Commonwealth, Act No. 76 of 1977, as amended and supplemented (72
P.S. § 4722 et seq.).
CITY — The City of Lower Burrell, Westmorland County, Pennsylvania,
acting by and through its Council, or, in appropriate cases, acting by and
through its authorized representatives.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
COUNTY — The County of Westmoreland, Pennsylvania, acting by and
through its Board of County Commissioners, or, in appropriate cases, acting
by and through its authorized representatives.
DESIGNATED AREA — The area within the City identified in § 266-54 of this
article;
ELIGIBLE PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial, or other business
property located in the designated area.
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating any industrial,
commercial or other business property owned by any individual, association
or corporation and located in the designated area; "improvements" does not
include any ordinary upkeep or maintenance.
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — Includes the City, the county, and the School
District;
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, municipality, municipality authority or other group or entity.
SCHOOL DISTRICT — The Burrell School District, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Board of School Directors, or, in
appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives.
§ 266-54. Designated area.
A. This City does hereby designate the area located within the following
boundaries as a "deteriorated area" within the meaning of the Act, and
one in which the local taxing authorities may grant a tax exemption
pursuant to the provisions of the Act:
Tax Parcel ID No. 17-03-16-0-095, Tax Parcel ID No. 17-03-16-0-096,
and Tax Parcel ID, No. 17-03-16-0-097 owned by Widewaters as shown
on Exhibit 1 attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.108
§ 266-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-54
1:365
§ 266-55. Exemption granted.
There is hereby exempted from real property taxation of this local taxing
authority that portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual
costs of new construction upon, or improvements to, eligible property for
which proper application has been made in accordance with this article,
subject to the limitations hereinafter set forth.
§ 266-56. Adherence to regulations and limitations.
The exemption authorized by this article shall be in accordance with the
provisions and limitations hereinafter set forth.
§ 266-57. Amount of exemption.
The schedule of real property taxes to be exempted shall be in accordance
with the following percentage of the assessed valuation of new construction
or improvements to eligible property:
Tax Year(s) Following Completion
of Construction
Exempt Portion of Assessed
Valuation
Year One 100%
Year Two 90%
Year Three 80%
Year Four 70%
Year Five 60%
Year Six 50%
Year Seven 40%
Year Eight 30%
Year Nine 20%
Year Ten 10%
§ 266-58. Start of exemption; levy of interim taxes.
A tax exemption granted under this article shall first apply in the tax year
of a local taxing authority immediately following the tax year in which the
eligible new construction or improvements are completed. Nothing in this
article is intended to limit or prohibit, nor shall it be construed as limiting or
B. Any discrepancy between the description of the designated area in this
section and the area designated for the purposes of LERTA in the
LERTA District Resolution shall be resolved in favor of the LERTA
District Ordinance, it being the intent of the local taxing authority to
grant exemption to all new construction and improvements to the
eligible property within the area designated by the City.
108. Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is on file in the City offices.
§ 266-54 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-58
1:366
prohibiting, the levy of interim real property taxes upon new construction
or improvements prior to completion thereof.
§ 266-59. Sale or exchange of property.
A tax exemption granted under this article shall be upon the property
exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the property.
§ 266-60. Location and time limit for submitting application.
Any person who is an owner of eligible property and who desires tax
exemption pursuant to this article with respect to new construction or
improvements on an eligible property shall apply in writing for such
exemption on a form to be provided by the local taxing authorities or tax
assessment office at the address set forth on such form or, if no address
is set forth thereon, at the principal office of the local taxing authorities,
and said form must be received by a local taxing authority within 60 days
following the date of issuance of a building permit for the new construction
or improvements with respect to which exemption is desired or, if no
building permit is required and no other notification of new construction
or improvements is required to be given to the City, within sixty (60) days
following commencement of construction.
§ 266-61. Application form; required information.
A local taxing body shall make available to any person desiring to apply
for a tax exemption in accordance with this article an application form
("the application") which shall require such person to supply the following
information:
A. The name of the owner or owners of the eligible property;
B. The location of the eligible property, including the tax parcel
identification number or numbers assigned to such property for real
property tax purposes;
C. The type of new construction or improvements to be made on the
eligible property;
D. The nature of the improvements to be made to the eligible property;
E. The date on which the relevant building permit was issued or, if no
building permit is required, the date on which construction commenced
or the estimated date on which it shall commence, as appropriate;
F. The cost or estimated cost of the new construction or improvements;
G. Such additional information as a local taxing authority may reasonably
require.
§ 266-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-62
1:367
§ 266-62. Assessment by county assessment office.
A copy of the exemption request shall be forwarded by the property owner
to the local tax authorities and Westmoreland County tax assessment office.
The said assessment office shall, after completion of the improvement,
assess separately the improvement and calculate the amounts of the
assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the limits
established by this article and shall notify the taxpayer and the local taxing
authorities of the reassessment and amounts of the assessment eligible for
exemption.
§ 266-63. Amendments to regulations; effect on filed applications.
The cost of new construction or improvements to be exempted and the
schedule of taxes exempted at the time of an initial request for tax
exemption made in accordance with the further provisions of this article
shall be applicable to that exemption request, and any subsequent
amendments to this article, if any, shall not apply to applications filed with
a local taxing authority prior to their adoption.
§ 266-64. Tax assessment appeals; reductions in assessed value.
If the property owner files a real estate tax assessment appeal with the
Westmoreland County Board of Assessment Appeals or Court of Common
Pleas and achieves a reduction in assessed value on the eligible property
for any of the years within the exemption schedule, or any of the first three
years following the 10th year of exemption, then the property owner must
repay the total amount of real estate taxes that were previously exempted
during the exemption schedule.
§ 266-65. Discontinuing use of improvements.
If during the ten-year exemption period or for three years thereafter, the
owner of the eligible property ceases using the improvements by relocating
the operations performed at the improvements, the owner shall, upon
demand of the local taxing authority, reimburse the local taxing authority an
amount equal to the annual real property taxes that would have been paid at
discount had the improvements not been exempted from the real property
taxes.
§ 266-66. Ineligibility for exemption.
This article and the tax exemptions granted herein shall not apply and shall
not be available where:
A. The property owner does not secure the necessary and proper permits
prior to improving the property;
B. The property, as completed, does not comply with the laws, ordinances,
regulations, and codes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Westmoreland County and the City of Lower Burrell;
§ 266-62 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 266-66
1:368
§ 266-67. Termination of exemption; repayment; renewals,
extensions and amendments.
§ 266-68. Declaration of purpose.
It is declared that enactment of this article and the provisions hereof are
for the benefit of the general health, safety and welfare of inhabitants of the
City of Lower Burrell and those purposes set forth in the LERTA statute, 72
P.S. § 4722 et seq.
C. There are any delinquent taxes owed to the local taxing authority;
D. The property owner fails to comply with the provisions of this article.
A. Unless otherwise sooner repealed, extended, or amended by ordinance
of the City Council, the LERTA tax exemption contained within this
article shall terminate following application of the final exemption in
Year 10, subject to the time period for any repayment provision
provided in this article. The repayment provisions contained in this
article shall continue for three years after the end of the LERTA tax
exemption.
B. This article may be renewed, extended, or amended at any time by
ordinance.
C. Any amendment to or termination of this article shall not apply to
exemption requests initiated prior to the termination or adoption of the
amendment, nor shall it impact any repayment provision of this article.
§ 266-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-68
1:369
Chapter 270
TIMBER HARVESTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 154.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 170.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 252.
Street excavations — See Ch. 256, Art. III.
§ 270-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOGGING or TIMBER HARVESTING — Such terms are used
interchangeably herein, and are defined as the act of cutting and removing
trees and all activities related thereto, for cordwood, for lumber, for pulp
or for any commercial purpose, excepting therefrom a homeowner cutting
on his own property for his own use, the cultivation and harvesting of
Christmas trees, or the clearing for development of building sites where
such development is otherwise subject to the City grading, erosion and
sedimentation, stormwater management, subdivision or land development
regulations.
§ 270-2. Findings of fact.
The Mayor and Council find, based on prior experience within the City, that:
§ 270-3. Permit required.
A. Much of the land within the City is forested and hilly.
B. Uncontrolled stormwater runoff has contributed to flooding problems in
many City watercourses.
C. Improper logging can result in uncontrolled and dangerous stormwater
runoff and erosion.
D. Improper logging can result in damage to roads, drains and
watercourses.
E. Improper logging can result in a fire hazard from logging debris.
F. Improper logging can ruin the natural beauty and environment of land
within the City and result in the reduction of property values in the City.
G. Long-term production of timber can increase property values, provide
continued employment in logging within the City, and help control
stormwater runoff and erosion.
§ 266-68 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 270-3
1:370
§ 270-4. Application procedure, standards and variances.
A. Logging operations within the City of Lower Burrell on any parcel of
property over one acre in size shall require a permit.
B. On parcels of 25 acres or more, a permit shall be issued for a maximum
of 25 acres at one time and may be extended to permit logging
operations on a contiguous area of up to 25 acres upon finding by the
Administrator that all requirements of this chapter have been met,
including payment of permit extension fees and charges as fixed by
resolution.
C. The logging contractor must notify the Administrator in writing at least
one month in advance that he or she will be completing timber
harvesting on any twenty-five-acre parcel, and desires a permit
extension to continue harvesting additional acreage. Timely notice will
expedite the review process and assure that timber harvesting
continues without delay and proper security is provided pursuant to
§ 270-6 of this chapter.
D. On parcels of 25 acres or less, a permit shall be granted for the entire
parcel.
E. All permits or permit extensions issued under this section shall be valid
for a period of four months.
F. The requirement of a permit is imposed pursuant to authority in the
Third Class City Code.109
A. An application for a logging permit shall be filed with the City Timber
Harvesting Administrator (hereinafter referred to as the
"Administrator") at least 30 days prior to the commencement of
logging.
B. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the City and shall
include at least the following information:
(1) The name and address of all property owners.
(2) The name and address of the logging operator.
(3) The proposed starting and completion dates for the logging
operation.
(4) The description of the type of trees to be harvested.
(5) A description of the method of logging.
(6) An erosion and sedimentation control plan and a stormwater
management plan describing all stormwater management and
erosion control measures to be taken and the location of any
109. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 35101 et seq.
§ 270-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-4
1:371
stormwater or erosion control devices or facilities. (Westmoreland
County Conservation District review may be required by the City.)
(7) A survey of the parcel or parcels of property upon which the
logging will be conducted, which shows:
(a) The location of roads, drains and watercourses in the area of
the logging operation.
(b) The location of any road work or grading to be done in
connection with the operation.
(c) The location of the trees to be cut down.
(8) A map showing the route loaded vehicles will travel over City
streets.
C. The Administrator shall forward the application to the City Engineer for
review. In reviewing the application, the City Engineer shall consider
the impact of the proposed logging operation upon stormwater runoff,
erosion, watercourses, roads and drains. In particular, the City
Engineer shall consider the extent to which the application addresses
and complies with the applicable standards.
(1) For erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing
regulations under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102, Erosion Control Rules
and Regulations, issued pursuant to the Clean Streams Law,110 and
25 Pa. Code, Chapter 105, Dam and Waterway Rules and
Regulations, issued pursuant to the Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act;111 City erosion and sedimentation control
ordinance and Westmoreland County Conservation District.
(2) For stormwater management as set forth in the Stormwater
Management Act112 and regulations issued pursuant thereto and in
Chapter 252, Stormwater Management.
D. The City Engineer shall make a recommendation in writing to the
Administrator approving or disapproving the logging plan and stating
the reasons therefor.
E. Within 90 days after filing of the application, the Administrator shall
issue or deny a permit. Denial shall be in writing with reasons for denial
stated therein. Approval may be subject to reasonable conditions stated
in writing upon the permit and intended to achieve the goals of this
chapter. The applicant shall be informed in writing of the reasons for
such conditions.
110. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
111. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
112. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 270-4 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 270-4
1:372
F. Requests for a variance from the rules and regulations of this chapter
shall be considered by the Administrator in accordance with the
following procedures:
(1) A variance may be granted from the requirements of this chapter if
the following criteria are met:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause based on physical
circumstances, conditions or topography unique to the
property.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in unnecessary
hardship to the applicant.
(c) Any variance granted shall be the minimum variance necessary
to relieve the hardship claimed as a basis for the variance.
(2) No application for a variance requested under this chapter shall be
granted that would cause a public or private nuisance or result in
violation of the of the erosion and sedimentation rules and
regulations set forth at 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102; the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.; the Dam Safety and
Encroachment Act, 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.; the Stormwater
Management Act, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.; or any other applicable
City ordinance or state or federal laws. If such is found to be
occurring, the applicant will be in violation of this chapter and
subject to the remedies set forth in §§ 270-8 and 270-9 of this
chapter.
(3) The Administrator shall forward all applications for variances to
the City Engineer who shall review the applications, with a copy to
the Mayor and Council. The Engineer, in conducting his review,
shall consider the factors referenced at § 270-4D of this chapter
and may consider the guidelines provided in the Pennsylvania
Forestry Association's publication entitled "New Timber Harvesting
Guidelines," and the Department of Environmental Protection's
publication entitled "Controlling Erosion and Sedimentation from
Timber Harvesting Operations," and any other publications setting
forth commonly accepted guidelines for the timber harvesting
industry. As a result of the Engineer's review, the City Engineer
may request additional information including, but not limited to,
the following:113
(a) A detailed erosion and sedimentation plan prepared pursuant
to 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102.
(b) Proof of approval of harvesting plan from the county and/or the
Commonwealth Department of Environmental Protection.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-4
1:373
§ 270-5. General operational requirements.
Both the landowner and logging operator shall be responsible for
compliance with the following operational requirements:
(4) The City Engineer shall, within 30 days after he receives an
application for a variance, and any additional information, make a
written recommendation with respect thereto to the Administrator,
stating the reasons for his recommendation. The Administrator
shall consider the City Engineer's recommendation and any
comment(s) received from the Mayor and Council, and shall grant
or deny the variance.
(5) The grant of a variance may be subject to reasonable conditions
and safeguards necessary in order to protect the public health,
safety and welfare, to protect public and private property and to
achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(6) Whenever a decision on a variance is made, the Administrator shall
notify the applicant and the Mayor and Council in writing of such
decision.
(7) Application for a variance shall stop the ninety-day time limit for
permit decisions under Subsection E of this section from running
until such time as the variance request is finally disposed of.
G. Any person aggrieved by a permit or variance decision may file an
appeal within 30 days to the Mayor and Council, who shall hold a
hearing thereon pursuant to the Local Agency Law114 and may affirm,
modify or reverse the decision appealed from.
A. No property shall be clear cut.
B. All applications to harvest timber on a slope exceeding 25% shall
conform to the following conditions:
(1) Applications must be accompanied by an approved erosion and
sedimentation plan approved by the Westmoreland County
Conservation District and/or the DEP.115
(2) All logging roads/skid trails shall be cut only horizontally across
slopes; and no roads/skid trails may be cut vertically.
C. No timber harvesting shall take place in areas determined by the City
Engineer, with reference to published or commonly accepted
guidelines, to be landslide-prone or flood-prone.
D. No tree with a diameter of 36 inches or more may be harvested without
written approval from the Administrator based upon a finding that the
harvest of such trees will not result in undue soil erosion, loss or
114. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq. and 751 et seq.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-4 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 270-5
1:374
§ 270-6. Security.
Prior to the commencement of a logging operation, the person who secures
the logging permit shall post a bond written by a surety company authorized
to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with the City as
obligee in the amount of $500 per acre to guarantee restoration of the
movement. Trees with a diameter of 12 inches or less may be harvested
only if such trees are cull trees or dead trees, and such harvesting will
not result in clear cutting. The diameter of the tree shall be measured
at 4 1/2 feet above ground level.
E. No log in excess of 24 feet in length shall be removed from the property.
F. Upon completing a timber harvesting operation, no replanting will be
required within one year. After one year, the property owner shall
inspect the property for evidence of new seedlings and provide the
inspection results to the Administrator. If such inspection shows
evidence of seedling regeneration, the property owner shall replant the
property with seedlings of similar nature measuring a minimum of one
foot in height, and in numbers determined by the Administrator to be
reasonably adequate to protect the harvested property from undue soil
erosion, loss or movement.
G. Treetops and other logging debris should not exceed seven feet in
height above the ground surface.
H. All roadways/skid trails must be repaired to prevent soil erosion and
sedimentation and to prevent pooling of stormwater.
I. Proper erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be taken on
disturbed property to prevent accelerated water runoff.
J. No commercial sale of wood or logs shall be permitted on the property
located in residential zones.
K. No tree may be cut which is the largest of its species in the state.
L. All soil or debris washed or otherwise deposited onto public streets
during logging shall be cleaned up each day. Where adjacent
properties, public or private, have suffered erosion or accumulation of
soil and debris as a result of logging, such conditions shall be promptly
remedied.
M. No timber harvesting operation may take place within 40 feet,
measured horizontally, from an adjacent property line, unless the owner
thereof has provided a written waiver consenting to the operation
encroaching closer that 40 feet. A waiver shall be knowingly made and
separate from a lease or deed unless the lease or deed contains an
explicit waiver from the owner.
N. And damage to public streets of the City will be repaired in accordance
with Chapter 256, Streets and Sidewalks, Article III, Excavations.
§ 270-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-6
1:375
property logged or of other property, including City streets, damaged by
the logging operation. In lieu of the bond, other securities acceptable to the
City, such as cash, escrow arrangement or irrevocable letter of credit issued
by a bank or savings and loan institution, may be posted. Upon completion
of timber harvesting in any twenty-five-acre parcel, and upon issuance of a
permit extension by the Administrator to proceed to the next twenty-fiveacre
area, the bond or other security posted shall be acceptable security for
the continuing timber harvesting operation.
§ 270-7. Fees.
§ 270-8. Enforcement.
§ 270-9. Violations and penalties.118
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A. A payment in the amount as established from time to time by resolution
of City Council for processing of a logging application shall accompany
the application.116
B. When a permit is issued, the applicant shall also reimburse the City for
reasonable fees charged by the City Engineer for reviewing the
application if in excess of the processing fee. Such fees shall be in
accord with a written schedule of fees submitted by the City Engineer
to the City.
A. City police officers or the Ordinance Officer may enter upon the land in
question before, during or after a logging operation in order to
determine whether a logging application or operation complies with
this chapter. The bond shall also cover street damage.117
B. If any logging is done in violation of this chapter, the City may do any or
all of the following:
(1) Bring action in court of law or in equity to prevent, restrain,
correct, determine or abate such violation.
(2) Revoke or suspend any logging license that has been granted, such
action to be appealable to the Mayor and Council within 30 days of
notice of revocation.
(3) Bring action before the Magisterial District Judge to impose
penalties for violation.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-6 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 270-9
1:376
Chapter 278
VEHICLES, ABANDONED AND JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 285.
§ 278-1. Abandoning prohibited.
No person shall park, store or leave any motor vehicles of any kind in a
wrecked, junked, unlicensed, stripped or abandoned condition, on private
property, where its presence constitutes a public nuisance, and no owner of
such motor vehicle, or the owner or occupant of any property, shall allow, or
permit the same to left upon any privately owned property, unless the same
be authorized in conjunction with a business properly operated, pursuant to
the zoning laws and other laws of the City.
§ 278-2. Notice to owners.119
If the Ordinance Officer or any police officer find that a violation of this
chapter exists, the Ordinance Officer or any police officer shall notify the
owner of the property on which the motor vehicle is stored or parked, or the
owner of the motor vehicle, or both, of the violation, and order the owner
of such vehicle or the owner of the property on which the motor vehicle is
stored or parked, within seven days thereof, to remove the motor vehicle.
§ 278-3. Mode of notice.
Notice shall be given by personal service or by registered mail to the
last known address of the violator. In the event that, on diligent search,
the address of either the property owner or motor vehicle cannot be
ascertained, the posting of such notice or copies thereof on the real
property, motor vehicle, structure or area immediately adjacent thereto
shall constitute sufficient notice.
§ 278-4. Failure to act; imposition of costs.
If the violation complained of shall not have been remedied within the
period as required by the order, the City shall, through its own agents,
contractors and/or employees, remedy the violation by removing such
vehicle and charge the costs thereof to the real property owner on whose
property the vehicle is located. Such costs shall, after a proper demand and
refusal or a failure to pay after 30 days, constitute a lien on such realty
which shall be filed by the City Solicitor.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-5
1:377
§ 278-5. Emergency powers.120
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Ordinance Officer, or any police
officer or volunteer fireman from removing from private property, without
notice, any attended or unattended motor vehicle, the presence of which
constitutes a hazard or threat to the life, health, safety, welfare and morals
of the citizens of the City which is imminently dangerous and in the opinion
of the Ordinance Officer, police officer or volunteer firemen constitutes a
nuisance which gives rise to the existence of emergency conditions.
§ 278-6. Violations and penalties.121
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 281
VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 285.
§ 281-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "ATV Ordinance of the
City of Lower Burrell."
§ 281-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms have the following meanings:
ATV — All-terrain vehicle.
ACCOMPANIED BY AN ADULT — Within visual and voice contact and under
the effective control of a child's parent or guardian or another person 18
years of age or older.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE —
Shall include all of the following vehicles:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV — A motorized off-highway vehicle,
which travels on three or more inflatable tires, and which has:
(1)
A.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 278-5 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 281-2
1:378
OPERATE — "To operate" in all its modes and tenses when it refers to an
ATV, means to use an ATV in any manner within the jurisdiction of the City
of Lower Burrell, whether or not the vehicle is moving.
OWNER — For the purposes of registration, means any person holding title
to an ATV.
§ 281-3. Operating on the land of another.
A maximum width of 50 inches and a maximum dry weight of
800 pounds; or
(a)
A width which exceeds 50 inches or a dry weight which
exceeds 800 pounds.
(b)
OFF-ROAD MOTORCYCLE — A two-wheeled motor vehicle that
has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator
and handlebars for steering control and that is intended by the
manufacturer for use on natural terrain. "Off-road motorcycle"
includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a certificate of title
and registered for highway but which contains design features that
enable operation over natural terrain.
(2)
OFF-ROAD UTILITY VEHICLE — A motorized vehicle, which
travels on three or more inflatable tires, and that has a seat that is
of bench design, not intended to be straddled by the operator, and
a steering wheel for control.
(3)
SNOWMOBILE — An engine-driven vehicle which is all of the
following:
(a) Is designed to travel over snow or ice.
(b) Has an endless belt track or tracks.
(c) Is steered by a ski or skis.
(d) Has an overall width of 48 inches or less.
(4)
The term does not include a farm tractor, construction equipment,
military vehicle, vehicle with inflatable tires or machinery used for
grooming snowmobile trails. "Snowmobile" does not include an allterrain
vehicle which has been altered or equipped with runners, skis,
belt-type tracks or treads.
B.
A. Except as specified in Subsection C of this section, no person shall go
on or cross the land of another to operate an ATV without the consent of
the landowner.
B. Any person operating an ATV upon the land of another shall stop and
identify himself upon the request of the landowner or his duly
authorized representative or a law enforcement officer.
§ 281-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-3
1:379
§ 281-4. Prohibited acts.
C. Members of an ATV club or other organization may operate ATVs on all
or any portion of the land of another without carrying on their persons
the written permission of the owners, provided that the club or
organization has obtained written authorization from the landowner
allowing members to operate ATVs upon all or designated portions of
his land. The written authorization, when filed with the City of Lower
Burrell's Police Chief, shall constitute notice to law enforcement
officers that members need not to carry on their persons the written
permission of the landowner to operate an ATV on his property.
A. Unlawfully operating an ATV on a snowmobile trail. No person may
operate any four-wheel drive vehicle, dune buggy, ATV, motorcycle or
any other motor vehicle, other than a snowmobile and appurtenant
equipment, on snowmobile trails, unless that use has been authorized
by the landowner or his agent, or unless the use is necessitated by an
emergency involving safety of persons or property.
B. Unlawfully operating an ATV on a private road. No person may operate
an ATV upon any private road after having been forbidden to do so by
the owner thereof, the owner's agent or a law enforcement officer,
either personally or by appropriate notices posted conspicuously on
that road.
C. Operating an ATV on a public way. Except as provided in Subsection
U(3), no person may operate an ATV upon any portion of a public way
maintained or utilized for the operation of conventional motor vehicles
or upon the sidewalks of any public way.
D. Failing to stop an ATV before entering a public way. No person who
operates an ATV may enter a public way without first bringing the ATV
to a complete stop.
E. Failing to yield right-of-way while operating an ATV. Any person who
operates an ATV on a public way shall yield the right-of-way to all other
types of vehicular traffic.
F. Crossing a closed bridge, culvert, overpass or underpass with an ATV.
No person may cross with an ATV, a bridge, culvert, overpass or
underpass closed to ATVs by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and posted by appropriate notices.
G. Reckless operating on an ATV. No person may operate an ATV in such a
way as to recklessly create a substantial risk of serious bodily injury to
another person.
H. Operating an ATV to endanger. No person may operate any ATV so as to
endanger any person or property.
§ 281-3 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 281-4
1:380
I. Operating an ATV at greater than reasonable and prudent speed. No
person may operate any ATV except at a reasonable and prudent speed
considering the existing conditions.
J. Unlawfully operating an ATV while under age. No person who is under
the age of 16 years of age may operate an ATV across any public way
maintained for travel or operate an ATV while unaccompanied by an
adult, except as provided in Subsection U(4).
K. Operating an ATV without a certificate of training. Except as provided
in Subsection U(4), no person under 16 years of age may operate an
ATV without having successfully completed a training course approved
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
L. Permitting an unaccompanied child to operate an ATV. Except as
provided in Subsection U(4), no person may permit a child under 16
years of age to operate any ATV, unless the child is accompanied by an
adult and unless the child holds a valid safety certificate.
M. Operating an ATV without a muffler. Except as provided in Subsection
U(2), no person may operate an ATV that is not equipped at all times
with an effective and suitable muffling device on its engine to effectively
deaden or muffle the notice of the exhaust.
N. Operating an ATV with insufficient lights. Except as provided in
Subsection U(2) and (4), no person may operate an ATV unless the ATV
is equipped as follows:
(1) Every ATV shall have mounted on the front at least one headlight
capable of casting a white beam for a distance of at least 100 feet
directly ahead of the ATV.
(2) Every ATV shall have mounted on the rear at least one lamp
capable of displaying a red light which shall be visible at a distance
of at least 100 feet behind the ATV.
O. Failure to use ATV lights. Except as provided in Subsection U(2) and (3),
no person may operate an ATV except when using a lighted head lamp
and tail lamp required under Subsection N(1) and (2) as follows:
(1) During the period from 1/2 hour after sunset to 1/2 hours before
sunrise; and
(2) At any time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable
atmospheric conditions caused by fog or otherwise, other persons,
vehicles and other objects are not clearly discernible for a distance
of 500 feet ahead.
P. Operating too close to certain buildings. Except as provided in
Subsection U(3), no person may operate an ATV within 300 feet of any
dwelling, hospital, nursing home, convalescent home, personal care
home, assisted living home, church or school.
§ 281-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-4
1:381
Q. Unlawfully permitting operation. A person unlawfully permits the
operation of an ATV if he owns an ATV which is operated by another
person in violation of any section of this chapter. A person unlawfully
permits the operation of an ATV if he is the parent or guardian
responsible for the care of a minor under 18 years of age who operates
an ATV in violation of this chapter.
R. Failure to report accident. Any person shall report an ATV accident if:
(1) He is the operator of an ATV involved in any accident resulting in
personal injuries, in death of any person or in property damage; if
he is some person acting for such an operator; or if he is the owner
of the involved ATV and he has knowledge of the accident, should
the operator of the ATV be unknown; and
(2) Notice of the accident shall be provided by the quickest means of
communication to a law enforcement officer available nearest to
the place where the accident occurred.
S. Operating an ATV in a prohibited area. No person may operate an ATV
in any prohibited area, which areas are defined as any cemetery, burial
place or burying ground, any municipal-owned lands or on municipal,
county or school-owned property, and land dedicated for conservancy,
other than on a trail designated for ATV use by any agency of
Pennsylvania who has the power to designate such a trail.
T. Operating an ATV on cropland or pastureland. No person may operate
an ATV on any cropland or pastureland without the consent of the
owner or lessee. As used in this subsection, "cropland" means acreage
in tillage rotation, land being cropped and land in bush fruits.
Pastureland means acreage devoted to the production of forage plants
used for animal production.
U. Exceptions. The following exceptions apply to the operation of an ATV.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A:
(a) No registration is required for an ATV operated on land on
which the owner lives or on lands on which he is domiciled,
provided that the ATV is not operated elsewhere within the
jurisdiction of this state;
(b) No registration is required for an ATV operated by a
commercial ski area for the purpose of packing snow or for
rescue operation thereof, unless the ATV is required to cross a
public way during that operation; and
(c) ATVs owned and operated in this state by the federal
government, the state, a fire department, or a political
subdivision of the state shall be exempt from registration fees,
but shall be registered and required to display numbers.
§ 281-4 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 281-4
1:382
§ 281-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who engages in any act prohibited by this chapter commits a
civil violation and shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $100, and
each day such activity occurs shall constitute a separate violation. All fines
collected shall inure to the benefit of the City of Lower Burrell.
§ 281-6. Impoundment.
(2) Notwithstanding the above subsections, ATVs used exclusively for
scheduled racing meets and operated solely on predefined race
courses are exempt from the provisions of this chapter concerning
registration, mufflers, and lights during the time of operation of
these meets and at all pre-race practices at the location of the
meet.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection O:
(a) ATVs may be operated on streets and public ways during a
period of emergency when the emergency has been so
declared by a public agency having jurisdiction and when
travel by conventional motor vehicles is not practicable; and
(b) ATVs may be operated on streets and public ways in special
events of limited duration conducted according to a
prearranged schedule, under a permit from the governmental
unit having jurisdiction.
(4) Notwithstanding the above subsections, Subsection U(3)(a) and (b)
do not apply on land which is owned by the parent or guardian of
the operator. All other subsections do apply to the operation of
ATVs on private property.
(5) Notwithstanding Subsection O, ATVs manufactured without a
headlight or taillight are exempt from the provisions of that
subsection while being operated between the hours of sunrise and
sunset.
A. Any ATV operated in violation of this chapter by a minor under 18 years
of age may be impounded and shall be released only to the parent or
guardian of the minor operating the impounded vehicle. The parent or
guardian may claim the impounded vehicle upon payment of cost of the
towing and impoundment.
B. Any ATV operated in violation of this chapter by a person 18 years of
age or older may be impounded, and shall be released only to the owner
of the impounded vehicle upon payment of cost of towing and
impoundment.
§ 281-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 281-6
1:383
Chapter 285
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 256.
Abandoned and junked vehicles — See Ch.
278.
All-terrain vehicles — See Ch. 281.
§ 281-6 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 281-6
1:384
ARTICLE I
Engine Brake Retarders
[Adopted 12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 9-2016]
§ 285-1. Use prohibited in certain locations.
Pursuant to a site study and inspection conducted by PennDOT on Thursday,
September 16, 2016, the use of engine brake retarders (Jake Brake) by
any motor vehicle shall be prohibited along the following sections of state
highways in the City of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County:
Direction Roadway Location
West S.R. 0366 From Segment/Offset 0057/0443 to
Segment/Offset 0062/0865
§ 285-2. Signs.
Pursuant to the procedures of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, and pursuant to regulations of the
Department with respect to signs on highways, the City of Lower Burrell
shall cause to be erected upon the roadways herein specified, signs
regarding the prohibition of the use of said engine brake retarders.
§ 285-3. Enforcement.
The City of Lower Burrell Police Department shall be responsible for
enforcement of the prohibition of engine brake retarders.
§ 285-4. Legislative authority.
This article is authorized by virtue of PennDOT's report dated September
16, 2016, and the findings and conclusions contained therein based upon
PennDOT's site visit and study conducted on Thursday September 16, 2016,
a copy of which is available for review and inspection at the offices of the
City of Lower Burrell during regular business hours. A copy is attached to
this article and incorporated herein by reference.122
§ 285-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Violations of this article shall be enforced through an action brought
before a District Magisterial Judge in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure.
B. Violators are subject to a fine of $ 1,000 for each violation.
122. Editor's Note: Said report is on file in the City offices.
§ 285-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-5
1:385

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations and Restrictions
[Legislation regulating and restricting traffic is on file in the City
offices.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-5
1:387

ARTICLE III
Immobilization, Towing and Storage of Vehicles
[Adopted 8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 7-2017]
§ 285-6. Intent and purpose.
The Council of the City of Lower Burrell intends to comply with the
requirements of state law by adopting 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6309.2 by local
ordinance.
§ 285-7. Adoption of provisions.
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6309.2 is hereby adopted by the
City of Lower Burrell providing for immobilization of vehicles and towing
and storage of vehicles.
§ 285-8. Responsibility for costs.
The vehicle operator/owner shall be responsible for all costs associated with
immobilization and/or towing and storage of the vehicle.
§ 285-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-8
1:389
Chapter 290
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 238. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
260.
§ 285-8 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 285-8
1:390
ARTICLE I
Mandatory Tapping in Water Expansion I Area
[Adopted 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 3-2000]
§ 290-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Mandatory Tapping Ordinance - Water
Expansion I."
§ 290-2. Purpose.
§ 290-3. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the words set forth below shall have the
following meanings for the purposes of this article; the present tense to
include the future tense; the word "shall" to always be mandatory and the
word "may" to always be permissive.
§ 290-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Establish a portion of the Water Expansion I Project Area within the
City of Lower Burrell.
B. Establish subareas within those parts of the Water Expansion I Project
Area in the City of Lower Burrell in which each property to be benefited
by said project is located.
C. Specify the activities to be undertaken in the subareas by the Municipal
Authority of the City of New Kensington.
D. Provide a mandatory requirement for the making of an Authority
connection from an available water main to the curb stop at the
property line of each property within a subarea.
E. Impose a mandatory tapping fee on each property within a subarea for
the making of the Authority connection to the curb stop at the property.
F. Establish administrative procedures as to the making of an Authority
connection and for payment of the mandatory tapping fee therefor.
G. Confirm the creating, by the Municipal Authority of the City of New
Kensington, of a separate rate district to be known as "Rate District
(2)," which shall include all subareas within the City of Lower Burrell.
H. Establish the general rules and penalties for violation of the provisions
of this article, and confirm the rules and regulations and schedule of
rates and charges of the Municipal Authority of the City of New
Kensington as being applicable to all subareas and to provide for any
violation thereof.
§ 290-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:391
AUTHORITY — Municipal Authority of the City of New Kensington.
AUTHORITY CONNECTION — A water line installed from a main which
abuts a property to a curb stop at the property line.
COUNCIL — Council of the City of Lower Burrell.
CUSTOMER FACILITY — A water line installed from a curb stop on a
property line to the meter in a structure erected on the property.
EXCLUDED AREAS — All areas of the municipality which are not included
in a subarea.
MAIN or MAINS — All water mains of the Authority which are installed in a
subarea and which are contiguous to a property.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania.
OWNER — An individual, partnership, corporation or any other legally
recognized entity having a fee simple interest in a property within a
subarea.
PROJECT AREA — The subareas of the municipality which are collectively
designated the "project area," as part of the Water Expansion I project and
which are described in Exhibit "1" attached to and which forms part of this
article.123
PROPERTY or PROPERTIES — All tracts or parcels of land within a subarea
which have public water service made available to them as a part of Water
Expansion I.
STRUCTURE — A building erected on a property which is reasonably suited
for human occupancy, commercial or industrial use or is actually so
occupied and/or used.
SUBAREAS — All areas included in the project area of the municipality
and which have water service made available within them as part of Water
Expansion I and which are further delineated and established within the
municipality by Exhibit "1" attached to this article.124
WATER EXPANSION I — A water expansion project of the Authority
whereby Authority water mains will be extended within the subareas of the
municipality.
§ 290-5. Water expansion project.
The Authority, with the full consent, approval and pledged cooperation of
the municipality, has undertaken a project known as "Water Expansion I,"
within all those subareas of the municipality which are set forth and defined
in Exhibit "1" which is attached to and made a part of this article.125 The
project provides for installation of mains by the Authority within certain
123. Editor's Note: Exhibit "1" is on file in the City offices.
124. Editor's Note: Exhibit "1" is on file in the City offices.
125. Editor's Note: Exhibit "1" is on file in the City offices.
§ 290-4 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 290-5
1:392
parts of those streets and roads, both public and private and within rightsof-
way and easements, all of which are within the subareas.
§ 290-6. Boundaries of subareas.
All the subareas which are hereby established within the municipality
include those streets and roads, both public and private, and all rightsof-
way or easements which are set forth and described in Exhibit "1," as
well as all those parts of any street, road, right-of-way or easement which
may, by future agreement between the Authority and the municipality, be
designated as being within a subarea.
§ 290-7. Availability of water service.
A main shall be deemed available to serve a structure erected on a property
within a subarea if the structure is reasonably suitable for human
occupancy, a commercial or industrial use or it is actually so occupied
and/or used. The structure must be erected on a property which abuts a
street, road, right-of-way or easement in which a main is installed and the
structure is, by the closest lineal measurement, situate within 250 feet of
the curb stop which is installed at the property line as part of an Authority
connection.
§ 290-8. Applicability of tapping fee.
At any time a main has been installed at a location contiguous to or abutting
a property within a present or later established subarea, on which a
structure is presently, or in the future constructed, the owner of the
property shall, upon notice from the Authority, be required to pay a tapping
fee to the Authority, this tapping fee now being established by the Authority
in its Schedule of Rates and Charges ("Rate Schedule"), as $1,250;
provided, nevertheless, that such tapping fee is subject to revision by
the Authority, from time to time, in its sole discretion, by a rate revision
uniformly applicable to all subareas within the municipality. This tapping fee
shall be imposed by the Authority and paid to it, notwithstanding the fact
that no part of a customer facility is installed by the owner from the curb
stop to the structure.
§ 290-9. Establishment of Rate District (2).
The Authority may, in its sole discretion, establish a separate rate district
to be known as "Rate District (2)," as part of its Schedule of Rates and
Charges. All rates and charges which are established for Rate District (2)
shall:
A. Be applicable to and enforced by the Authority as to all properties in
present and future subareas;
B. Continue in full force and effect until final repayment has been made of
all debt incurred by the Authority for construction of the Water
Expansion I project; and
§ 290-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-9
1:393
§ 290-10. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The municipality hereby approves and confirms all Rules and Regulations
and the Schedule of Rates and Charges of the Authority which are now in
effect and as each may be later amended, revised and/or rescinded by the
Authority in the exercise of its exclusive power so to do, the municipality
confirming that said Rules and Regulations and Schedule of Rates and
Charges shall be applicable to and controlling as to each property which is
now or, in the future, included in any subarea within the municipality.
§ 290-11. Failure to pay tapping fees or rates and charges.
If any owner of a property within Rate District (2), as established by the
Authority, shall fail or refuse to timely pay any tapping fee assessed him
by the Authority or fail to timely pay any rate or charge applicable to him
and as established by the Authority, the Authority shall have the absolute
right, acting either for itself or as an agent for the municipality and without
any further grant of authority by the municipality, to file a claim or lien
against the property in order to secure payment by the owner of any
such claim. This claim shall be entered in the Office of the Prothonotary
of Westmoreland County at the same time and in the same form and be
collected in the same manner as municipal claims are filed and collected.
The municipality hereby confirms that the Authority also has and shall
retain the exclusive right to proceed in any other way that it shall see fit to
compel and secure payment of all tapping fees and rates and charges which
are established by the Authority as applicable to owners in Rate District (2),
provided only that the Authority shall give 20 days' written notice to the
municipality advising it of its intent to proceed under the provisions of this
article against any party to whom it is applicable.
§ 290-12. Enforcement.
The municipality hereby irrevocably designates and appoints the Authority,
on behalf of the municipality, and to the fullest extent necessary and
possible, to carry out all the intents, purposes and requirements of both
this article and the Water Expansion I project of the Authority, all as same
are applicable to the municipality, and to act in all ways and in all manner,
either in its own name as the Authority or on behalf of and in the name
of the municipality, in the administration and enforcement of all terms and
conditions of this article, the Rules and Regulations of the Authority and
its Schedule of Rates and Charges, all such Rules and Regulations and
Schedule of Rates and Charges being capable, in the sole discretion of the
Authority, of amendment by it from time to time.
C. Provide for payment to the Authority of its cost of repayment of all debt
incurred by the Authority as a result of the project, the rates and
charges to be applicable to and assessed against each owner, on a pro
rata basis.
§ 290-9 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 290-13
1:394
§ 290-13. Reservation of right to enact tapping ordinance.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the municipality
reserves to itself and the Authority concedes to the municipality, the
absolute right of the municipality to enact a Mandatory Tapping Ordinance,
which may apply to all areas of the municipality which are not now, nor
which in the future, form part of any subarea of the municipality as same
are herein defined.
§ 290-14. Violations and penalties.
Any owner who fails to timely pay a tapping fee established by the Authority
for Rate District (2), within 60 days following his receipt, by personal
service or by certified mail of a notice to make such payment or who fails to
pay any rate or charge, as defined, established and made part of a Schedule
of Rates and Charges of the Authority for Rate District (2), shall, upon
being found to be legally responsible for any such failure by a Magisterial
District Judge shall, in addition to being required to pay such tapping fee,
rate or charge, pay a civil penalty of not less than $25, nor more than
$1,000, plus costs, all for the use of the Authority, it being further provided
that each day's failure to so pay any tapping fee, commencing with the
first day following the initial sixty-day period or pay any rate or charge,
commencing with the 31st day following its billing date, shall constitute a
separate offense and impose liability therefor as such.
§ 290-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-14
1:395

ARTICLE II
Mandatory Connection
[Adopted 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 4-2000]
§ 290-15. Connection to water main.
Every owner of a property in the City of Lower Burrell which abuts a
public water main and upon which is erected a structure suitable for human
occupancy or commercial or industrial use shall, at the cost of such owner,
connect the structure to the water main in order that the structure be
served with a public water supply, subject only to such exceptions as are set
forth elsewhere herein.
§ 290-16. Exemption.
If a structure erected on a property which is subject to the operation of
this article is located more than 250 lineal feet from the closest possible
point at which it could be connected to a public water main, the owner
and the structure shall be exempt from the operation of this article and the
structure need not be connected to the water main.
§ 290-17. Tapping fee.
At any time a water main of an entity which operates the public water
distribution system has been installed at a location abutting or contiguous
to property on which a structure is presently, or in the future constructed,
the owner of the property shall, upon notice from the entity which operates
the public water distribution system, be required to pay a tapping fee to the
entity. This tapping fee is established by the entity which operates the public
water distribution system. The tapping fee shall be paid to the entity which
operates the public water distribution system, notwithstanding the fact that
no water line lateral from the main water line to the structure is installed
by the owner from the curb stop.
§ 290-18. Compliance with rules and regulations.
No person or other entity shall make or cause to be made any connection
to a public water main until such party has complied with all rules and
regulations established by the entity which operates the public water
distribution system to which the connection is to be made.
§ 290-19. Refusal to comply; tapping by water distributor;
responsibility for costs.
If the owner of a property on which a structure is erected which is subject
to this article, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this
article for at least 90 days after receiving notice so to do from the entity
which operates the public water distribution system, this either by personal
service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, then an
agent or employee of the entity which operates the public water distribution
§ 290-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-19
1:397
system may enter the property and the structure and supply all the material
and labor necessary to accomplish the tapping of said structure into the
public water main in order that the property and the structure be brought
into compliance with the provisions of this article. All cost and expense of
any such action shall be that of the owner and it shall be due and payable
to the entity which operates the public water distribution system within 30
days of the date of the invoice to the owner for same. If not paid within
said period of time, the payment may be enforced in the same manner as
debts may be collected by law or a municipal claim or lien may be filed by
the entity which operates the public water distribution system against the
property and/or the owner as provided by law.
§ 290-20. Violations and penalties
In addition to the penalties provided for herein, any person, firm, or other
entity which fails to make the required connection within the ninety-day
period after notice shall, upon conviction thereof before a Magisterial
District Judge, pay a fine or penalty of not less than $25 nor more than
$1,000, plus costs, and, in default of payment, be sentenced to undergo
imprisonment of not more than 30 days in the Westmoreland County
Detention Center. It is further provided that each day's violation following
the initial ninety-day period shall be a separate offense and each such
offense may be prosecuted as such.
§ 290-21. Limit of applicability.
This article, its effect and its enforcement, shall not, in any way, be
applicable to or affect any area, subarea or any other part of the City which
is now, or in the future, included as part of the Water Expansion I project of
the said Municipal Authority of the City of New Kensington, the Municipal
Authority of the City of New Kensington having been granted, by Ordinance
No. 3-2000 of the City,126 exclusive jurisdiction of all matters involving its
water distribution system and all properties served therefrom and subject
thereto within all areas or subareas of the said project within the City.
126. Editor's Note: See Article I of this chapter.
§ 290-19 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 290-21
1:398
Chapter 300
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 140.
Erosion and sediment control — See Ch. 154.
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 165, Art. I.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 170.
Sewers — See Ch. 238.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 252.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
260.
Timber harvesting — See Ch. 270.
§ 290-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-21
1:399

ARTICLE I
General Provisions, Specific Requirements and Zoning Map
§ 300-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Lower Burrell" and the district map shall be known and may be
cited as the "Official Zoning District Map of the City of Lower Burrell."
§ 300-2. Purpose.
The fundamental purpose of this chapter is to promote the safety, health,
morals, convenience and general welfare; to encourage the most
appropriate use of land throughout the City; to conserve and enhance the
value of property; to minimize overcrowding of land and buildings; to avoid
undue concentration of population; to lessen congestion in the streets; to
secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate
open spaces for light and air; to facilitate adequate provision of streets and
highways, water, sewerage, drainage and other public facilities; to conserve
life, property and natural resources; and to conserve the expenditure of
funds earmarked for public improvement.
§ 300-3. Community development objectives.
A. This chapter shall render a legal basis and framework for the future
land use and development of the City. The objectives guiding future
growth and improvements of existing development within the City shall
promote the most economical and efficient provision of municipal
services; encourage beneficial and compatible land uses; promote
development of uses suitable to the physical character of the land;
maintain a healthful residential environment with adequate
recreational, commercial and industrial supporting areas; protect and
conserve open spaces, drainageways and floodplains; and, in general,
avoid problems of random development inconsistent with the City's
goals and objectives of managed growth.
B. Managed growth refers to a means whereby the reviewing bodies apply
reasonable and sound planning procedures to the overviewing and
approval of all growth activity. This chapter provides one of the
principal means of determining the quality of the City's future overall
environment.
C. The specific objectives of this chapter are outlined in the
Comprehensive Plan for the City and subsequent revisions of that plan,
as required by Act 247 of the General Assembly, § 606.127 The
community development objectives are designed to achieve the purpose
set forth in Act 247 of the General Assembly. §§ 105–604.128
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10606.
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10105–10604.
§ 300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-4
1:401
§ 300-4. Finances.
Council may appropriate from general funds, moneys to finance the
preparation, administration and enforcement of this chapter, to finance
the work of the Zoning Hearing Board and to support or oppose, upon
appeal to the courts, decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board. For the same
purposes, Council may accept, with public disclosure, gifts and grants of
money and services from private sources and from Westmoreland County,
the commonwealth and the federal government. Council may prescribe fees
to be charged to the administration of this chapter set forth in § 300-187.
§ 300-5. Continuance of prior decisions.
The passage of this chapter shall not invalidate any decisions enacted
under prior enabling laws. This chapter shall, in such respect, be deemed a
continuation and codification of such prior enabling laws.
§ 300-6. Higher standard to control.
§ 300-7. Compliance.
No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
converted or be designed to be used, except in full compliance with all
provisions of this chapter and after the lawful issuance of all permits and
certificates required by this chapter.
§ 300-8. Scope of regulations.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall control wherever they impose
greater restrictions than those imposed by this chapter itself, other
laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits or by easements,
agreements or covenants.
B. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the
provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the community development objectives stated in § 300-3.
This chapter is not intended to interfere with other rules, regulations or
ordinances of the City except that where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of a
building, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed by such other
rules, regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Article XVII, any building erected
hereafter, any uses of land or buildings established hereafter, any
structural alteration or relocation of an existing building occurring
hereafter and any enlargements of or additions to existing uses
occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter.
B. All land, buildings and uses thereof shall be subject to:
§ 300-4 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-8
1:402
§ 300-9. Additional use classifications and restrictions.
Additional use classifications and restrictions may be permitted by Planning
Commission and Zoning Hearing Board in any district for the purposes of:
§ 300-10. Termination of certain existing uses.
In case of any public building, facility or land area, such as a school,
recreation area, community center or municipal building, shall cease to
be used according to its intended function, the Planning Commission and
Zoning Officer shall study the existing zoning classification of the property
on which the use is located and shall make recommendations to Council
on any necessary zoning changes to ensure a suitable reuse of the parcel.
This study and recommendation shall be made by the Planning Commission
within 90 days of the notification by the appropriate public entity of the
intent to terminate the existing use of the property.
(1) The district regulations of this Article I, which are applicable to the
zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or land shall be
located.
(2) The supplementary district regulations in this chapter, which are
only applicable in the zoning district(s) specified in addition to the
above noted regulations.
(3) The general provisions and specific requirements which are
applicable in all zoning districts in addition to the above district
regulations.
C. All regulations shall be subject to the rules and definitions in Article XIX
and shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Officer, unless
stated otherwise, as in the case of appeals, challenges, special
exceptions and variances granted by the Zoning Hearing Board and
amendments issued by Council.
D. The special exceptions permissible in the zoning districts are listed as
part of this chapter, in Article XVIII.
E. The supplementary district regulations of this chapter (dealing with
more than one but not all zoning districts), the districts regulations of
Articles II through VI and the regulations applicable to all districts shall
all have complementary application consistent with § 300-6 for all land,
buildings and uses thereof.
A. Making transitional provisions at or near the boundaries of districts.
B. Regulating, restricting or prohibiting uses and structures at or near
major transportation arteries; natural or artificial bodies of water;
public buildings and grounds; places having unique historical or
patriotic value or interest; floodplain areas and other places having a
special character or use affecting or affected by their surroundings.
§ 300-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-11
1:403
§ 300-11. Compliance with state and federal regulations.
Regardless of any other provision of this chapter, no land shall be used
and no structure erected or maintained in violation of any state or federal
control or environmental protection law or regulation.
§ 300-12. Compliance with all conditions and standards.
Unless a proposed use can clearly comply with all of the conditions and
standards provided in this chapter, or if there is any ambiguity,
indefiniteness or absence of standards in this chapter pertaining to an
accessory use or special exception, such use shall not be permitted.
§ 300-13. Subdivision of land.129
§ 300-14. Adoption of Zoning Map; identification; changes.
A. All subdividing of land into three or more lots (parcels) after the
effective date of this section shall meet all the requirements established
by this chapter and Chapter 260, Subdivision and Land Development.
B. The subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two tracts or parcels
and containing not more than six acres of total land area. Any lots
further subdivided from any portion of the original lot, tract or parcel, if
divided within five years, must meet the requirements of major
subdivision. [See Chapter 260, Subdivision and Land Development.]
A. A map consisting of an 800 scale base map and an overlay, showing
zoning district boundaries entitled "Key - City of Lower Burrell Zoning
District Map," dated October 7, 1985, and a set of 100 scale City of
Lower Burrell, Official Westmoreland County Tax Maps, showing zoning
boundaries, together are hereby adopted and made the official Zoning
District Map of Lower Burrell and an integral part of this chapter.
B. The Original Zoning District Map (key at 800 scale and Tax Maps at 100
scale) and Zoning District Map list of amendments and changes, or an
authorized copy thereof, shall be kept on file available for examination
at the Municipal Building in the office of the City Clerk.
C. The Zoning District Map and the Zoning District Map list of
amendments and changes shall each be identified by the signature of
the Mayor and City Clerk and the map shall bear the seal of the City
under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official
Zoning District Map of the City of Lower Burrell as adopted as an
integral part of the Zoning Ordinance."
D. When, in accordance with the amendment provisions of this chapter,
changes are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on
the Zoning District Map, such changes shall be made on the Zoning
District Map promptly after having been approved by Council, together
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-11 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-14
1:404
§ 300-15. Final authority of map and ordinance on file.
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Zoning District Map
and this chapter which may from time to time be made in the office of the
Zoning Officer, the Zoning District Map and this chapter on file shall be the
final authority as to current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings
and other structures in the City.
§ 300-16. Replacement of map.
In the event that the Zoning District Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost
or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and
additions, Council may by resolution adopt a new Zoning District Map which
shall supersede the prior Zoning District Map. The new Zoning District
Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City
Clerk and bear the seal of the City under the following words, "This is to
certify that this Zoning District Map supersedes and replaces the Zoning
District Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of
the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Lower Burrell, County of Westmoreland,
Pennsylvania."
with an entry on the Zoning District Map list of amendments and
changes. Each entry shall include the date and a brief description of the
nature of the amendment. Each such entry shall also be signed by the
Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. No amendment to this chapter
which involves matter portrayed on the Zoning District Map shall be
dependent upon such amendment and entry being made on the map.
E. No changes of any nature shall be made in the Zoning District Map
shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in
this article. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind of person or
persons shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
§ 300-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-16
1:405

ARTICLE II
Districts Established
§ 300-17. Classification of districts.
In order to carry out the intent of this chapter, the area of the City is
divided into the zoning districts as stated in this chapter and as shown by
the zoning district boundaries on the Zoning District Map included as part
of this chapter. The four general land use classification districts and the 10
specific zoning districts are:
§ 300-18. District boundaries.
A. Conservancy Districts.
(1) S-1 - Noncommercialized Conservancy District (agricultural).
(2) S-2 - Commercialized Conservancy District (specialized use only).
B. Residential Districts.
(1) R-1 - Low-Density Residential District (single-family detached
dwellings).
(2) R-2 - Medium-Density Residential District (single-family detached
and two-family dwellings).
(3) R-3 - High-Density Residential District (single-family detached and
multifamily dwellings).
C. Business Districts.
(1) C-1 - Neighborhood Business District.
(2) C-2 - Community Business District.
(3) C-3 - General Business District.
D. Industrial Districts.
(1) M-1 - Restricted Industrial District (light manufacturing).
(2) M-2 - General Industrial District (heavy manufacturing).
E. Planned residential development. Shown on Zoning Map only if and as
established by public hearing and as special exception. (See also Article
VIII.)
A. Where the indicated boundaries on the Zoning District Map are or are
approximately lot lines, property lines, public rights-of-way, streams or
dimensions on the Zoning District Map, such lines, streams, public
rights-of-way or dimensions shall be construed to be the boundaries.
B. Commercial zoning district boundaries shown on the map within or at a
distance of 200 feet from the lines of streets shall be deemed to follow
§ 300-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-18
1:407
§ 300-19. District regulations.
The zoning district regulations for each of the four general land use
classification districts are found in Articles III through VI. Each of these
articles contains the purpose of the district followed by a listing of the
permitted and special exception uses, height requirements and area
standards. The land and structures may be used, and structures may be
erected, altered, enlarged and maintained for the listed uses only; and such
use shall not be objectionable because of odor, dust, smoke, noise, gas,
fumes, cinders, vibrations, refuse matter, water-carried waste or toxic or
hazardous waste of any nature.
§ 300-20. Permitted uses; special exceptions.
In each zoning district, permitted uses shall be according to the common
meaning of the term or according to definitions given in Article XIX.
Conversely, uses not specifically listed or defined as included in these
districts shall not be permitted. Special exceptions are permitted by the
Zoning Hearing Board only in specific zones and according to specific
procedures and conditions prescribed herein.
§ 300-21. Unlisted uses.
Uses not listed in this chapter but equivalent or identical in nature to
a listed use may be permitted subject to interpretation and approval of
the Planning Commission and Zoning Hearing Board, or may be added as
permitted uses or special exceptions through the amendment procedure
provided in § 609 of Act 247130 and Article XXIV of this chapter. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall decide all contested questions of interpretation and
make findings on all relevant issues of fact.
the center lines of the preceding. The vacation of streets or property
lines shall not affect the location of such zoning district boundaries.
C. When the Zoning Officer cannot definitely determine the location of a
zoning district boundary by lines of streets or center lines, by the scale
or dimensions stated on the map, or by the fact that the boundary
clearly coincides with a property line shown on the map, the Zoning
Officer or the Zoning Hearing Board, upon appeal, shall interpret the
location of the zoning district boundary with reference to the nearest
property lines indicated by the Westmoreland County Tax Base Maps on
file and bearing district boundaries marked by the Department or
Zoning Officer, and the scale of the Zoning Map and the intentions and
the purposes set forth in all relevant provisions of this chapter.
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.
§ 300-18 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-22
1:408
§ 300-22. Area, height and use requirements.131
The general zoning standards, requirements and exceptions listed in this
chapter shall be applied in the zoning districts specifically stated herein by
the Zoning Hearing Board or Zoning Officer. Action by the Board shall be
required where so stated in compliance with the requirements of § 300-183.
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-22
1:409

ARTICLE III
Conservancy Districts
§ 300-23. Purposes.
Districts designated as Conservancy Districts are primarily tracts of open
land which present limitations (including flooding, slopes in excess of 24%
and highway restrictions) to development. The specific purposes of each of
the conservancy districts are as follows:
§ 300-24. Permitted uses.
A. The S-1 Noncommercialized Conservancy District permits publicly
owned and nonprofit clubs and institutions to own, operate and
maintain those public service and recreation facilities indicated for the
S-2 District. This land, due to its limited capability for intensive
development, should be preserved as near to its natural state as
possible. However, large tracts may still be considered for subdivision
or development if disturbance is limited to the less severe areas of the
tract after considering the specific site limitations.
B. In the review of proposed development in Conservancy Districts,
special attention shall be given to the approval of a site plan. This is to
assure sensitive use within the site considered and as it relates to
contiguous properties. Particular effort should be made to safeguard
steep slopes as permanent greenbelts, landscape frames and buffers.
(See Articles VII and VIII.)
C. Future development will be considered only when all proposed
structures are erected with supporting structures appropriate to the
land limitations. Provisions for safe and sanitary sewage disposal and
water supply that comply with city and state requirements will be
mandatory.
A. S-1 and S-2 Districts:
(1) Accessory uses. (See §§ 300-27B and 300-95.)
(2) Dwelling, one-family.
(3) Essential services. (See §§ 300-88, 300-151 and 300-155.)
(4) General gardening.
(5) Museum, public. (See § 300-151.)132
(6) Nursery stocking, with sales and limited advertising on the
premises.
(7) Public recreation.
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-24
1:411
§ 300-25. Special exception uses. [Amended 7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
5-1998]
(8) Reforestation.
(9) Tree growing and harvesting, with sales and limited advertising on
the premises. (See § 300-30A.)
B. S-2 Districts only: blacksmith shop.
A. Permitted in S-1 and S-2 Districts:
(1) Educational facilities. (See § 300-28C.)133
(2) Cemeteries, public, private or pet. (See § 300-28A.)
(3) Government. (See § 300-151.)
(4) Farming. (See § 300-135.)
(5) Limited enlargement of nonconforming uses. (See § 300-147.)
(6) Public utility substation. (See § 300-155.)
(7) Public utility towers. (See § 300-156.)
(8) Recreation areas (nonprofit) including all such uses in S-2,
Subsection B, hereof.
(9) Religious institutions. (See § 300-128.)134
(10) Stables. (See § 300-135D.)
(11) Planned residential development. (See Article VIII.)
(12) Sheds (utility). (See § 300-101C.)
(13) Antennas. Permitted in all zoning districts as an accessory use to a
legally existing structure, provided that all of the following
conditions are met: [Amended 3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2-2009]
(a) Submission of a certification from a licensed engineer or
architect that the structure to which the antenna is to be
attached can safely support the antenna and any ancillary
electric equipment.
(b) Submission of a lease or other document evidencing that the
owner of the structure approves the installation of the antenna
and any supporting equipment.
(c) Submission of scale drawings showing the location and method
of attachment of the antenna and any supporting equipment.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-24 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-25
1:412
(d) A full description and a picture of the antenna and other
supporting equipment to be attached, including pictures.
(e) A certification by the applicant that the antenna will operate in
conformity with all applicable FCC regulations concerning
radio frequency emissions.
(f) The antenna will not exceed the height of the existing structure
by more than 15 feet.
(g) The antenna and any ancillary equipment or structure will
meet otherwise applicable setback requirements.
(14) Oil and gas wells. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
B. Permitted in S-2 Districts:
(1) Community parking spaces or garages. (See § 300-98, 300-100 and
300-151.)135
(2) Greenhouse or horticulture nursery.
(3) Natural or artificial swimming facilities. (See § 300-153.)
(4) Indoor or racquet sports and/or skating.
(5) Lodges (transient housing in a recreational development providing
overnight accommodations for those using public or commercial
recreational facilities).
(6) Marina facilities for harboring and servicing all forms of
recreational watercraft. These facilities must have an architectural
design which is aesthetically compatible to the surrounding area
and which conforms to all the safety requirements of the Army
Corps of Engineers. The marina design must be approved by the
Planning Commission before it is submitted to the Zoning Hearing
Board for approval.
(7) Nursery stocking and sales.
(8) Recreation areas (commercial) including beaches; archery ranges;
riding stables and bridle paths; golf courses; church camps;
miniature golf courses; driving ranges; trap and gun, country
membership of sportsmen's clubs; picnic or swimming facilities;
camp sites or resorts; skiing or roller skating areas; and dog
training areas. (See §§ 300-24, 300-152 and 300-153.)
C. All of the above uses must meet all the applicable requirements of this
chapter and the standards recommended by national and/or local
organizations regulating and governing design for special uses listed.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-25
1:413
§ 300-26. Conditional uses. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
Permitted in the Conservancy (S) Districts:
§ 300-27. Areas and height regulations.
§ 300-28. Cemeteries; stables; pet cemeteries; educational
institutions (special exceptions).
D. All above uses subject to site plan and architectural review by the
Planning Commission and/or its consultant on special planning matters.
A. Oil and gas wells.
A. Areas. Each lot in the S-1 and S-2 Districts shall comply with the
following minimum requirements (see § 300-128):
(1) Front yard width: 40 feet. (See §§ 300-128B, 300-129F.)
(2) Side yard width.
(a) Interior lots: 16 feet on each side.
(b) Corner lot. Abutting a street, not less than the depth of front
yard required on the adjoining lot on that street; not abutting a
street, no less than 16 feet. (See §§ 300-128B, 300-129F.)
(3) Rear yard depth: 40 feet. (See §§ 300-128B, 300-129F, 300-101 and
300-128C for a through lot.)
(4) Lot area: 20,000 square feet/dwelling unit with water and sewer,
and 40,000 square feet/dwelling unit without either water or sewer.
(5) Lot width.
(a) Interior lot: 100 feet.
(b) Corner: 125 feet.
B. Heights. The maximum heights of structures, except as otherwise
provided (see Article XV), in the S Districts shall be:
(1) Thirty feet (not exceeding two stories for a one-family dwelling).
(2) Forty-five feet (not exceeding three stories) for other main
structures.
(3) Fifteen feet (not exceeding one story) for accessory structures. This
shall not apply to farm buildings.
A. Cemeteries. Mausoleums, headstones, crematories, living quarters for
caretakers and a sales office open at appropriate times and directly
related only to the permitted use of the premises shall be permitted.
Also, the sale of flowers and grave decorations, for use only on the
§ 300-25 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-28
1:414
premises, is permitted. Adequate fences or barriers shall be provided.
Pet cemeteries, if according to accepted standards of the trade, are
permitted.
B. Stables. Stables, when used for horses and/or ponies owned by the
residents of a dwelling in this zoning district and only when used
exclusively by such residents or their guests, shall be permitted. Five
acres minimum site area. (See § 300-135D.)
C. Educational institutions. An elementary or secondary school or
institution of higher learning (public or private, nonprofit) may be
permitted in any of the S-1 or S-2 Districts in accordance with the
regulations specified in this section.
(1) The height of main buildings may be, but shall not exceed, two
stories or 30 feet; except that this height limitation may be
exceeded if all required yard widths are increased by one foot for
every foot by which a building exceeds 30 feet in height.136
(2) Minimum yard requirements shall be: front yard depth, 30 feet;
side yard widths, 40 feet and rear yard depth, 60 feet.
(3) Building coverage shall not exceed 10% of the total lot area.
(4) Playgrounds, playfields and other active recreation facilities shall
not extend into required front or side yards, any closer than 30 feet
to a rear lot line; and no secondary school athletic facility involving
spectators, except a gymnasium or auditorium completely enclosed
within a building, shall be located closer than 200 feet to any
residential property lines.
(5) Fences or planted buffer strips shall be provided as determined by
the Zoning Hearing Board to be necessary for safety purposes or to
minimize possible adverse influences upon abutting or adjacent
property.
(6) If students or teachers are to be housed on the site, the lot area
devoted to housing shall be not less than prescribed for housing in
conjunction with churches in § 300-151B.
(7) Minimum distances between buildings shall not be less than
prescribed in § 300-151C.
(8) Adequate off-street parking, as determined by the Board, but no
less than one space per employee, shall be provided to
accommodate vehicles of the maximum number of teachers,
students and others using the premises at any one time; and
loading space shall be provided adequate to permit off-street
loading and unloading of students of no less a number than that
specified in §§ 300-91 and 300-92.137
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-28
1:415
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-28 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-28
1:416
ARTICLE IV
Residential Districts
§ 300-29. Purpose.
Districts designated for residential use are limited to dwellings and the uses
normally associated with residential neighborhoods. Planned residential
developments (Article VIII) may be permitted as special exceptions, which
may include ancillary commercial facilities integrated into the
neighborhood design. The specific purposes of each of the residential
districts are as follows:
§ 300-30. Permitted uses.
(Including certain stated special exceptions, see Article XVIII and
§ 300-164.)
A. R-1 Low-Density Residential District is designated for single-family
detached residential structures in developments of relatively low
density.
B. R-2 Medium-Density Residential District is designated for single
detached and two-family residential structures in developments of low
to moderate density.
C. R-3 High-Density Residential District is designated for valuable
centrally located property or property where good access and existing
sewer and water facilities warrant possible higher density of
population. Provides for single-family detached dwellings as well as
multifamily units.
A. R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts.
(1) Accessory uses (Article XVIII and § 300-164).
(2) Dwellings, one-family detached. (See § 300-32.)
(3) Essential services. (See §§ 300-88, 300-151 and 300-155.)
(4) Farming. (See § 300-135.)
(5) General gardening and greenhouses, without sales or advertising
of sales on the premises. (See Articles XIII and XIV.)
(6) Nursery stocking, without sales or advertising of sales on premises.
(7) Schools, elementary. (See §§ 300-37 and 300-151.)138
(8) Tree growing and harvesting, without sales or advertising of sales
on the premises. Indiscriminate harvesting not permitted within 40
feet of adjacent property owners. However, harvesting permitted
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-30
1:417
§ 300-31. Special exception uses.
(See also Article XVIII.)
with consent of adjacent owners; provided, that all requirements of
Chapter 270, Timber Harvesting, are complied with.139
B. R-2 District only:
(1) Dwellings, two family. (See § 300-32.)
(2) Public library. (See § 300-151.)140
(3) Permitted uses in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, as listed in Subsection
A hereof.
C. R-3 Districts only:
(1) Colleges. (See §§ 300-37 and 300-151.)141
(2) Dormitories. (See § 300-33.)
(3) Dwellings, row and townhouse (no more than six units in length),
condominiums, and garden apartments. (See § 300-32.)
(4) Fraternity or sorority houses. (See § 300-33.)
(5) Museums. (See § 300-151.)142
(6) Permitted uses in R-2 Districts.
A. R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts:
(1) Cemeteries. (See § 300-33A.)
(2) Child-care facilities. (See §§ 300-33C and 300-164, also subject to
§ 300-37.)
(3) Community garage or parking areas. (See § 300-91, 300-100,
300-151.)143
(4) Educational institutions. (See §§ 300-37 and 300-151.)144
(5) Government. (See § 300-151.)145
(6) Limited enlargement of nonconforming uses. (See § 300-147.)
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-30 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-31
1:418
(7) Nursing home. (See §§ 300-33C, 300-164.)
(8) Philanthropic institutions. (See § 300-151.)
(9) Planned residential development. (See Article VIII.)
(10) Professional services of medical doctors and ministers of religion.
(See § 300-34.)
(11) Public utility substation. (See § 300-155.)
(12) Public utility towers. (See § 300-156.)
(13) Parks, playgrounds and recreation areas. (See § 300-152.)
(14) Boarding and/or rooming house. (See § 300-33C.)
(15) Religious institutions. (See § 300-151.)146,147
B. R-2 Districts only:
(1) Dwelling, two-family, townhouse, other than a land development
project or planned residential development, provided each
structure has a lot frontage of 135 feet. (See § 300-32E.)
(2) Special exception uses permitted in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts. (See
Subsection A hereof.)
(3) Land development project. (See § 300-154.)
C. R-3 Districts only:
(1) Accessory business uses. (See § 300-35.)
(2) Clinic, health care, including counseling. (See § 300-164.)
(3) Dormitories.
(4) Greenhouse and nursery sales where compatible with existing
adjacent uses. (See § 300-98.)
(5) Home occupation. (See § 300-99.)
(6) Hospital. (See § 300-33C.)148
(7) Loading space.
(8) Membership club. (See §§ 300-33C, 300-151.)
(9) Mobile home park. (See § 300-36.)
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
147. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 1.P, Sheds, utility, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-31
1:419
§ 300-32. Area and height requirements.
(10) Hotel, motel or tourist court. (See § 300-34.)
(11) Personal and professional services. (See § 300-34.)
(12) Land development project. (See § 300-154.)
A. R-1 Areas. Each lot in the R-1 District shall comply with the following
minimum requirements (see §§ 300-129 through 300-137), except as
otherwise provided. (See § 300-128.)
(1) Front yard depth: 30 feet. (See §§ 300-128 and 300-129E.)
(2) Side yard width.
(a) Interior lot: eight feet on one side, 20 feet total both sides.
(b) Corner lot. Abutting a street, not less than the depth of front
yard required on the adjoining lot on that street; not abutting a
street, no less than eight feet. See §§ 300-128B, 300-129F.
(3) Rear yard depth: 40 feet [see §§ 300-126, 300-128B, D and
§ 300-128C(2) for a through lot].
(4) Lot area per family: 10,000 square feet; 15,000 square feet where
either public water or sewerage is absent; and 20,000 square feet
where neither public water or sewerage are provided.
(5) Lot width per family. (See § 300-38.)
(a) Interior lot: 70 feet.
(b) Corner lot: 90 feet.
(6) Exceptions. See § 300-127.149
B. R-1 Heights. The maximum heights of structures, except as otherwise
provided (see Article XV), shall be:
(1) Thirty feet (not exceeding two stories) for a one-family dwelling.
(2) Forty-five feet (not exceeding three stories) for other main
structures.
(3) Fifteen feet (not exceeding one story) for accessory structures. This
shall not apply to farm buildings.
C. R-2 Areas. Each lot in the R-2 District shall comply with the following
minimum requirements (§§ 300-129 through 300-137), except as
otherwise provided (§ 300-127):
(1) Front yard depth: 25 feet, see §§ 300-128, 300-129E.
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-31 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-32
1:420
(2) Side yard width:
(a) Interior lot: six feet on one side; 18 feet total both sides.
(b) Corner lot. Abutting a street, not less than the depth of front
yard required on the adjoining lot on that street; not abutting a
street, six feet. (See § 300-128, Subsections B through F.)
(3) Rear yard depth: 40 feet [see §§ 300-128B, D and 300-129F and
§ 300-128C(2) for a through lot].
(4) Lot area per family.
(a) One family dwelling: 7,500 square feet, 10,000 square feet
where either public water or sewerage is absent and 20,000
square feet where both are absent.
(b) Two-family dwelling: 3,750 square feet each dwelling unit, and
5,000 and 10,000, depending on water and sewerage as above.
(5) Lot width.
(a) Interior lot: 60 feet.
(b) Corner lot: 75 feet.
(6) Exceptions. See § 300-127.150
D. R-2 Height. The maximum height of structures, except as otherwise
provided (Article XV), in the R-2 District shall be:
(1) Thirty feet (not exceeding two stories) for a two-family dwelling.
(2) Ten stories for a high-rise in land development project. (See
§ 300-154.)
(3) For all other structures, the same as in the S Districts. (See
§ 300-27B.)
E. R-3 Areas. Each lot in the R-3 District shall comply with the following
minimum requirements (see § 300-129), except as otherwise provided
(see § 300-128):
(1) Front yard depth: 25 feet. A concrete curb and four foot six inch
concrete sidewalk shall, when and if required by the Planning
Commission, be constructed when fronting on any major or
collector street of any width. See Illustration No. 8 of Appendix A
and §§ 300-128B, 300-129E, H and 300-164.
(2) Side yard width.
(a) One-family dwelling or two-family dwelling. Same as in the R-2
District, Subsection C(2), hereof.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-32
1:421
(b) Townhouse or row dwelling: 15 feet.151
(c) A side yard abutting a street need not be more, but shall not be
less than the depth of the front yard required on the adjoining
lot on that street. (See §§ 300-128B and 300-129F.)
(3) Rear yard depth. See §§ 300-128B, D and 300-129F; for a through
lot, see § 300-128C(2).
(a) Townhouse or row dwelling: 40 feet.
(4) Courts.
(a) Every court shall have between two opposite facing walls
thereof a horizontal dimension 60 feet or more.
(5) Lot area per dwelling.
(a) One-family dwelling: 7,500 square feet, 10,000 square feet,
where either public water or sewerage is absent, and 20,000
square feet where both are absent.
(b) Two-family dwelling: 3,750 square feet each unit and 5,000
square feet and 10,000 square feet, as above.
(c) Townhouse or row dwelling: 4,000 square feet per unit, and
where public water or sewerage is absent, 8,000 square feet
for the first two units and 4,000 square feet for the additional
units; where both are absent, 10,000 square feet.
(d) Garden apartment: 3,500 square feet per unit, and where
public water and/or sewerage is absent, increase square
footage to 5,000 square feet per unit or a minimum as
determined by the Department of Environmental Protection or
other applicable agency.152
(e) High rise. (See Article VIII and § 300-154.)
(6) Lot width.
(a) Multifamily, townhouse or row dwelling: 135 feet.
(b) Other uses than the dwellings listed in Subsection E(6)(a)
hereof, shall be as in Subsection C(5) hereof.
F. R-3 Height. The maximum heights of structures, except as otherwise
provided (Article XV) in the R-3 District shall be:
(1) Maximum of 10 stories for a high-rise structure in a land
development project. (See § 300-154.)
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-32 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-32
1:422
§ 300-33. Cemeteries; dormitories; funeral homes.
(See also Article XVIII.) The following pertain to Residential Districts:
(2) The same as in the S District, § 300-27B for other applicable
structures.
A. Cemeteries are permitted in Residential Districts only to preserve a
"burying ground" or expand an existing cemetery. Aboveground
headstones may be permitted in existing cemeteries, up to four feet in
height.
B. Dormitories, fraternity houses and sorority houses shall be located
upon a lot facing a street or public right-of-way across from the school
or college to which they are related or upon a lot adjacent to the
property of such school or college or upon a lot adjacent to an existing
dormitory, fraternity house, sorority house in R-3 Districts as a special
exceptions.
C. Site location requirements.
(1) Funeral homes. C-3 Districts only, when not adjacent or across the
street from R-1 or R-2.
(2) Hospitals. R-3, when adjacent to other R-3 lands or C.
(3) Nursing homes and child-care facilities. R-3 only; and also R-1 and
R-2 when site is adjacent to or across street from R-3 or C.
(4) Rooming houses and/or boarding houses. R-3 and also R-1 or R-2
when site is adjacent to R-3 or C.
(5) Membership club not serving intoxicating beverages. R-3 or C
when adjacent to other R-3 or C uses. Membership clubs may be
permitted to serve intoxicating beverages only when located across
from or adjacent to C or M Districts.
D. The following conditions are applicable to the aforementioned uses:
(1) The use conforms to the provisions of § 300-37B and Article XV.
(2) There shall be provided a lot area of not less than 20,000 square
feet for funeral homes, rooming and/or boarding houses, and one
acre plus 300 square feet for each inpatient or reposing room
facility.
(3) Dormitory facilities for doctors and nurses may be included;
provided, in addition to the requirement of Subsection D(2) hereof,
the lot area in relation to the number of sleeping rooms or persons
to be housed in such facility meets a unit density commensurate
with that permitted on surrounding properties.153
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-33
1:423
§ 300-34. Professional services, hotels and motels.
(See also Article XVI.) Personal and professional services in an R-3 District
shall be located upon lots adjacent to or immediately across a street or
public right-of-way from a C District or upon lots adjoining a legally
permitted use other than a one- or two-family dwelling. A motel, hotel or
tourist court, with accessory uses and structures incident thereto, may be
permitted, provided:
(4) The use meets one-family dwelling height, yard and width
requirements.
(5) Funeral homes shall not include crematories. Neighborhood
character shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board. (See
§§ 300-37B, 300-91, 300-128C and Article XV.)
A. Each building shall be on a section of ground of not less than 2,000
square feet in area for each living or sleeping unit in a one-story tourist
court, or of not less than 750 square feet in area for each living or
sleeping unit in a two-story tourist court designated on the plan as a
building area.
B. The minimum distances between the main buildings within the site area
(tract) shall be as follows:
(1) Front-to-front or front-to-rear or rear-to-rear: 70 feet.
(2) Side-to-side: 20 feet.
(3) Front-to-side or rear-to-side: 50 feet.
C. The building or buildings on the lot shall be no closer than 50 feet to any
lot line which is not a street line, or 100 feet to a street line.
D. Each living or sleeping unit shall have at least 150 square feet of floor
area.
E. There may be accessory uses and structures incident to the tourist
court operation, including common dining facilities and swimming
pools, tennis courts and similar recreational uses. (See § 300-98B.)
F. Each sleeping unit shall have one approved ionization-type smoke
detector sensing visible and invisible particles of combustion. Such
detector shall work on electric and battery power and have the capacity
to be connected to both sources of power simultaneously. Such detector
shall be installed in a manner and location approved by the authority
having jurisdiction. When actuated, the detector shall provide an alarm
suitable to warn the occupants. (See Chapter 165, Fire Prevention,
Article I, Smoke Detectors.)
G. Uses permitted under this provision shall be operated or maintained
only under the same ownership and on the same zoning lot as the
principal use.
§ 300-33 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-34
1:424
§ 300-35. Accessory business uses.
(See also § 300-164.)
H. Parking. (See § 300-91B.)
I. Special attention shall be given to buffering or screening if such use is
adjacent to residential uses. (See § 300-94.)
A. R-2 Districts. C-1 retail and personal service business may be permitted
as an accessory use to multifamily dwellings in R-2 Districts, provided:
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board shall determine that the proposed retail
and/or service business is reasonably necessary for the
convenience of residents of the neighborhood in which such uses
are to be located.
(2) All business uses permitted under the provisions of this section
shall be located within a building the principal use of which is
residential. The total floor area which may be used for business
purposes shall not exceed 1/3 of the total ground floor area of the
building in which it is located.
(3) The residential neighborhood in which the proposed business use is
accessory shall be comprised of at least 150 dwelling units.
(4) Off-street parking spaces shall be required to accommodate the
maximum number of potential customers or clients at any one time.
(5) Uses permitted under the provisions of this section shall be
operated or maintained only under the same ownership and on the
same zoning lot as the principal use. (See §§ 300-97 and 300-98.)
B. R-3 Districts. C-1 retail and personal service businesses may be
permitted as an accessory use to apartment dwellings in R-3
Multifamily Residence Districts, provided:
(1) The Board shall determine that the proposed retail and/or service
business is reasonably necessary for the convenience of residents
of the building or development in which such uses are to be
located.
(2) All business uses permitted under the provisions of this section
shall be located within a building, the principal use of which is
residential.
(3) The total floor area which may be used for business purposes shall
not exceed 1/3 of the ground floor area of the building in which it is
located.
(4) The residential building or development to which the proposed
business use is accessory shall contain at least 50 dwelling units. A
business use permitted under the provisions of this section shall be
§ 300-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-35
1:425
§ 300-36. Mobile homes and parks.154
(See also Article XVI and § 300-164.) In R-3 Districts, a mobile home,
whether the wheels are attached or not, shall be permitted only in mobile
home parks as herein defined. Mobile home parks may be permitted in R-3
Districts, provided:
operated or maintained under the same ownership, or by lessees or
concessionaires thereof, and on the same zoning lot as the principal
use. (See Articles XIII and XIV.)
A. The site shall be located on or near a main traffic artery, and direct
vehicular access shall be provided by means of an abutting improved
public street or an improved and permanently maintained private street
which is protected by a permanent easement. Provision shall be made
for a visual buffer between the site and abutting public rights-of-way.
B. Each new mobile home park shall provide facilities and
accommodations for no fewer than 50 mobile homes on a minimum of
10 acres for such park.
C. The use shall be for occupancy by families for extended tenure 60 days
or longer and shall not include facilities designed for transient
occupancy. Shorter tenures may be considered in Conservancy
Districts. (See § 300-164.)
D. For each mobile home, a section of ground of not less than 5,000 square
feet in area (double units, 6,000 square feet in area), shall be allocated
or designated on the plan as the location for only two automobiles and
one mobile home.
E. In addition to the requirement of Subsection D hereof, there shall be an
overall site requirement of 10% per mobile home lot size for community
facilities including play space, utility rooms, additional parking and
access roads.
F. For purposes of practical placement and removal, and retention of the
mobile home on its section of ground in a stable condition and in a
satisfactory relationship to its surroundings, each location for a mobile
home shall provide a stand not less than 14 feet by 70 feet with a
longitudinal gradient not more than 5% and with adequate crown or
cross gradient for surface drainage. Such a stand shall be at an
elevation, distance and angle in relation to the access street and
driveway that placement and removal of the mobile home are practical
by means of a car, conveyor truck or other customary moving
equipment.
G. The site, including mobile home stands, patios, buildings and all site
improvements, shall be harmoniously and efficiently organized in
relation to topography, to the shape of plot, to the shape, size and
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-35 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-36
1:426
§ 300-37. Educational institutions.
(See also Article XVI.) A public or private nonprofit child care facility,
nursery school, kindergarten, elementary or secondary school or institution
of higher learning may be permitted in residential districts, provided that:
§ 300-38. Reduction in lot width; R-1 Zone.
In R-1 Zone where both public water and sewer is available, the required
minimum seventy-foot width for interior lots (corner lots may be reduced to
85 feet) for single-family homes may be reduced to 65 feet, providing the
following special conditions are met [see § 300-32A(5)]:
position of buildings and with full regard to use and appearance. Site
planning shall provide for safe, comfortable, efficient and sanitary use
by the occupants under all weather conditions, and shall provide
services appropriate to the needs of the occupants. Full advantage shall
be taken of favorable views, existing trees and other desirable site
features; adequate protection shall be provided against any undesirable
off-site views or any adverse influence from adjoining streets or areas.
H. Unless as specifically noted otherwise and in addition to this chapter,
the rules and regulations of the Westmoreland County Mobile Home
Park Subdivision Regulations shall be followed as an additional
requirement of this section.
A. The height of principal buildings shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35
feet.
B. Yards shall be provided as follows:
(1) Front yard depth: 30 feet.
(2) Rear yard depth: 40 feet.
(3) Side yard depth: 15 feet each when not abutting a street and 25
feet when abutting a street.
C. Building coverage shall not exceed 20% of the total lot area.
D. Fences or planted buffer strips shall be provided, as determined by the
Planning Commission to be necessary for safety purposes or to
minimize possible adverse influences upon adjacent or abutting
properties.
E. Sufficient off-street space for loading and unloading students from
private autos or school buses shall be provided.
F. Active recreation space, accessory to the principal use, may be located
partially within a rear yard, but not within a required side or front yard.
G. Adequate off-street parking [see § 300-28C(8)].
H. For other applicable special provisions, see § 300-128.
§ 300-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-38
1:427
A. The minimum site area for a developer seeking reduced lot width shall
be 12 acres.
B. The plan shall be submitted for review to the Planning Commission for
conformance with all other applicable provisions of this chapter.
C. The lot area requirement remains the same as required for R-1
developments.
D. Option. The lot area may be reduced to 8,500 square feet, providing an
equal amount of open space is dedicated for common open space. The
open space may be dedicated to the community or to an association of
the homeowners living in the plan for park and recreation use or as a
permanent landscape frame.
§ 300-38 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-38
1:428
ARTICLE V
Business Districts
§ 300-39. Purpose.
To restrict the type of uses, to group or consolidate compatible commercial
uses, and to avoid scattered or isolated commercial uses, this chapter
designates specific commercial classifications and areas as follows:
§ 300-40. Enclosure.155
In Business Districts, the land and structures may be used and structures
may be erected, altered, enlarged and maintained for the uses listed in this
article. In the C-1 and C-2 Districts, each enterprise shall be conducted
within an enclosed building unless otherwise specifically stated and shall
conform to the performance standards of Article IX. All commercial
structures must be serviced by public water and sewers or acceptable sewer
or water systems approved by DEP and other reviewing bodies.
§ 300-41. Permitted uses.
(Including certain stated special exceptions. See Article XVIII and
§ 300-164.)
A. C-1 Neighborhood. Small businesses to meet day-to-day needs for food
and common household goods and services of nearby residents without
adversely affecting residential properties. This may serve as a
transitional district for property located on major streets or on the edge
of residential neighborhoods. (See § 300-164.)
B. C-2 Community. Intermediate in size and function, to serve everyday
needs of customers, providing a wider variety of goods and services
than the neighborhood centers. This district permits limited retail
establishments which normally occur within shopping centers.
C. C-3 General. Large or region-serving facilities with possible mix of
commercial, governmental and cultural activities and generally
highway oriented. This district also permits automobile service
business.
A. C-1, C-2 and C-3 Districts.
(1) Accessory uses. (See Articles XIII and XIV.)
(2) Barber shop or beauty shop.
(3) Catering establishment.
(4) Clothes pressing or minor clothes repair.
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-41
1:429
(5) Community garage or parking area. (See §§ 300-91, 300-124 and
300-151.)156
(6) Dog grooming.
(7) Dry-cleaning establishment.
(8) Essential services. (See §§ 300-88, 300-151, 300-155.)
(9) Farming. (See § 300-135.)157
(10) Financial institution or enterprise.
(11) General gardening.
(12) Hotel or boarding house, motel, motor inn or tourist court [see
§§ 300-34, 300-43A(7)].158
(13) Laundry; agency, hand- or customer-operated.
(14) Meat markets, including groceries, fish and poultry, sales and
minor dressing only. (See § 300-79.)
(15) Membership club without intoxicating beverages [see
§ 300-43A(7), 300-151].
(16) Museum. (See § 300-151.)
(17) Neighborhood shopping center. (See § 300-46.)159
(18) Nursery stocking and sales.
(19) Office, business.
(20) Office, professional (architect, doctor, dentistry or medicine,
optician, engineer, lawyer and minister or priest).
(21) Restaurant without bar and entertainment. Outdoor patio eating
area permitted, provided such is not detrimental to the area as
determined by the Board.160
(22) Retail store (convenience and nonmanufacturing), beverages,
books, confections, drugs, gifts, groceries, novelties, notions,
periodicals, tobacco and sporting goods. Sales and service of
electrical appliances including, but not limited to, radios, television
and phonographs, and auto parts.
(23) Retail specialty building supply sales (regional in nature).
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-41 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-41
1:430
(24) Personal services.
(25) School, business.
(26) Shoe repair.
(27) Tree growing.
(28) Single-family residence [see § 300-42A(1), Special exception
uses].161
B. C-2 and C-3 Districts (including certain special exceptions; see Article
XVIII and § 300-164).
(1) Amusement enterprises. (See §§ 300-76, 300-81, 300-152 and
300-153), including pitch and putt, pool hall, bowling alley,
trampolines and sales of same.)
(2) Animal hospital. (See § 300-84.)
(3) Auditorium. (See § 300-151.)162
(4) New automobile, boat, motorcycle, snowmobile, trailer sales and
service; including sales of used vehicles in connection with sales of
new vehicles only. No repair work to be performed on vehicles
outside of enclosed buildings. (See §§ 300-44A, 300-76, and
300-81.)163
(5) Beverage distributors, both wholesale and retail.
(6) Business services.
(7) Clinic, dental or medical.
(8) Convenience food market (community oriented).
(9) Funeral homes. (See § 300-33C.)
(10) General photography.
(11) Laboratory, dental or medical.
(12) Membership club with intoxicating beverages.
(13) Printer's shop.
(14) Recreation, commercial or private clubs, including outdoor tennis
courts. All outdoor activities subject to Zoning Hearing Board
approval.
(15) Restaurant with or without bar and entertainment. (See
§ 300-79B.)
161. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-41
1:431
§ 300-42. Special exception uses. [Amended 10-13-1997 by Ord. No.
9-1997]
(See also Article XVIII.)
(16) Retail store (nonmanufacturing), appliances (minor), flowers,
hardware, sporting goods, tailoring, variety stores, wearing
apparel, pet sales and supplies.
(17) Repair shop, appliances.
(18) Studio (broadcasting, music, dance and art.)
(19) Theaters.
C. C-3 Districts (including certain special exceptions; see Article XVIII and
§ 300-164.)
(1) Automobile, car washes and repair shops, provided such are not
detrimental to the area as determined by the Board. (See
§ 300-44B.)
(2) Farm hardware and equipment sales.
(3) Feed stores.
(4) Laboratory, research. (See § 300-83.)
(5) School, vocational.
A. C-1, C-2 and C-3 Districts.
(1) Dwelling, one- or two-family may be in the same building with a
permitted commercial use when owner and/or renter occupied, or
in an accessory building if area and height and other requirements
are met. Multifamily housing shall comply with the yard
requirements for an R-3 District and the minimum lot area per
family established in § 300-32. Any multifamily dwelling in a C-3
District shall be within 100 feet of an R-2 or R-3 District or existing
multifamily dwelling. (See §§ 300-97 and 300-136.)
(2) Educational, philanthropic or religious institutions. (See §§ 300-47,
300-151.)164
(3) Government. (See § 300-151.)
(4) Health care centers, clinic, including counseling. (See Article VII
and § 300-164.)
(5) Ice sales and storage (not more than five tons) may be an accessory
use if placed against the main building and ice sale signs are only
on sales unit or immediately adjacent wall.165
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-41 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-42
1:432
(6) Land development projects, high-rise only. (See § 300-154.)
(7) Light manufacturing including sales and indoor display;
manufacturing, repair and assembling (in building where made) of
small electrical or mechanical machines and appliances; small
musical and precision instruments; watches, toys and novelties;
rubber and metal hand stamps; metal products of a light nature,
including heating and ventilating ducts, cornices, eaves and the
like; and also including plumbing, heating or electrical contracting
businesses. Light manufacturing shall comply, at a minimum, with
the lot, yard and land coverage requirements of an M-1 District.
Light manufacturing in a C-1 or C-2 District shall not occupy over
50% of the ground floor area. (See § 300-164.)
(8) Limited enlargement of a nonconforming use. (See § 300-147.)
(9) Multifamily, high-rise apartment, single structure for either
subsidized or conventional rental, sale or ownership, may be
permitted as a special exception according to § 300-154.
(10) Public utility corporation buildings, structures, facilities and
installations. (See § 300-155.)
(11) Public utility towers. (See § 300-156.)
(12) Telephone booth may be an accessory use if placed against the
main building and signs are only on unit or immediately adjacent
wall.166
(13) Microbreweries, wineries and microdistilleries are permitted as
special exception uses in the C commercial (C-1, C-2, and C-3)
zoning districts subject to Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board
(PLCB) requirements. Additionally, microbreweries, wineries, and
microdistilleries shall be set back 200 feet from other PLCB
licensees and 300 feet from schools, public playgrounds, churches,
religious institutions, hospitals and charitable institutions. [Added
4-11-2016 by Ord. No. 1-2016]
B. C-2 and C-3 Districts.
(1) Drive-in business excluding gasoline service stations and drive-in
theaters. (See § 300-74.)167
(2) Indoor recreation. (See § 300-159.)
C. C-1 and C-2 Districts.
(1) Unit group building development (neighborhood shopping center).
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-42
1:433
§ 300-43. Area and height requirements.
(a) Uses are those that are otherwise allowed in the C-1 or C-2
Districts.
(b) The area and height requirements shall be met. (See § 300-43A
and B for C-1 District, see § 300-43A and C for C-2 District.)
(c) Off-street parking requirements shall be met.
(2) Minor automobile repair (permitted in C-2 areas as a special
exception; permitted in C-1 areas that are adjacent to C-2 and C-3
areas as a special exception) and car washes. (See § 300-44.)
[Added 4-8-2013 by Ord. No. 1-2013168]
D. C-2 Districts.
(1) Adult business.
E. C-3 Districts.
(1) Cultural centers. (See Article VII.)
(2) Unit group building development, regional shopping center. (See
§§ 300-46, 300-111D and 300-164.)169
(3) Department or variety store of a state or nationwide chain.170
(4) Drive-in theaters. (See § 300-48.)
(5) Gasoline service station. (See §§ 300-44C, 300-91, 300-94 and
300-164.)171
A. C-1, C-2 and C-3 areas. Each lot in the C Districts shall comply with the
following minimum requirements (see §§ 300-129 through 300-137),
except as otherwise provided (see § 300-128):
(1) Front yard depth for lawns and plantings shall be 15 feet. A
concrete curb and four foot six inch concrete sidewalk shall, when
and if required by Planning Commission, be required when fronting
on a major street of any width. (See Illustration No. 8 of Appendix A
and §§ 300-128B, E, H and 300-164.)
(2) Side yard width for lawn, plantings and sidewalk shall be 7 1/2 feet
when not abutting a street; or, when abutting a street, not less in
width than the required front yard depth, or shall also meet
sidewalk requirements as above in Subsection A(1) hereof. (See
§§ 300-128B and 300-129F.)
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-42 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-43
1:434
(3) Rear yard depth. Fifteen feet, when rear lot line abuts an R District;
otherwise, none required (see §§ 300-128B and D and 300-129F);
for through lot, see § 300-128C(2).
(4) All required yards shall be maintained in lawns and plantings and
shall not be used for automobile parking.
(5) No structure shall be closer to another abutting district than the
depth of front yard required in such abutting district, nor closer to
a lot line abutting a street than is permitted in the district on the
opposite side of the street, and in no case closer than 50 feet to a
major street and 30 feet from a minor street. (See Illustration No.
7.)
(6) Lot width. Sixty feet minimum in C-1, 70 feet minimum in C-2 and
100 feet minimum in C-3.
(7) Lot area and yard requirements. Refer to R-3 District standards
when a dwelling (one- or two-family) may be proposed in the same
building with a permitted commercial use. (See § 300-42A.)
(8) Lot area for a hotel, boarding house with dwelling quarters. Two
thousand square feet plus 3,000 square feet for each sleeping room
in excess of four [see Subsection A(7) hereof].
(9) Lot area, C-3 only. Four acres desirable (see § 300-45) to 10 acres
(see § 300-46), of which after development, not more than 20%
shall have a gradient exceeding 5%.
B. C-1 heights. The maximum height of structures, except as otherwise
provided (see Article XV), in the C-1 Districts shall be:
(1) Fifteen feet for each story not exceeding two stories in total height.
(2) Fifteen feet (not exceeding one story) for accessory structures.
C. C-2 and C-3 heights. The maximum height of structures, except as
otherwise provided (see Article XV), shall be:
(1) Forty-five feet, not exceeding three stories, for main structures of a
business use.
(2) Fifteen feet, not exceeding one story, for accessory structures.
(3) Exceptions. The height of a main building may be increased,
provided:
(a) The building or increased height portion thereof is set back
from the permitted building lines one foot for each four feet of
building height over 45 feet, or 2 1/4 feet for each story over
three, whichever results in the greater dimension.
§ 300-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-43
1:435
§ 300-44. Automobile sales; repair; service stations.
(See also Article XVIII.)
(b) The cubical content of the building does not exceed the cubical
content of a solid having a base equal to the buildable area of
the lot and a height of 45 feet.
A. Automobile sales area. Automobile sales establishments, with all
supplies, new and used car sales and incidental service, shall be
permitted in C-2 and C-3 Districts, provided that any area not within a
building which is used for the display of automobiles shall be paved and
maintained for an all-weather, dust-free surface and shall be bordered
by curbing or barrier. Where an automobile display area abuts a
Residential or Conservancy District, it shall be bordered by a fence or
hedge not less than four feet in height. All lights used to illuminate an
automobile sales area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away
from adjoining properties and roadways. (See § 300-39.)
B. Automobile repair shops and car washes. An automobile repair shop or
automobile (car) wash, self-service, coin-operated or non-self-service
facilities shall be permitted in the C-3, M-1 and M-2 Districts and
special exception in C-2 Districts, provided that use is located on a
zoning lot complying with the yard and all other requirements of this
chapter. The use shall be carried on completely within a building or
within an enclosed storage area on the lot. There shall be no storage of
dismantled, partially dismantled or parts of automobiles outside of a
building or enclosed area. No automobile repair shop or car wash shall
be located closer than 100 feet to any lot in a residential district. An
automobile car wash shall not be permitted as an accessory use to a
repair shop or gasoline service station unless the lot and building meet
all yard and other requirements for both uses. See Subsection A hereof
for regulations governing special exceptions for gasoline service
stations.172
C. Gasoline service stations in the C-3, M-1 and M-2 districts. The Board
may permit the construction of a gasoline service station, provided the
following requirements are met:
(1) Area requirements.
(a) Minimum lot size: 12,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot frontage: 120 feet.
(2) Required yards.
(a) Abutting a property in another district: 30 feet.
(b) Abutting a property line in the C-3 District: 15 feet.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-43 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-44
1:436
§ 300-45. Waiver of area requirements in C-3 Districts.
In the C-3 Districts, the Zoning Hearing Board may permit the erection or
use of a structure for a use permitted in the district on a lot or parcel which
(c) Abutting a street (front street): 15 feet.
(3) Compressed air connections and similar equipment may be located
within a required yard abutting a street, but shall be located no
closer than 50 feet from any R District, 25 feet from any right-ofway
line or 25 feet from an adjacent property line. Pumps and
islands shall be located at minimum of 25 feet from any right-of-way
line. All other structures, excluding a fence, wall or landscape
feature, shall be located within the buildable area of the lot.
(4) Hydraulic hoists, pits and all lubrication, greasing, automobile
washing and repair equipment shall be entirely enclosed within a
building.
(5) Driveway openings (curb cuts) for gasoline service stations shall be
in accordance with the following:
(a) A driveway opening shall not exceed 35 feet in width and shall
be paved with concrete. Positioning of all openings shall be
such as to encourage one-way traffic through each opening.
Medial barriers and turning lanes on abutting major streets
shall be considered for installation at the landowner's expense
to prevent traffic congestion or hazards.
(b) A driveway opening shall not be located within 25 feet of the
intersection of curblines on a corner lot or within 15 feet of any
adjoining property line.
(c) Any two driveways providing access to a single street shall be
separated by an island with a minimum dimension 20 feet at
both the right-of-way line and the curb or edge of the
pavement.
(d) Entrances and exits must be approved by PennDOT if on a state
highway.
(6) Gasoline pump islands shall be surrounded by 10 feet of concrete
pavement; gasoline storage tank openings shall be surrounded by
three feet of concrete pavement.
(7) The Zoning Hearing Board, in passing upon the request of
approval, may consider the type of machinery and equipment to be
used and the methods of operation employed and may require
changes in relation to yards, location of pumps and buildings and
construction of buildings as it may deem best suited to ensure
safety, to minimize traffic difficulties and to safeguard adjacent
properties.
§ 300-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-45
1:437
does not meet the area standards established in § 300-43A(9), provided,
that adjacent lots within the C-3 District have been developed for
commercial uses on an individual basis and not according to the area and
facilities standards established for neighborhood shopping centers. Area
and height requirements for uses permitted under this section shall be the
same as for all other uses in the C-3 Districts which are not located within a
neighborhood or regional shopping center.
§ 300-46. Unit group building development (shopping center) in C-3
Districts.
(See also Article XVIII.) In a unit group building development in the C-3
Districts, the Zoning Hearing Board may permit the construction or use of
buildings or unit group buildings, provided:
§ 300-47. Educational institutions.
(See also Article XVIII.) An elementary or secondary school or institution of
higher learning, public or private, nonprofit, may be permitted in any of the
A. The required front yard, parking and access roadway are provided, and
in addition, the depth of front and rear yards and the width of side
yards, where abutting streets, shall be increased at the ratio of six
inches per acre or portion thereof, provided no such yard exceeds a
depth or width of 30 feet.
B. Additional parking areas are provided elsewhere on the lot in the ratio
of one parking space per 200 square feet of building floor area in excess
of the permitted floor area.
C. The required additional parking shall be accessible to a customer
approaching from the highway and shall be constructed in accordance
with the requirements of §§ 300-44C(5)(a).173
D. There shall be submitted with the application a market analysis of the
potential service area, prepared by an individual or an organization
indicated by documentary evidence as qualified to make such an
analysis. The analysis shall include data on population, income and
buying habits of the people.
E. The use, an integral part of which is "planned," shall be a regional or
neighborhood shopping center proposed by the landowner to be
developed as a single entity for a number of businesses. The proposed
structures shall not cover more than 30% of the total gross area of the
site proposed for ultimate development.
F. The Planning Commission shall determine that the proposed use is
related to its potential service area and is in keeping with principles of
the adopted master plan.
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-45 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-47
1:438
Commercial Districts in accordance with the regulations specified in this
section:
§ 300-48. Drive-in theaters in C-3 Districts.
A drive-in theater is permitted in the C-3 District, provided:
A. The height of main buildings may be, but shall not exceed two stories or
30 feet, except that this height limitation may be exceeded if all
required yard widths are increased by one foot for every foot by which a
building exceeds 30 feet in height.
B. Minimum yard requirements shall be:
(1) Front yard depth: 30 feet.
(2) Side yard widths: 40 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 60 feet.
C. Building coverage shall not exceed 15% of the total lot area.
D. Playgrounds, play fields and other active recreation facilities shall not
extend into required front or side yards or closer than 30 feet to a rear
lot line; and no secondary school athletic facility involving spectators
(except a gymnasium or auditorium completely enclosed within a
building) shall be located closer than 200 feet from any residential
property lines.
E. Fences or planted buffer strips shall be as provided in § 300-93 or as
determined by the Planning Commission to be necessary for safety
purposes or to minimize possible adverse influences upon abutting or
adjacent property.
F. If students or teachers are to be housed on the site, the lot area devoted
to housing shall be not less than prescribed for housing in conjunction
with churches in § 300-151B.
G. Minimum distances between buildings shall not be less than prescribed
in § 300-151C.
H. Adequate off-street parking as determined by the Board, but no less
than one space per employee, shall be provided to accommodate
vehicles of the maximum number of teachers, students and others using
the premises at any one time, and adequate loading space shall be
provided to permit off-street loading and unloading of students. (See
§§ 300-91 and 300-92.)
I. See § 300-151 for other applicable provisions.
A. Off-street parking, in addition to patron spaces, be provided on site at a
ratio of one space for every two employees. No other automobile
parking facilities under the provisions of § 300-39 shall be required.
§ 300-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-48
1:439
§ 300-49. Special consideration; traffic control, Leechburg Road
commercial uses.
B. There shall be no structure other than an enclosure fence within 50 feet
of any site boundary line, and the theater screen shall be located not
less than 100 feet from any national or state highway, major or collector
street or property in an R District, and not facing such highway or
property unless the face of the screen is not visible because of natural
or artificial barriers.
C. The height of the theater screen may be, but shall not exceed, a height
of 100 feet.
D. There must be individual car sound speakers, but low-volume speakers
may supply sound from refreshment stands and other service areas.
E. There may be accessory uses and structures incident to the theater
operation such as refreshment stands and toilet facilities, provided they
serve only the patrons within the theater enclosure.174
F. An overall site plan shall be presented for Planning Commission review
and approval showing, in particular, the screening and buffering from
adjacent properties directly affected by possible noise, lights or visual
projections.
A. In addition to meeting all the applicable restrictions of the zoning
district and the use requirements for permitted uses for sites fronting
on or having direct access to and from Leechburg Road, the Planning
Commission may recommend to Council that permission be refused for
any use determined to overburden traffic flow because of poor, unsafe
and congested ingress and egress or that a condition be unsafe because
of the anticipated increase in traffic generated from the proposed use.
B. Certain uses, such as a car wash, fast-food eating establishment,
commercial grocery store, etc., can be classified as high traffic
generators and, therefore, can be an inordinate cause of traffic conflict.
C. If necessary, special traffic studies can be required by the Planning
Commission and/or Council to aid in the review and approval process of
proposed uses on Leechburg Road. Such studies shall be the
responsibility of applicant.175
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
175. Editor's Note: The Residential in C District (Special Exceptions Only) table, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-48 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-49
1:440
ARTICLE VI
Industrial Districts
§ 300-50. Purpose.
The provisions of this article are meant to encourage the sound and
reasonable development of industrial areas within the City. Permitted uses
shall not be objectionable because of odor, dust, smoke, noise, noxious
gas, fumes, cinders, vibrations, refuse matter or water-carried waste. (See
Article IX and Chapter 154, Erosion and Sediment Control.) Performance
standards, parking specifications and yard regulations are set forth in this
chapter to assure industrial development compatible with adjacent uses.
In the industrial districts, the land and structures may be erected, altered
enlarged and maintained for the following uses only. The specific purposes
of the industrial districts are as follows:
§ 300-51. Permitted uses.
(Including certain stated special exceptions. See Article XVIII and
§ 300-164. All uses not listed are subject to review and approval of Planning
Commission and other reviewing bodies.)
A. The M-1 Restricted Industrial District provides space for the
development of high-standard, precision industries in a protected
environment. The district regulations are designed to encourage
harmonious and appropriate industrial development that contributes to
the stability of the economic base of the City and otherwise furthers the
purposes set forth in this section.
B. The M-2 General Industrial District provides space for a wider range of
industrial and manufacturing activity under conditions and standards
which protect adjacent properties from adverse or objectionable
influences. (See § 300-85.)
A. M-1 and M-2 Districts.
(1) Accessory uses. (See §§ 300-95, 300-164); need not be within an
enclosed building.
(2) Automobile services including major repair, painting, upholstering,
tire retreading or recapping, battery manufacture and the like.
(See § 300-44B.)
(3) Automobile (car) wash. (See § 300-44B.)
(4) Gasoline service station. (See §§ 300-44C, 300-91, 300-94.) No
stands, racks or other paraphernalia, other than, or in direct
connection with, merchandise offered for sale, shall be located
outside a completely enclosed building. (See §§ 300-44B.)176
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-51
1:441
(5) Boat building, sale, assembly or repair.
(6) Building materials sales establishment.
(7) Community or businessmen's association garage or parking area.
(See § 300-98, 300-100, 300-124.)177
(8) Distribution plant, including parcel delivery, ice and cold storage
plant, bottling plant and food commissary or catering
establishment.
(9) Essential services. (See § 300-88.)
(10) Farming. (See §§ 300-73, 300-135.)
(11) Laboratories, dental, medical or research. (See § 300-83.)
(12) Landscape gardener's sales and area or business.
(13) Laundry processing.
(14) Light manufacturing, including sales and indoor display,
manufacturing, assembling and repair (in building where made) of
small electrical or mechanical machines and appliances; small
musical and precision instruments, phonographs, radios,
telephones, televisions, or other instruments or machines for
receiving, reproducing or transmitting sound; watches, clocks, toys
and novelties; rubber and metal hand stamps; metal products of a
light nature including heating and ventilating ducts, cornices,
eaves and the like; and also including plumbing, heating or
electrical contracting businesses. (See § 300-164.)
(15) Machine shop.
(16) Manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic
products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only
by electricity. (See § 300-85.)
(17) Manufacturing, assembling, repairing, compounding, fabricating,
treatment of articles or merchandise from the following previously
prepared material (not employing a boiling process): bone, canvas,
cellophane, clay, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair,
horn, leather, paint; also paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious
metals or stones, shells, straw, textiles, tobacco, wood (but not
including heavy woodworking shop) and yarns. (See §§ 300-75,
300-85.)
(18) Manufacture, canning, packaging, processing, treatment of such
products as beverages, cosmetics, drugs, perfumed toilet soaps,
perfumes, pharmaceuticals and food products not including fish
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-51 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-51
1:442
smoking, curing, canning, rendering of fats and oils or the
slaughter of animals. (See § 300-85.)
(19) Mobile home and trailer sales.
(20) Office, professional or business.
(21) Printing, lithographing, type composition, ruling and binding
establishment.
(22) School, vocational (industrial or trade).
(23)Warehousing, with the same restrictions as Subsection B(31),
Storage, hereof. (See § 300-75.)
(24) Wholesale business.
(25) Uses found in C Districts (subject to approval).
B. M-2 District.
(1) Alcohol manufacture and distillations. (See §§ 300-75, 300-77.)
(2) Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture. (See
§ 300-77.)
(3) Asphalt manufacturing or refining. (See §§ 300-75, 300-77.)
(4) Automobile wrecking.
(5) Blast furnace or coke oven. (See § 300-77.)
(6) Boiler works.
(7) Box factory.
(8) Brewery.
(9) Brick, tile or terra cotta manufacturing.
(10) Building, mover and wrecker's establishment.
(11) Chemical manufacture.
(12) Cleaning and dyeing establishment, using nonflammable cleaning
fluids.
(13) Concrete or cement products manufacture.
(14) Contractor's establishment, including sales and storage of
equipment and supplies.
(15) Cooperage works.
(16) Drop forge industry manufacturing forging with power hammers.
(17) Fuel (except gasoline) sales establishments.
§ 300-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-51
1:443
§ 300-52. Special exception uses.
(See also Article XVIII.)
(18) Feed-mixing plant and sales establishments.
(19) Freight transport terminal, interstate trucking.
(20) Iron or steel or other metal manufacture or treatment, foundry or
fabrication plant and heavyweight casting.
(21) Lumber storage, heavy woodworking shops, millwork and sales.
(22) Machinery repairing.
(23) Manufacturing; general and heavy. (See § 300-85.)
(24) Office, in conjunction with, and on the same zoning lot with, an
industrial plant development provided the gross floor area does not
exceed 50% of the area of the zoning lot.
(25) Ore reduction and general smelting operations.
(26) Rock, sand or gravel distribution and sales.
(27) Rolling mill.
(28) Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture or treatments.
(29) Soap manufacturing.
(30) Stone or monument works.
(31) Storage, not including explosives, inflammables, garbage, offal or
dead animals.
(32) Terminal warehousing or transfer depot.
(33) Tool manufacture.
A. M-1 and M-2 Districts.
(1) Building unit group shopping center.
(2) Cabinet making. (See § 300-55.)178
(3) Government, including educational institution. (See § 300-151.)
(4) Indoor recreation. (See § 300-159.)
(5) Limited expansion of nonconforming uses. (See § 300-147.)
(6) Public utility corporation buildings, structures, facilities and
installations. (See § 300-155.)
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code. (See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
§ 300-51 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-52
1:444
§ 300-53. Conditional uses. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
Permitted in the Industrial (I) District:
§ 300-54. Area and height requirements.
(7) Public utility towers. (See § 300-156.)
(8) Oil and gas wells and development. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 5-2011]
(9) Natural gas processing plants. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
5-2011]
(10) Natural gas compressor stations. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 5-2011]
(11) Refineries, for oil, gas, or similar products. (See § 300-162B.)
[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
B. M-1 Districts.
(1) Automobile, boat and trailer sales (new). (See § 300-44A.)
(2) Freight terminal, local trucking.
(3) Machine shop.
(4) Storage, other than celluloid, coal and coke, garbage, offal, dead
animals or refuse, gas (in its various forms) in excess of 10,000
cubic feet, gasoline in excess of an amount necessary for use on the
premises, gunpowder, fireworks or other explosives, junk, scrap
metal, paper or rags, petroleum and petroleum by-products in
excess of an amount necessary for use on the premises, raw hides
or skins, terminal warehouse or transfer depot.
C. M-2 Districts.
(1) Natural production uses (mineral extraction), such as the
extraction, excavation and sale of sand and gravel, clay, shale rock
or other natural mineral deposits or in the operation of a stone
quarry or mill. (See § 154-11.)
(2) Paint, oil (including linseed), shellac, turpentine, lacquer or varnish
manufacture. (See §§ 300-75, 300-77.)
A. Oil and gas wells, oil and gas development, natural gas compressor
stations, natural gas processing plants and related equipment.
A. Areas. Each lot shall comply with the following minimum requirements
(see §§ 300-129 through 300-137), except as otherwise provided (see
§ 300-128):
§ 300-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-54
1:445
§ 300-55. Cabinet making in industrial zone.179
Cabinet making may be permitted in an industrial zone provided:
(1) Front yard depth (building line): 35 feet. (See §§ 300-128,
300-129E.)
(2) Side yard width: 15 feet required, except in the following instances:
(a) When side lot line abuts an R District: 25 feet; and
(b) A side yard abutting a street not less than 15 feet or not less in
width than the depth of front yard required on the adjoining lot
on that street, whichever requirement is greater. (See
§§ 300-128B, 300-129F.)
(3) Rear yard depth: 35 feet when rear lot line abuts an R District, 25
feet required otherwise [see §§ 300-128B and D and 300-129F; for
through lot, see § 300-128C(2)].
(4) The front 15 feet of the required front yard depth shall be
maintained for landscaping and not used for automobile storage or
parking.
(5) Lot width: 200 feet.
(6) Lot coverage, buildings shall not cover more than 30% of the lot
area. (See §§ 300-128 through 300-137.)
(7) No parking shall be within 10 feet of adjacent residential zones.
B. Heights. The maximum height of structures, except as otherwise
provided (Article VII) shall be:
(1) Thirty feet, not exceeding two stories in M-1, 80 feet in M-2 for
main structures.
(2) Fifteen feet, not exceeding one story, for accessory structures;
exceptions will be considered.
A. The business (manufacturing) is conducted entirely under an approved
structure.
B. The structure cannot be closer than 100 feet to any adjacent structure
on another lot.
C. The waste (sawdust) is removed from the site, contained or treated to
prevent burning.
D. All other applicable provisions of this chapter apply.
179. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-54 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-55
1:446
ARTICLE VII
Site Plan Review and Certified Plot Plan
§ 300-56. Site plan.
A. Prior to construction of any proposed use, a site plan is required.
B. In order to assure the satisfactory development and use of recorded
sites within all zone districts, except for single-family dwellings in R
Districts, in addition to conforming to any and all regulations pertaining
thereto that are specifically set forth in this chapter, the site plan shall
be in accordance with an approved site development plan. Such plan
shall be submitted to the Lower Burrell Planning Commission for its
review and approval as well as to obtain the recommendation of other
reviewing bodies requesting same for the issuance of a building permit
to occupy or use the lot for the uses prescribed in this chapter. The
Planning Commission is delegated power of approval for site plans
under this article.
C. The site plan for a planned residential development shall conform in
particular to provisions under Article VIII.
(1) Before commencing site preparation or construction of any
structure, the site plan must have the approval of the Planning
Commission and the recommendation of Council when requested
by the Planning Commission. The site plan shall show, as proposed,
the location of main and accessory structures on the site and in
relation to one another; traffic circulation within the site; the
location of vehicular access onto the site; the height and bulk of
structures; the provision of automobile parking; the provision of
other open space on the site; and the handling of stormwater
drainage or controls; the landscaping, paving, fencing and walls,
and display of signs. Street opening permit must be submitted with
site plan. (See Chapter 260, Subdivision and Land Development.)
(2) When reviewing a site plan, the Planning Commission may act upon
the plan submitted to it or may act on its own initiative in
recommending the approval of a site plan. In considering any site
plan, the Planning Commission and Zoning Hearing Board shall
endeavor to assure safety and convenience of traffic movement
both within the site covered and in relation to access streets,
harmonious and beneficial relationships of structures and uses on
the site as well as contiguous properties. To this end, the Planning
Commission and City Council may limit vehicular access. Special
consideration shall be given to vehicular access to and from arterial
roads.
(3) Submission procedure. Each required site development plan shall
be submitted, in writing, to the Planning Commission at least 10
days prior to its next scheduled meeting.
§ 300-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-56
1:447
(a) Submission of preliminary site plan. An owner or owners
requiring approval of a site development plan for any
industrial, commercial or residential development shall submit
a written letter of application to the Planning Commission,
together with at least five prints of each drawing submitted as
part of the preliminary site development no later than 10 days
prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which
consideration is desired.
(b) Preliminary approval.
[1] If the preliminary site development plan is approved by the
Planning Commission, the owner is authorized to proceed
with the preparation of the final site development plan.
Conditional preliminary approval may be given by the
Planning Commission subject to modifications or changes
requested and recorded by the Planning Commission, in
which case the final site development plan may be
prepared to include such modifications or changes. A
statement approving or disapproving the preliminary site
development plan shall be signed by the Chairman or Vice
Chairman of the Planning Commission and attached to and
made part of the preliminary site development plan.
[2] If a variance or special exception is required from the
Zoning Hearing Board which is in any way related to the
preliminary site development plan, the Planning
Commission shall give only conditional approval which
shall not be binding if such variance or special exception is
denied by the Zoning Hearing Board.
[3] Preliminary approval shall confer upon the owner the
following rights for a six-month period from the date of
approval:
[a] That the general terms and conditions under which
the preliminary site development plan was granted
will not be changed.
[b] That the owner may submit on or before the expiration
date the final site development plan for final approval.
(c) Final approval.
[1] Five copies of the final site development plan shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for final approval
not later than five days prior to the meeting at which the
plan is to be considered. The submission shall conform to
all site development specifications available at the time.
[2] When the final site development plan has been approved
by the Planning Commission, the original tracing or
§ 300-56 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-56
1:448
§ 300-57. Certified plot plan.
When reviewing proposed new construction or additions, alterations or
revisions to any existing structure, including residential, the Building
Inspector or Zoning Officer may request a certified plot plan when deemed
necessary to insure compliance to yard requirements and/or other
provisions of this chapter.
tracings shall bear the signature of the Chairman or Vice
Chairman of the Planning Commission, attested by the
Secretary.
§ 300-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-57
1:449

ARTICLE VIII
Planned Residential Development
§ 300-58. Purpose and intent.
§ 300-59. Application.
Planned residential developments may be permitted in S-1 and S-2
Conservancy Districts and in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Zoning Districts
in the City, subject to the restrictions, qualifications and requirements cited
in this article, as enumerated herein below. Provisions of this chapter and
Chapter 260, Subdivision and Land Development, concerned with dwelling
type, bulk, density and open space shall not be applied except for the single
family portions of a PRD, when planned residential development proposals
are reviewed and approved and except when specifically indicated by the
provisions contained in this article. Planned residential developments shall
be shown on Official Zoning Map after being given tentative approval and
certified by Council.
§ 300-60. Ownership requirements.
A. The text and provisions of this article are herein included as they
pertain to residential development according to the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.180
B. The regulations set forth in this article are adopted to encourage
residential development design patterns which are more creative and
imaginative than is generally possible under conventional zoning
district controls and subdivision requirements. The use of the planned
residential development concept should be given favorable
consideration in cases where a rigid pattern of development would
create substantial difficulties in the installation and servicing of utilities
or roads and destroy natural site amenities. The flexibility afforded by
these provisions should preserve or create physical and economic
amenities that will be a continuing asset to the community and permit
the City to acquire open land in a manner heretofore not possible. For
example, flexibility would provide a mechanism for encouraging
dedication of land for parks and permitting the preservation of
contiguous steep slope areas.
A. The minimum land area for a planned residential development (PRD)
shall be 10 continuous acres.
B. The applicant for a PRD plan approval shall evidence a full ownership
interest in the land. The evidence shall be either legal title or an
executed binding sales agreement.
C. The project shall be in single, legal as well as equitable, ownership prior
to approval of the final development plan.
180. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 300-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-60
1:451
§ 300-61. Availability of public services and access.
D. A parcel to be developed must be one contiguous piece of land not
separated into subparcels by a public highway, road or a railroad rightof-
way.
A. In any instance where public or municipal sewer and water facilities are
available and are capable of being extended to the development site,
the developer shall connect the project to such facilities. Any extension
of the sewer system and collector lines (not laterals) must become a
public system, constructed in accordance with the sewage manual
procedures and requirements, with inspection by and approved by the
Lower Burrell Municipal Authority. If the cost of the connector facility
or line is more than the cost for the installation of an interim treatment
facility, the developer shall not be required to connect to the municipal
system. [Amended 9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
B. In the absence of public sewerage facilities, the developer shall provide
within a planned unit, a sanitary sewer system which shall be subject to
the standards and rules and regulations of the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Department of Environmental Protection of
the Commonwealth and of the rules and regulations and standards of
the City.181
C. Central water service shall be supplied to each structure to be erected
in the development subject to the above-mentioned provisions as well
as any other requirements of the federal or state government. A fire
hydrant shall be provided within 600 feet of each structure.
D. The developer shall provide within the planned residential development
a storm drainage system which shall be of sufficient size and design to
collect, carry off and dispose of all predictable surface water runoff
within the development, and shall be so constructed as to conform with
the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the commonwealth and the
City. The adequacy of such facilities shall be determined by the City
Engineer.
E. All PRDs shall be related to the local and regional highway systems. The
developer must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning
Commission, the City Engineer and appropriate officials of the State
Department of Transportation that traffic circulation will not be
adversely influenced, that additional traffic hazards will not be created
and that public and private road systems are adequate in terms of
traffic volume capacity and construction type to accommodate the
projected PRD-generated traffic.
F. Access to all PRDs shall not be through or over streets of existing
single-family developments, but must have direct access from arterial
or collector roads as defined.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-60 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-61
1:452
§ 300-62. Administration and procedures.
G. Collector lines/branches (not laterals), or whatever vernacular term is
applied to them (e.g., multiple laterals connected to a private sanitary
sewage collection line, which is then tapped into the public sanitary
sewage collection facilities), are not permitted. Each residential unit
must be individually tapped into the public sanitary sewage facilities.
See Exhibit 1 attached hereto and incorporated by reference.182 This
does not apply to high-rise buildings or garden apartment style
buildings or whatever vernacular term is applied to them. [Added
9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 1-2012]
A. The planned residential development provision of this chapter shall be
administered by the Planning Commission, which shall review all
applications on the basis of specified standards, conditions, regulations
and procedures. The Planning Commission shall conduct public
hearings and have final authority to approve, modify or disapprove
development plans.
B. The developer shall obtain required approvals for planned residential
developments by following a four step review process which shall
consist of:
(1) A preapplication conference.
(2) A preliminary development plan.
(3) Public hearings and approvals.
(4) A final development plan.
C. Preapplication conference with Planning Commission.
(1) Each applicant shall schedule a preapplication conference at a
regular meeting of the Planning Commission to obtain information,
exchange of ideas and feedback. It shall be the responsibility of the
City Building Inspector to arrange the mandatory conference with
the Planning Commission and other officials who should be
participants. The conference shall include members or a
designated committee of the Planning Commission and the City
Engineer, and such other representatives as deemed appropriate to
be included in the preapplication conference.
(2) No formal requirement for plan or material submission is
established for the preapplication conference; however, the more
data the applicant presents in the form of sketch plans, land use
concepts, density ranges proposed, ancillary use proposals, site
information, existing perimeter conditions, access considerations
and utility needs, the more guidance and help can be offered in
preparing an acceptable plan for local approval.
182. Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is on file in the City offices.
§ 300-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-62
1:453
§ 300-63. Formal application and tentative approval proceedings.
(3) The general intent of the proposal, evidenced schematically by
sketch plans and other basic illustrative materials, are to be
considered before submission of the planned residential
development application. It is the intent of this chapter that
subdivision review where applicable to a PRD and according to
Chapter 260, Subdivision of Land, be carried out simultaneously
with the review of a planned residential development under this
section of this article.
(4) This early review is to discourage developers from committing
substantial resources to a PRD until the preapplication conference
is completed, and to also expedite the formal review procedure and
assist in completing the application.
A. Following the preapplication conference(s), the developer shall provide
the Planning Commission with an application for tentative approval and
five copies of the overall preliminary site plan adhering to the standards
and requirements of this chapter. The application shall be placed on the
Planning Commission agenda to initiate the formal tentative approval
review proceedings. The applicant shall submit with the preliminary
plan an explanation of the character of the planned residential
development, the reasons why a planned residential development
would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for the development of the City.
B. The preliminary development plan shall be presented in sufficient detail
to provide the Planning Commission with a major substantive review of
the proposed planned residential development.
C. A statement of the applicant's intentions with regard to the future
selling or leasing of all or portions of the PRD, such as land areas,
dwelling units, etc., shall be included.
D. The preliminary development plan shall also include a key map of the
location of the site. The overall site plan shall be at a scale no smaller
than one inch equals 100 feet and any maps necessary to show the
major details of the proposed PRD shall contain the following minimum
information:
(1) The existing site conditions including contours at a minimum
interval of two feet up to 10% slope and a minimum interval of five
feet for over 10% slope, watercourses, floodplains, unique natural
features, and forest cover and other natural vegetation considered
significant by the Planning Commission and City Engineer.183
(2) Proposed lot lines and plot designs.
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-62 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-63
1:454
(3) The location and floor area size of all existing and proposed
buildings, structures and other improvements, including maximum
heights, types of dwelling units by code, density per type, and
nonresidential structures, including commercial facilities. All
structures shall be distinguished and identified on the plan by code.
Preliminary evaluations and/or architectural renderings of typical
structures and improvements shall be provided. Such drawings
shall be sufficient to relay the basic architectural intent of the
proposed improvements but should not be encumbered with final
detail at this stage.
(4) The location and size in acres or square feet of all areas to be
conveyed, dedicated or reserved as common open spaces, public
parks, recreational areas, school sites and similar public and
semipublic uses.
(5) The existing and proposed circulation system of arterial, collector
and local streets including off-street parking areas, service areas,
loading areas, and major points of access to public rights-of-way,
including major points of ingress and egress to the development.
Notations of proposed ownership, public or private, should be
included where appropriate. (Detailed engineering drawings of
cross sections and street standards shall be handled in the final
development plan stage.)
(6) The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system, including
its interrelationships with the vehicular circulation system,
indicating proposed treatments of points of conflict.
(7) The existing and proposed utility systems including sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, and water, electric, gas and telephone lines.
(8) A general landscape plan indicating the treatment of materials
used for private and common open spaces. (The landscape plan
should be in general schematic form at this stage.)
(9) Enough information on land areas adjacent to the proposed PRD to
indicate the relationships between the proposed development and
existing and proposed adjacent areas, including land uses, zoning
classifications, densities, circulation systems, public facilities, and
unique natural features of the landscape.
(10) The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the PRD, including
materials and techniques used such as screens, fences and walls.
(11) Any additional information as required by the Planning
Commission necessary to evaluate the character and impact of the
proposed PRD.
E. Projected scheduling of phases. In the case of development plans which
call for development over a period of years, a schedule shall be
provided showing the proposed times within which applications for final
§ 300-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-63
1:455
§ 300-64. Public hearings.185
approval of all sections of the PRD are intended to be filed. This
schedule shall be reviewed annually with the Planning Commission by
the developer on the anniversary of the tentative approval, until the
development is completed and accepted. It shall be the obligation of
the developer to request such reviews in writing within the thirty-day
period prior to the anniversary date of the tentative approval.184
A. Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative approval of
a planned residential development pursuant to this chapter, a public
hearing pursuant to public notice on said application shall be held by
the Planning Commission.
B. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer and to any person who has made timely
request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in
such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the Planning
Commission. In addition to the written notice provided herein, written
notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected
tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
C. The parties to the hearing shall be the City, any person affected by the
application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Planning Commission, and any other person including civic or
community organizations permitted to appear by the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission shall have power to require that
all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in
writing on forms provided by the Planning Commission for that
purpose.
D. The Chairman, or Acting Chairman, in the absence of the Chairman, of
the Planning Commission shall have power to administer oaths and
issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and
documents requested by the parties.
E. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
F. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
G. The Planning Commission shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared
equally by the applicant and the Planning Commission. The cost of the
184. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 6, Public hearings and approvals, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
185. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-63 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-64
1:456
§ 300-65. Findings.186
original transcript shall be paid by the Planning Commission if the
transcript is ordered by the Planning Commission or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Planning Commission if
such appeal is made, and in either event, the cost of additional copies
shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other
cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost
thereof.
H. The Planning Commission shall not communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue
involved except upon notice for all parties to participate, shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other
materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed and shall not
inspect the site or its surroundings after the commencement of
hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are
given an opportunity to be present.
I. The Planning Commission may continue the hearing from time to time;
provided, however, that in any event, the public hearing or hearings
shall be concluded within 60 days after the date of the first public
hearing.
A. The Planning Commission, within 60 days following the conclusion of
the public hearing shall, by official written communication to the
landowner, either:
(1) Grant tentative approval of the development plan as submitted;
(2) Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not
included in the development plan as submitted; or
(3) Deny tentative approval to the development plan.
B. Failure to so act with said sixty-day period shall be deemed to be a grant
of tentative approval of the development plan as submitted. In the
event, however, that tentative approval is granted subject to conditions,
the landowner may, within 30 days after receiving a copy of the official
written communication of the Planning Commission, notify such
Planning Commission of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in
which case, the Planning Commission shall be deemed to have denied
tentative approval of the development plan. In the event the landowner
does not, within said period, notify the Planning Commission of his
refusal to accept all said conditions, tentative approval of the
development plan, with all said conditions, shall stand as granted.
C. The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings of
186. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-65
1:457
fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons
for the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial, and said
communication shall set forth with particularity in what respects the
development plan would or would not be in the public interest
including, but not limited to, findings of fact and conclusions on the
following:
(1) In those respects in which the development plan is or is not
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
City;
(2) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property including, but not limited to, density, bulk and use, and
the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the
public interest;
(3) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the
planned residential development, the reliability of the proposals for
maintenance and conservation of the common open space, and the
adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common
open space as related to the proposed density and type of
residential development;
(4) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which said design does or does not make adequate provision for
public services, provide adequate control over vehicular traffic, and
further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment;
(5) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned
residential development to the neighborhood in which it is
proposed to be established; and
(6) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents
of the planned residential development in the integrity of the
development plan.
D. In the event a development plan is granted tentative approval, with or
without conditions, the Planning Commission may set forth in the
official written communication the time within which an application for
final approval of the development plan shall be filed or, in the case of
development plan which provides for development over a period of
years, the periods of time within which applications for final approval of
each part thereof shall be filed. Except upon the consent of the
landowner, the time so established between grant of tentative approval
and an application for final approval shall not be less than three months
and, in the case of development over a period of years, the time
between applications for final approval of each part of a plan shall be
not less than 12 months.
§ 300-65 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-66
1:458
§ 300-66. Status of plan after tentative approval.187
§ 300-67. Application for final plan approval.
After the preliminary development plan is granted tentative approval by
the Planning Commission, the developer shall thereafter submit detailed
plans for any part or section of the land for which he desires approval.
The Planning Commission shall review the detailed plans to determine if
they comply with this section and with the overall plan originally submitted
by the developer. No zoning or building permit shall be issued until after
approval by the Planning Commission of the detailed plans for the section in
which the proposed development is located. Approval of any detailed plans
shall lapse unless more than token construction is started in that section
within one year. No legal or equitable conveyance of land or buildings within
the development may be made until the developer has complied with all
applicable City ordinances.
A. The official written communication shall be certified by the City Clerk
and shall be filed in his office, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the
landowner. Where tentative approval has been granted, it shall be
deemed an amendment to the Zoning Map, effective upon final
approval, and shall be noted on the Zoning Map.
B. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of the
planned residential development for recording nor authorize
development or the issuance of any building permits. A development
plan which has been given tentative approval as submitted, to which
has been given tentative approval with conditions which have been
accepted by the landowner (and provided that the landowner has not
defaulted nor violated any of the conditions of the tentative approval),
shall not be modified or revoked nor otherwise impaired by the action of
the City pending an application or applications for final approval,
without the consent of the landowner, provided an application or
applications for final approval is filed or, in the case of development
over a period of years, provided applications are filed, within the
periods of time specified in the official written communication granting
tentative approval.
C. In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and
thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to
abandon said development plan and shall so notify the Planning
Commission in writing, or in the event the landowner shall fail to file
application or applications for final approval within the required period
of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative approval shall be
deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area included in the
development plan for which final approval has not been given shall be
subject to those ordinances otherwise applicable thereto as they may be
amended from time to time, and the same shall be noted on the Zoning
Map and in the records of the City Clerk.
187. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-67
1:459
A. In the event the application for final approval has been filed, together
with all drawings, specifications and other documents in support
thereof, and as required by the official written communication of
tentative approval, the Planning Commission shall, within 30 days of
such filing, grant such development plan final approval.
B. The final development plan shall be deemed in substantial compliance
with the preliminary development plan, provided modification by the
applicant does not involve a change of one or more of the following:
(1) Violate any provision of this article.
(2) Vary the lot area requirement by more than 10% the amount
specified on the approved preliminary development plan.
(3) Involve a reduction of more than 10% of the area reserved for the
common open space and/or usable open space as specified on the
approved preliminary development plan.
(4) Increase the floor area proposed for nonresidential use by more
than 10% the area specified on the approved preliminary
development plan.
(5) Increase the total ground area covered by buildings by more than
5% of the amount specified on the approved preliminary
development plan.
C. Minor changes in the location, siting and height of buildings and
structures may be authorized by the Planning Commission without
additional public hearings if required by engineering or other
circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. No
change authorized by this subsection may cause any of the following:
(1) A change in the use or character of the development.
(2) An increase in overall coverage of structures.
(3) An increase in the intensity of use.
(4) An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public
utilities.
(5) A reduction in approved open space.
(6) A reduction of off-street parking and loading space.
(7) A reduction in required pavement widths.
D. In the event the development plan, as submitted, contains variations
from the development plan given tentative approval, the Planning
Commission may refuse to grant final approval and shall within 30 days
from the filing of the application for final approval so advise the
landowner in writing of such refusal, setting forth in such notice the
§ 300-67 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-67
1:460
reasons why one or more of such variations are not in the public
interest. In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
(1) Refile his application for final approval without the variations
objected; or
(2) File a written request with the Planning Commission that they hold
a public hearing on this application for final approval. If the
landowner wishes to take either such alternate action he may do so
at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for final
approval, or within 30 additional days if the time for applying for
final approval has already passed at the time when the landowner
was advised that the development plan was not in substantial
compliance. In the event the landowner fails to take either of these
alternate actions within such time, he shall be deemed to have
abandoned the development plan. Any such public hearing shall be
held pursuant to public notice within 30 days after request for the
hearing is made by the landowner, and the hearing shall be
conducted in the manner prescribed in this article for public
hearings on applications for tentative approval. Within 30 days
after the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall
by official written communication either grant final approval to the
development plan or deny final approval. The grant or denial of
final approval of the development plan shall, in cases arising under
this section, be in compliance with the provisions of Act 247,
§ 709.188
E. A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final
approval shall be so certified without delay by Council and shall be filed
of record forthwith in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds before
any development takes place in accordance therewith. Unless the
development plan or part thereof is so recorded, no construction shall
commence on the project site. Upon the filing of record of the
development plan, the zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise
applicable to the land included in such plan shall cease to apply thereto.
Pending completion within a reasonable time of such planned
residential development or of that part thereof, as the case may be, that
has been finally approved, no modifications of the provisions of such
development plan, or part thereof, as finally approved, shall be made
except with the consent of the landowner.
F. In the event that a development plan, or a section thereof, is given final
approval and thereafter the landowner abandons such plan or the
section thereof that has been finally approved, and so notifies the
Planning Commission in writing; or, in the event the landowner fails to
commence and carry out the planned development within the schedule
projected and approved in the application for tentative approval, or
such amendment as subsequently mutually agreed to by the landowner
188. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10709.
§ 300-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-67
1:461
§ 300-68. Standards and requirements.
and the Planning Commission, no development or further development
shall take place on the property included in the development plan.
G. If the sequence of construction of various portions of the development
is to occur in stages, then the open space and/or recreational facilities
shall be developed, or committed thereto, in proportion to the number
of dwelling units intended to be developed during any given stage of
construction as approved by the Planning Commission. Furthermore, at
no time during the construction of the project shall the number of
constructed dwelling units per acre of developed land exceed the
overall density per acre established by the approved final development
plan.
A. Density per gross acre.
R-1 R-2 R-3 S-1, S-2
Single-family 4 5 5 3
Doubles or
Townhouses
8 12 12 8
Garden apartments — 18 20 —
High-rise — 25 25 —
(1) The Planning Commission reserves the right to reduce density
levels in any proposed planned residential development if it
determines that:
(a) There is inconvenient or inadequate vehicular access to the
development.
(b) Serious traffic congestion on adjoining streets will be
generated.
(c) An excessive burden will be placed upon the ability of
responsible public agencies to provide needed public facilities
to serve the proposed development.
B. Lot and structure requirements.
(1) Lot size. There shall be no minimum lot size, setbacks, percentage
of lot coverage or lot width. However, every single-family dwelling
shall have access to a public street, court, walk or other area
dedicated to public use. No structure or group of structures shall
be erected within 20 feet of any other structure or group of
structures.
(2) Setback. All structures on the perimeter of the development must
be set back in accordance with the provisions of the zoning district
controlling the area within which the development is situated.
§ 300-67 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-68
1:462
(3) Height. There shall be no maximum height requirements.
(4) Length. There shall be no continuous structure of townhouses
containing more than six dwelling units.
(5) Location of structures. The proposed location and arrangement of
structures shall not be detrimental to existing or prospective
adjacent structures or to existing or prospective development of
the neighborhood.
C. Open space. [See Act 247, Article I, § 107(4), Common Open Space.189]
Area limitations for various uses. Within a planned residential
development, the following percentages of the total gross land area
shall be devoted to specified uses as indicated herewith:
(1) A maximum of 80% for residential use; land devoted to residential
use shall be deemed to include those streets, alleys, parking areas,
private open spaces and courts which abut and service primarily
residences or groups of residences.
(2) A maximum of 8% for accessory retail, dining and service facilities
and parking associated with these uses.
(3) A minimum of 15% for open-air recreational uses, which may
include steep slopes, and other usable open space, but this open
space shall not include usable open space which is available for use
by the general public or by persons who do not reside in the
residences or groups of residences in proximity to it.
(4) Usable open space shall not include space devoted to streets and
parking. Usable open space shall be defined as an open area
(natural or graded) set aside and developed for use by the
occupants of the development for recreation, parks, courts,
gardens or household service activities such as clothes drying,
which space is effectively separated from automobile traffic and
parking and is readily accessible to the residents. The buildings,
structures and improvements which are permitted in the common
open space must be appropriate to the uses which are authorized
for the common open space and must conserve and enhance the
amenities of the common open space having regard to its
topography and unimproved condition. Recreation facilities or
structures and their accessory uses located in common recreation
areas shall be considered open space as long as total impervious
surfaces (paving, roofs, etc.) constitute no more than 5% of the
total open space. Landscaped roof areas devoted to recreational or
leisure-time activities, freely accessible to residents, may be
counted as open space at the option of the Planning Commission at
a value of 50% of actual roof area devoted to these uses.
189. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10107(4).
§ 300-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-68
1:463
(5) A minimum of 5% for passive or undisturbed open space such as
sloped lands, watercourses or wooded lands. Where significant or
unique natural amenities exist on the site, the Planning
Commission shall have the authority to enforce their preservation.
These may include, but are not limited to, features such as rock
outcroppings, groves of trees, ravines, ponds and stream beds.
(6) Protection of open spaces. Open spaces between structures,
including those spaces being used as public or private recreational
areas, shall be protected by adequate covenants running with the
land or by conveyances or dedications. Planned residential
developments shall be approved subject to the submission of a legal
instrument or instruments setting forth a plan or manner of
permanent care and maintenance of such open spaces, recreational
areas and communally owned facilities. No such instrument shall
be acceptable until approved by the City Solicitor as to legal form
and effect, and the Planning Commission as to suitability for the
proposed use of the open areas. In cases where the City will not be
accepting dedications of streets, recreation areas or open spaces,
the landowner shall provide for an organization or trust for
ownership and maintenance. If the common open space is deeded
to a homeowners' association or a nonprofit corporation
established on a membership basis, the developer shall file a
declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the
association, to be submitted with the application for the
preliminary approval. If there is a homeowners' association under
the Uniform Condominium Act,190 the developer must file a
declaration of rules and regulations. The provisions shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:191
(a) The homeowners' association or nonprofit corporation must be
set up before the homes are sold.
(b) Membership must be mandatory for each home buyer and any
successive buyer.
(c) The open space restrictions must be permanent, not just for a
period of years.
(d) The association must be responsible for liability insurance,
local taxes and the maintenance of recreational and other
facilities.
(e) Homeowners must pay their pro rata share of the cost; the
assessment levied by the association can become a lien on the
property.
(f) The association must be able to adjust the assessment to meet
changed needs.
190. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
191. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-68 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-68
1:464
(7) The City may, at any time and from time to time, accept the
dedication of land or any interest therein for public use and
maintenance, but the City need not require, as a condition of the
approval of a planned residential development, that land proposed
to be set aside for common open space be dedicated or made
available to public use [see Act 247, Article VII, § 705(d)(1)192]. In
the event that the organization established to own and maintain
common open space, or any successor organization, shall at any
time after establishment of the planned residential development
fail to maintain the common open space in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the development plan, the City may
serve written notice upon such organization or upon the residents
of the planned residential development setting forth the manner in
which the organization has failed to maintain the common open
space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a
demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within
30 days thereof, and shall state the date and place of hearing
thereon which shall be held within 14 days of the notice. At such
hearing, the City may modify the terms of the original notice as to
the deficiencies and may give an extension of time within which
they shall be corrected. If the deficiencies set forth in the original
notice or in the modifications thereof shall not be corrected within
such 30 days or any extension thereof, the City in order to preserve
the taxable values of the properties within the planned residential
development and to prevent the common open space from
becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon such common open
space, and maintain the same for a period of one year. Such
maintenance by the City shall not constitute a taking of such
common open space, nor vest in the public any rights to use the
same. Before the expiration of such year, the City shall, upon its
initiative or upon the request of the organization theretofore
responsible for the maintenance of the common open space, call a
public hearing upon notice to such organization, or to the residents
of the planned residential development shall show cause why such
maintenance by the City shall not, at the option of the City, continue
for a succeeding year. If Council determines that such organization
is ready and able to maintain such common open space during the
next succeeding year and, subject to a similar hearing and
determination, in each year thereafter. The decision of Council
shall be subject to appeal to court in the same manner, and within
the same time limitation, as is provided for zoning appeals by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as
amended.193 The cost of such maintenance by the City shall be
assessed ratably against the properties within the planned
residential development that have a right of enjoyment of the
common open space, and shall become a lien on such properties.
192. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10705(d)(1).
193. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 300-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-68
1:465
The City, at the time of entering upon such common open space for
purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of lien in the office of the
Prothonotary of the County upon the properties affected by the lien
within the planned residential development.
D. Permitted uses. (See § 300-164.)
(1) Land and buildings may be used for the following purposes:
(a) Single-family (detached dwelling units).
(b) Townhouses (row house units), all districts.
(c) Apartment buildings (high-rise: R-2/R-3 only, maximum 10
story; and garden apartments: R-2/R-3 only, three story only.
(d) Park and recreation uses to include open space and landscape
frames, golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, tot lots,
court and field sports areas, ski slopes, toboggan runs, skating
rinks and similar uses approved by the Planning Commission.
(e) Schools.
(f) Church, parsonage or convent.
(2) Accessory retail dining and service facilities may be permitted by
specific approval of the Planning Commission; provided, that such
uses are primarily for the service and convenience of the residents
of the planned residential development; and, further provided, that
the development contains 50 or more dwelling units. At least 80%
of the total planned dwelling units of the total project must be
physically constructed prior to any nonresidential use construction.
(3) All structures on the perimeter of the development must be set
back in accordance with the provisions of the zoning district
controlling the area within which the development is situated. All
structures on the perimeter of the development must be well
screened in a manner which is approved by the Planning
Commission.
(4) Each PRD shall be planned as an entity which includes an overall
site plan, mixtures of housing types and land uses, usable open
spaces, site-related vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems,
and preservation of significant natural features.
E. Parking. Parking shall be provided as follows:
(1) There shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces for each
single-family and townhouse unit, and 1 1/2 spaces for each unit in
a garden apartment or high-rise apartment. Such spaces shall be
situated in the immediate vicinity of the dwelling units served.
(2) All parking areas shall be landscaped, paved and visually screened
from adjacent structures through the use of planting, grade
§ 300-68 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-68
1:466
changes or similar appropriate means approved by the Planning
Commission.
(3) Parking areas shall be designed to minimize excessive numbers of
vehicles in any one area. Continuous rows of more than 10 vehicles
shall be interrupted with appropriate landscaping.
F. Circulation.
(1) Vehicular access within the planned residential development shall
be designed to permit smooth traffic flow with minimum hazards to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic. All internal streets shall be oriented
and designed in a manner which will discourage through traffic.
(2) A pedestrian and bicycle circulation system shall be established to
serve all elements within the development. The pedestrian and
bicycle circulation system shall be reasonably segregated from
vehicular traffic to provide separation of vehicular and pedestrian
movement.
(3) Streets in a planned residential development may be dedicated to
public use or may be retained under private ownership. Council
may modify specifications otherwise applicable for street standards
where it finds that the standards are not required in the interest of
the residents of the PRD and that modifications of the standards as
proposed will be consistent with the interests of the entire City.
G. Landscaping.
(1) A general landscaping plan shall be required at the time of the
original submission, to be followed by a detailed landscaping plan
prior to final approvals. The detailed plan shall show the spacing,
sizes and specific types of landscaping materials.
(2) Existing trees shall be preserved whenever possible. The location
of trees shall be considered when planning the site elements such
as open spaces, building location, walks, paved areas, playgrounds,
parking, circulation systems and finished grade levels. Natural
amenities of all types shall be preserved where feasible.
(3) A grading plan and an erosion and sedimentation plan shall be
provided prior to any construction or site development activity
which will confine excavation, earthmoving procedures and other
changes to the landscape in order to insure preservation and
prevent despoliation of the character of the project site.
(4) All manufactured slopes shall be planted or protected from erosion
and shall be of a character to blend with surrounding terrain.
(5) Layout of parking areas, service areas, entrances, exits, yards,
courts and landscaping, and control of signs, lighting, noise or
other potentially adverse influences shall be established in a
§ 300-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-68
1:467
§ 300-69. Subdivision and resale.
§ 300-70. Enforcement and agreements.
manner which will protect residential character within the PRD
District and in any adjoining district.
(6) Within a PRD District, all utilities including telephone, television
cable and electrical systems shall be installed underground;
provided, however, appurtenances to these systems which require
on-grade installation must be effectively screened.
H. Signs.
(1) All sign internal installations and lighting of signs shall meet the
standards for signs established for R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential
Districts in Article XIV.
(2) Plans shall indicate the location, size and character of any sign
within the PRD intended to be seen from public ways outside the
district. No more than two sign surfaces, each with surface area not
exceeding 30 square feet, shall be permitted at any principal
entrance to the district.
I. Water supply. If water is to be provided by means other than by private
wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
planned residential development, applicants shall present evidence to
the Planning Commission that the planned residential development is to
be supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative
association of lot owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or
utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such
certificate, a cooperative agreement, or a commitment or agreement to
serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be
acceptable evidence.194
A. A planned residential development may be resold or leased or
subdivided for purposes of sale or lease, after final completion of all
phases of the final development plan.
B. If the subdivision of such planned development will create a new lot or
plot line, the applicant shall apply to the Planning Commission for
approval of the subdivision. The Planning Commission shall approve the
subdivision only if each section of the subdivided development meets all
provisions of this chapter governing planned residential developments.
C. All sections of a subdivided planned development shall be controlled by
the final development plan.
194. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-68 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-70
1:468
A. After general construction commences, the City Building Inspector
shall review, at least once every six months, all building permits issued
and compare them to the overall development phasing program. If he
determines that the rate of construction of residential units or
nonresidential structures substantially differs from the phasing
program, he shall so notify the developer and the Planning Commission
in writing; thereafter, the Planning Commission may issue such orders
to the developer as it sees it, and upon continued violation of this
subsection, may suspend the developer from further construction of
dwelling units of nonresidential structures until compliance is achieved.
B. Council shall require a performance bond be furnished and filed with
the City for private improvements. An escrow agreement and account
approved by the City Solicitor as to form and content shall be required
in the amount of 110% of the estimated construction cost and
engineering for each phase of development. These funds may be
dispersed upon certification by the Project Engineer and by the City
acting through the City Engineer. Such escrow shall accompany the
request for final approval to insure completion of all public site
improvements, streets, parking areas, sewers, utilities, landscaping,
plantings and screening.195
C. Before any building permit may be issued in the planned development,
all agreements, contracts, deed restrictions and sureties shall be in
form acceptable to the City, all sureties required shall be provided, and
all payments due to the City or its agents shall be made.
(1) Sureties regarding completion of development shall generally take
the form of sureties by a corporate surety company licensed to do
business in the commonwealth, although in specific cases, other
forms of surety may be found to be acceptable to the City.
(2) Sureties for continuing operation and maintenance of areas,
facilities and functions not to be a responsibility of the City and
performed at general City expense may take any form acceptable to
the City, but shall include agreement that if operation and
maintenance of such areas, facilities and functions is not continued
as set forth in the final plan and report, the City may, in addition to
other remedies, operate and maintain such areas, facilities and
functions in the manner required in the final plan and report, with
costs assessed ratably against properties within the development
having right of use of such areas, facilities and services, and such
costs shall become a lien on such properties.
D. In the event that a development plan, or a section thereof is given final
approval and thereafter the landowner abandons such plan or the
section thereof that has been finally approved, and so notifies the
Planning Commission in writing; or, in the event the landowner fails to
commence and carry out the planned residential development within
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-70
1:469
§ 300-71. Enforcement; violations and penalties.196
§ 300-72. Fees.
such reasonable period of time as may be fixed by ordinance after final
approval has been granted, no development or further development
shall take place on the property included in the development plan until
after the property is resubdivided and is reclassified by enactment
of an amendment to this chapter in the manner prescribed for such
amendments.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation, who or which has violated the
planned residential development provisions of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the City, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the City may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the appropriate rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial
District Judge determining that there has been a violation, further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating these provisions to have believed that there
was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have
been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees
collected for the violation of planned residential development
provisions of this chapter shall be paid over to the City.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the City the right to commence
any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under this section.
A. At the time of application for tentative approval for a planned
residential development, an application fee of as established from time
to time by resolution of City Council per acre within the total
development application site area shall be payable to the City.197
196. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-70 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-72
1:470
B. At the time of filing of final development plans for any section or phase
of the PRD, a fee of as established from time to time by resolution of
City Council per dwelling unit shall be payable to the City.198
C. At the time of filing of final development plans for any nonresidential
accessory uses, a fee as established from time to time by resolution of
City Council per acre for all such land, or fraction thereof, shall be
payable to the City.199
D. In addition to the above cited PRD fees, all applicable building permit
fees adopted by the City shall apply.
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
199. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-72
1:471

ARTICLE IX
Performance Standards
§ 300-73. Compliance required.
All land, buildings and uses thereof in the City shall be subject to the
exceptions and requirements specified in this article.
§ 300-74. Plans; descriptions; consultants.
All permitted uses and special exceptions shall comply with the
requirements of this article. In order to determine whether a proposed
use will conform to the requirements of this chapter, the Zoning Hearing
Board may require a plan of the proposed construction or development, and
description of machinery or techniques to be used during operation of the
proposed use. The Board may also obtain a qualified consultant to testify,
whose cost for services shall be borne by the applicant.
§ 300-75. Fire protection.
Fire prevention and fighting equipment acceptable to the National Fire
Protection Association shall be readily available when any activity involves
the handling or storage of flammable or explosive materials.
A. All industrial uses shall be carried on only in buildings classified as fireresistant
by the Building Code of the City,200 and shall be carried on in
such a manner as to conform fully to the standards herein, and with
such precautions against fire and explosion hazards as to produce no
exposure hazard to a use on an adjacent property, either at present or in
the future.
B. The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products,
ranging from free to active burning as determined by the State Fire
Marshal, is permitted subject to compliance with all other performance
standards and provided the following conditions are met:201
(1) Such materials or products shall be stored, utilized or produced
within completely enclosed buildings or structures having
incombustible exterior walls.
(2) All such buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an
automatic sprinkler system complying with installation standards
prescribed by the Westmoreland County Fire Marshal.
C. Any commercial or industrial activity not covered by local, county or
state codes shall be covered by safety standards established for
particular products and materials by commercial and industrial codes,
regulations and laws; including the requirement to install approved and
recommended smoke detectors. All activity shall be carried on only in
200. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Code, Uniform.
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-75
1:473
§ 300-76. Noise.
§ 300-77. Air pollution.203
No pollution of air by fly-ash, dust, vapors or other substance shall be
permitted which is harmful to human health, animals, vegetation or to other
property. Air pollution shall also be subject to the standards established by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
buildings classified as acceptable by the National Fire Protection
Association. All new structures shall be constructed according to the
fire protection provisions of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry for those types of buildings requiring their review and
approval.202
A. Protection against the effects of noise exposure shall be provided by all
commercial and industrial users within the City. This does not pertain to
normal truck and vehicular noises. Noise, as a consequence of regular
activities, emitted from commercial or industrial operations inside or
outside a building shall not exceed the acceptable maximum sound
pressure level for residential areas measured with a sound level meter
from the closest residence, and conforming to standards prescribed by
the American National Standards Institute.
B. Noise which is determined to be objectionable because of volume,
frequency or beat shall be muffled or otherwise controlled. Fire sirens
and related apparatus used solely for public purposes shall be exempt
from this requirement. Noise shall not be such as to create a nuisance
or hazard. Testing of noise levels, if required, shall be by City Engineer.
A. Smoke. The maximum amount of smoke emission permissible shall be
determined by use of the standard Ringelmann chart issued by the U.S.
Bureau of Mines. No smoke of a shade darker than No. 2 will be
allowed. Exception to this may occur when starting fires or there is a
temporary breakdown of equipment.
B. Dust. Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such
sources as storage areas, yards, roads and so forth shall be kept to a
minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling or other
acceptable means.
C. Fumes; gases. No use shall emit, for any period of time, across the
boundaries of the lot wherein it is located, noxious, toxic or corrosive
matter, fumes or gases in such concentration as to be detrimental or to
endanger the public health, safety or welfare or cause injury or damage
to property or business.
202. Editor's Note: Original § 904, Electrical disturbances, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-75 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-77
1:474
§ 300-78. Water pollution.
Water pollution shall not be permitted; liquid waste storage and disposal
shall be subject to the standards established by the commonwealth.
§ 300-79. Solid waste disposal.205
No person or use shall dispose any solid waste matter or fill within the
City without first securing written approval (permit) from the Board. (See
§ 300-173.) Commercial and industrial disposal shall also have approval
from the commonwealth.
D. Odor. No use shall emit odorous matter in such quantities as to be
readily detectable at any point along or behind the boundaries of the lot
wherein it is located.
(1) In any district, malodorous gas or matter shall not be permitted to
be emitted which is so objectionable as to damage property interest
on any neighboring lot.
(2) Uses in the M-2 General Industrial District shall be permitted to
emit odorous gas or matter, provided it does not endanger lives or
property within the M-2 District, and provided that it is not so
objectionable as to damage property interests on any neighboring
lot.
A. Liquid waste storage. The storage of liquid wastes shall be subject to
the requirements of the State Fire Marshal, the laws of the
commonwealth, this chapter and other City ordinances. In addition to
the foregoing requirements, the storage of petroleum by-products shall
be permitted in such quantities as may be authorized by proper
authority and by application to the Zoning Hearing Board. (See
§ 300-78.)204
B. Waste disposal. No use or person shall discharge any waste matter,
whether liquid or solid, into the waters of the commonwealth, including
both natural or artificial surface and underground waters, or discharge
into any private septic system or the public sewers of the City without
written approval of the commonwealth.
A. The disposal of any waste material from any commercial industrial,
mining or construction operation shall be permitted, subject to the
following:
(1) That materials be dumped or disposed in a scrap yard registered
with the Zoning Officer.
(2) That such materials so dumped or disposed shall be graded to a
uniform slope not to exceed 60% above a horizontal plane
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
205. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-79
1:475
§ 300-80. Heat.
No use shall carry on the operation that would produce heat perceptible
from any property line of the lot on which the operation is located.
§ 300-81. Glare.
Uses, signs or lighting devices which produce either continuous or
intermittent objectionable direct or reflected glare on adjoining properties
or public thoroughfares shall not be permitted.
§ 300-82. Vibration.
Any use or portion thereof creating intense or earthshaking vibrations shall
be set back from the lot lines on all sides to a distance which will insure that
in no case shall any such vibration create a nuisance or hazard beyond such
lot lines.
measured from any point on the toe of the slope of the material
disposed; and
(3) That as the grading of materials so dumped or disposed is
completed, such materials shall be planted with grass, shrubs,
trees or some other suitable vegetation.
B. Restaurants, meat markets and other food establishments will store and
dispose of grease, lard and excess meat products (renderings) in closed
containers. Vehicles transporting the above shall be covered at all times
during transit. Haulers of the same shall keep all public rights-of-way
free from any such products and odors from the same.
C. Scrap yards shall be located in M-2 Districts and be over 75 feet from
land zoned as an R District and shall have an approved solid fence, wall
or landscaping to screen the exterior operations from any adjoining R
District land, either immediately abutting or across a public street or
alley.
D. No resident, owner or tenant, institution, commercial or industrial
establishment shall empty any waste or water into the public sewer
system which may contain fat, oil or grease containing more than 100
parts/million by weight of such substances. See the provisions and
additions of Chapter 238, Sewers.
A. Vibrations detectable without instruments on neighboring property in
any zoning district, except the heavy industrial M-2 District, shall be
prohibited.
B. Vibrations detectable without instruments on neighboring property in
the heavy industrial M-2 District shall be permitted, provided such
vibrations do not endanger or in any way damage persons or properties
on neighboring lots. (See § 300-85.)
§ 300-79 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-83
1:476
§ 300-83. Research laboratories.
Research laboratories shall not include the production or manufacture of
goods or materials for sale, and the laboratory areas shall be completely
sealed and air-conditioned to prevent the direct emission of smoke, fumes
or radiation to the outside.
§ 300-84. Animal care.
Animal hospitals shall be totally enclosed in a sealed, air-conditioned
structure at least 100 feet from the nearest dwelling when located in a C-2
and C-3 District.
§ 300-85. General and heavy manufacturing.
§ 300-86. Consideration of other unobjectionable uses.
A. General and heavy manufacturing shall be located where vibration or
noise will not be objectionable to industries or other permitted uses
already established within 400 feet of the manufacturing use lot line.
(See § 300-82.)
B. General and heavy manufacturing shall be located where the emission
of gases, fumes, smoke, odor or dust will not be objectionable to
adjacent and established permitted uses or is controlled by the
installation of special equipment.
C. General and heavy manufacturing shall be located where the
prevention of the overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion
in travel, loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic or other
dangers can be maintained. Manufacturing shall be located in
accordance with an overall program and with consideration for the
character of the City and the suitability of the various parts for
particular uses and structures.
D. The following uses may be prohibited by the Planning Commission and
the Zoning Hearing Board in order to achieve the performance
standards herein:
(1) Distillation of bones, coal or wood.
(2) Extermination and insect poison manufacture.
(3) Fat rendering, tallow, grease or lard manufacturing and refining.
(4) Fireworks or explosive manufacture.
(5) Garbage disposal or incineration.
(6) Junkyard. (See § 300-164.)
(7) Slaughterhouse or stock yards.
§ 300-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-86
1:477
§ 300-87. Razing and removal.
The elimination of an existing structure or use shall not cause traffic
obstructions and shall comply with the performance standards in this
chapter. Demolition shall commence within four weeks and be completed
within two months after notice is given to the Zoning Officer of the
demolition.206
A. Any use not otherwise specified and not similar to a permitted use
which is not objectionable to immediate neighbors because noise, heat,
glare, erosion, water pollution, electrical disturbance, radiation,
vibration or emission of noxious gases, fumes, dust or toxic waste shall
be referred to the Zoning Hearing Board for interpretation, and, if
approved, added by amendment and approval as provided in Article
XXIV.
B. Unobjectionable uses similar to permitted uses in all zoning districts
but not otherwise specified shall be referred to the Board for
interpretation and approval.
206. Editor's Note: Original Part 10, Erosion and Sedimentation Control, and Part 11, Problem
Development Land, which immediately followed this section, were repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-86 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-87
1:478
ARTICLE X
Utilities and Streets
§ 300-88. Essential services.
The uses and requirements listed in this article and the establishment and
enlargement thereof shall be required in the zoning districts listed herein.
When the prescribed conditions and provisions for services, uses, buildings
or structures have been met, along with other provisions of this chapter, the
Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning certificate.
§ 300-89. Utilities. [Amended 5-10-1999 by Ord. No. 7-1999]
Development, expansion, plans, proposals or additions shall have the
provision of the required essential services indicated. These services
(utilities) shall include the following for the purposes of this chapter,
electricity, natural gas, streets, telephone, sewerage, solid waste disposal
and water supply. Easements for utilities shall be provided, with a minimum
width of 15 feet, where possible and feasible. (See § 300-173.)
§ 300-90. Access drives.208
A. Sewerage and water systems. Where any tree or trees present a hazard
to the proper functioning of sewerage and water systems, the
landowner shall, at his own expense, have such tree or trees removed.
(See § 300-174.)
B. Electrical service and streetlighting. In subdivisions of five or more lots
and multifamily dwellings or townhouses containing five or more
dwelling units, in accordance with an order by the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission dated July 8, 1970, all extensions of residential
electric service shall be installed underground. Additional costs will be
paid prior to installation thereof by the applicant for such service.
Further, the applicant for such service must provide satisfactory
easements, clear and rough grade the land where the facilities are to be
placed to within six inches of final grade, and request electric service at
such time that the lines may be installed prior to any paving. Developer
must provide and install poles (type and location) for streetlighting as
per recommendations of the power company providing the service.
C. Streets. In addition to providing suitable access to the property in such
a manner that will not have the effect of debarring adjacent property
from access to public streets that is consistent with the driveway
provisions of this chapter and that no traffic hazard is or will be created,
streets shall conform with the Construction Standards for Minor Access
Streets and Major Streets set forth in Appendix A as prepared by the
City Engineer, Alpha Engineering Company.207 [Amended 5-10-2010
by Ord. No. 1-2010]
207. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to Chapter 260, Subdivision and
Land Development.
§ 300-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-90
1:479
A. Residential. Access drives to any public street or highway in a
residential area shall be governed by the following:
(1) An access drive may not exceed 20 feet in width at its intersection
with a public street or highway, as it crosses through the right-ofway
of said street or highway, and for an additional 10 feet beyond
said right-of-way line to the residence which it serves.
(2) The number of access drives may not exceed two per lot.
(3) Any access drives must comply with the following at the point
where they cross a street right-of-way line and then continue with
Subsection A(3)(a) through (e).
(a) Within five feet of property line, except for common access for
two dwellings.
(b) Within 50 feet of the right-of-way line of an intersecting street
when entrance is from an arterial street.
(c) Within 35 feet of the right-of-way line of an intersecting street
when entrance is from a collector street.
(d) Within 25 feet of the right-of-way line of an intersecting street
when entrance is from a minor street.
(e) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(4) An access drive must be located in safe relationship to sight
distance and barriers to vision. The drive may not exceed a slope of
5% within 25 feet of the street right-of-way lines. Where a drive
enters a bank through a cut, the shoulders of the cut may not
exceed 50% in slope within 25 feet of the point the drive intersects
the street right-of-way.
B. Commercial and industrial. Access drives to any public street or
highway in the case of a commercial or industrial development:
(1) Access drives to public streets or highways shall be located at least
150 feet from any intersection involving arterial or collector
streets, and 100 feet from any intersection of minor streets. Access
drives shall be designed to permit safe ingress and egress and,
where practicable, shall be located on minor rather than collector
or arterial streets.
(2) No design shall be approved which is likely to create substantial
traffic hazards endangering the public safety. Safety requirements
which may be imposed in such a review shall include traffic control
devices, acceleration or deceleration lanes; turning lanes, traffic
and lane markings, and signs. The developer shall be responsible
for the construction of any such traffic control devices.
208. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-90 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-90
1:480
ARTICLE XI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 300-91. Off-street parking requirements.
No application for a zoning certificate, in conjunction with an application
for a building permit for the construction or substantial reconstruction of
any principal building, shall be approved unless there is included with the
plan for such building a site plan showing the number of off-street parking
spaces (community garage or parking area as in § 300-100 or private lots
as noted herein) to be provided in connection with such construction or
reconstruction in accordance with the regulations set forth herein.
A. Off-street parking lots are permitted in all zoning districts, provided
that a permanent screen wall, fence or planting be installed adjacent to
properties in R Districts not served by subject lots. (See Subsection G
hereof.) All off-street parking lots may be enclosed by an open fabric
fence approved by the Planning Commission. Such lots shall be
provided with bumper guards where appropriate, surfaced with asphalt
or concrete, served by concrete driveways between street property
lines and curblines, graded to drain to a catch basin attached to a
municipal storm sewer when sites are over 10,000 square feet and have
lights properly shielded to prevent glare upon adjacent properties in R
Districts (see other provisions of this section).
(1) The required site plans shall show the location of all of the
buildings and/or structures upon the lot, the location of driveways,
the location of screen walls, fences, or planting and all appropriate
dimensions. Driveways shall be no wider than 25 feet and
measured perpendicular to the center lines of streets or roadways.
No driveway shall be within 15 feet of another driveway at the
street line or of the curbline of an intersecting street, nor within
five feet of another driveway at the street line or the curbline of an
intersecting street, nor within five feet of a fire hydrant, a catch
basin or the open end of a cul-de-sac.
(2) All parking spaces must be located within 300 feet of the structures
served. However, for places of assembly, 500 feet will be
acceptable.
(3) Any deviation from the approved plans shall constitute a violation
of this chapter.
B. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided for
every new or substantially reconstructed building shall be as follows:209
Residential Uses Spaces
One-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Two-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit
209. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-91
1:481
Residential Uses Spaces
Townhouses and garden
apartments
2 spaces per dwelling unit
High-rise apartments 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
(1) On a lot occupied by only a one-family dwelling, a minor garage or
minor parking area may be established in the rear yard, provided
that the garage or parking area shall be no closer than 50 feet to
any front street.
(2) Public, semipublic, institutional and related uses.
Public, Semipublic,
Institutional and
Related Uses Spaces
Church, temple or other
place of worship
1 space for every 5 seats provided in
the principal place of worship, but no
less than 1 space for each family of
the congregation
Hospital or rest home 1 space for every 2 beds and each 2
employees on the maximum working
shift
Nursery, junior high
school or elementary
school
1 space for every 2 maximum
employees on the premises at any 1
time plus provisions for off-street
loading of vehicles transporting
students
High school 1 space for every 2 maximum
employees on the premises at any 1
time
All schools 1 space for every 5 seats in the
auditorium or principal place of
assembly, plus provisions for off-street
loading of vehicles transporting
students; additional spaces for
students as required by the Zoning
Hearing Board
Major Commercial and
Uses Related Uses
Other than Those
Listed
In C-1, C-2 and C-3
Districts
1 space for every 200 square feet of
gross floor area
§ 300-91 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-91
1:482
Public, Semipublic,
Institutional and
Related Uses Spaces
In M District 1 space for every 1.5 hourly
employees on the maximum working
shift, plus 1 space per salaried
employee
Independent Major
Commercial Uses
Automobile sales, flower
and plant nurseries,
lumber and building
supplies
1 space for every 600 square feet of
floor area and outdoor display area
Automobile (car) wash 1 space for each 2 employees plus 5
spaces for each vehicle which can be
accommodated in washing lines at the
same time
Drive-in business 1 space per 2 patrons capable of
being accommodated at peak business
hours; this will be determined on 5
square feet of sales area per customer
Home occupations and
personal services
1 space for each patron that could
possibly be served at one time
Mortician or funeral home 5 spaces for each chapel or parlor
room plus 1 space for each vehicle
maintained on the premises, but no
fewer than 12 spaces
Motel, hotel, fraternity or
sorority boarding house or
rooming house, dormitory
1 space for each sleeping room,
employee and manager or 1 space for
every 100 square feet of ground floor
area, which ever results in the greater
requirement
Gasoline service station 5 spaces per station at minimum
Other independent major
commercial uses
1 space for every 200 square feet of
floor area.
Cultural and
Entertainment Uses
Establishments handling
sale and consumption of
food on the premises,
retail business and
personal service
establishments
(restaurants, barbers and
beauty shops)
1 space for every 50 square feet of
floor area devoted to patron use, plus
1 space per maximum number of
employees
§ 300-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-91
1:483
Public, Semipublic,
Institutional and
Related Uses Spaces
Bowling alleys 5 spaces for each lane plus 1 space for
every 2 employees
Theater or stadium 1 space for every 4 seats
Other recreation and
entertainment
A sufficient number of spaces as
determined by the Board to
accommodate the vehicles of the
average maximum number of
employees and users of the facility at
any 1 time but no less than 1 space
per 75 square feet of floor space
Business and
Professional Offices
Medical and dental 5 spaces for every doctor or dentist
engaged on the premises, plus 1 space
per each person employed at any time
on the premises
Other business and
professional offices
1 space for every 200 square feet of
floor area
Light Industrial
Research and
development and other
uses permitted in the
Industrial and Business
District
1 space for every 1.5 maximum
employees on the premises at any 1
time
Minimum in all zoning
districts for each and all
uses
1 space per each 4 residents, 3
employees or 2 patrons
C. When determination of off-street parking results in a requirement of a
fractional space, any fraction shall be counted as one parking space.
D. For the purpose of this section, one automobile parking space shall be
assumed to be 180 square feet of area, exclusive of adequate interior
driveways or entrance and exit driveways to connect the parking space
with a public street or alley. Units shall be a minimum of nine feet by 20
feet with a twenty-foot lane for ninety-degree parking.
E. No open space established as off-street parking shall be encroached
upon by building storage or any other use, nor shall the parking space
be reduced in any way except upon the approval of the Zoning Hearing
Board and then only after proof that the off-street spaces provided are
no longer needed by reason of the reduction in floor area, seating
capacity or other factors controlling the regulation of such parking
areas as established in this section.
§ 300-91 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-91
1:484
F. All off-street parking shall be located on the site or conveniently close to
the principal building which is being served by the parking. At any time
that such parking becomes continually unavailable as a general parking
area, the permit for the building or buildings built in connection with
such parking areas shall be cancelled and become void.
G. All open parking areas containing more than four parking spaces shall
be effectively screened on each side abutting a residential district by a
five-foot-high wall, solid fence or a densely planted compact hedge of
deciduous shrubs or evergreens which shall be at least four feet high at
time of planting. (See § 300-93.) Planting screens shall be suitably
protected from damage by automobiles. Such required screenings shall
conform with the yard setback requirements of the zoning district or, in
zoning districts where parking is permitted in a portion of a yard, the
required screening wall, fence or planting shall immediately abut the
portion of a yard which is devoted to parking. Any yard area between a
wall, fence or screen shielding an off-street parking area and a
residential district property line shall be planted and maintained in
good condition.
H. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle
or drive of such design as to provide safe and efficient means of
vehicular access to a street in a manner which will least interfere with
traffic movements. No driveway across public property or curb shall
exceed a width of 25 feet.
I. All open off-street parking spaces, except for a one or two-family
dwelling, shall be improved with a bituminous or other dust-free
surface.
J. All parking areas in commercial districts shall be suitably illuminated
when night use is proposed. Any lighting used to illuminate parking
areas shall be directed away from property in a residential district.
K. All garage or other space within buildings or in basements or open
space on the roofs of buildings, allocated for the parking of vehicles,
shall be considered as part of the off-street parking facilities and may be
included in computing the area requirements as outlined in this section.
L. Community parking spaces or garages may be used for required
parking spaces.
M. All parking spaces shall have immovable concrete curbs or bumpers
placed at the front of the space; the portion of a parked vehicle
extending beyond such bumper or curb shall be considered as part of
the parking space area. No vehicle or part thereof shall be parked in a
public right-of-way so as to obscure vision of passing traffic or impede
pedestrian movement; parked vehicles or parts thereof are prohibited
on required sidewalks. (See illustration No. 10 of Appendix A.210)
Parallel parking spaces shall be exempt from the front bumper or curb
210. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
§ 300-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-91
1:485
§ 300-92. Off-street loading requirements.
requirement. Parking spaces accessible from the front and rear shall
not be exempt from the bumper requirement when front access is not
directly from a major street or access is through an area required
for landscaping or fencing. (See Illustration No. 11 of Appendix A.)
Residential parking spaces may be located in required yards, and, if
possible and advisable, should be more than five feet from any adjacent
property line or right-of-way line for the purpose of providing an area
for snow removal and to prevent direct drainage onto property of
others, and in no case shall parking be permitted in or on required
sidewalks. Nonresidential parking spaces may be located in required
yards, but shall be more than 7 1/2 feet from any adjacent property line
or minor street right-of-way line and 15 feet from any major street rightof-
way line.
N. Nonparallel parking spaces requiring the backing of a vehicle
immediately onto a public street shall be prohibited.
O. Driveways and street corners. (See §§ 300-44C, 300-164, and
Subsections H and N hereof.)211
(1) Clear sight triangle areas. To provide clear sight triangle areas of
unobstructed vision at street and driveway intersections nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed in such a manner as to
impede vision of pedestrian or vehicular traffic as provided in
PennDOT Publication 201, Engineering and Traffic Studies.
(2) The clear sight triangle areas are defined as follows:
(a) Driveway. The two triangular areas on either side of a driveway
formed by the intersection of the street right-of-way line with
the center line of the driveway and a line joining points along
such lines 20 feet from the point of intersection of these lines.
(b) Corners. The triangular area formed by the intersection of the
two street right-of-way lines extended and a line joining points
along such lines 25 feet from the point of intersection of the
right-of-way lines.
(3) In addition to the driveway opening requirements, driveway
consolidation or adjacent uses along major streets and left-hand
turn lanes shall be encouraged by the Zoning Officer in conjunction
with the appropriate roadway authority.
A. No application for a zoning certificate or building permit for the
construction or substantial reconstruction of any principal building
shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such
building a plot plan showing the amount of off-street loading space to be
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-91 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-92
1:486
provided in connection with such construction or reconstruction in
accordance with the regulations set forth in this section.
B. The following number of off-street loading berths shall be required for
the building types and sizes listed. Unless otherwise specified, a loading
berth shall be at least 50 feet in length and 12 feet in width, exclusive of
aisle and maneuvering space; with all uses receiving goods, there shall
be no less than one space for every 20,000 square feet of total floor
area.
Building Type
Floor Area
(square feet)
Number of Loading
Berths Required
Apartment building Less than 50,000
50,000 to 200,000
More than
200,000
0
1
1 for each 200,000 or
fraction thereof
Hospitals, public
buildings, recreation
buildings and similar
uses
Less than 10,000
10,000 to 100,000
More than
100,000
0
1
1 for each 100,000 or
fraction thereof
Light industrial
research and related
uses
Less than 2,000
2,000 to 40,000
40,000 to
100,000;
More than
100,000
0
1
2 (includes 1 berth 14 feet x
50 feet) plus 1 for each
additional 100,000 or
fraction thereof (includes at
least 1 berth 14 feet x 50
feet)
Retail
establishments
Less than 2,000
2,000 to 5,000
5,000 to 25,000
25,000 to 40,000
40,000 to 100,000
100,000 to
250,000
0
1
2
3 (includes 1 berth 14 feet x
50 feet)
4 (includes 1 berth 14 feet x
50 feet)
5 (includes 1 berth 14 feet x
50 feet)
C. All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning lot as
the use served. No permitted or required loading space shall be located
§ 300-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-92
1:487
within 30 feet of a point of intersection of any two streets. No loading
berth shall be located in a required yard abutting a street or property in
another zoning district. Such loading areas shall be oriented to the rear
of the building where possible and screened by fence, wall or planting
from any adjacent R Districts and as approved by Planning Commission.
D. Each required off-street loading space shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements.
E. All drives and loading berths shall be surfaced with a bituminous or
other dust-free surface.
F. No motor vehicle repair work or service shall be permitted in
conjunction with loading space.
G. Space allocated to off-street loading shall not be used to satisfy the
space requirements for off-street parking.
H. For uses which generate truck traffic other than those listed in these
section, off-street loading space shall be provided as determined to be
necessary by the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 300-92 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-92
1:488
ARTICLE XII
Fences, Walls and Screens
§ 300-93. Fences, enclosure walls and screens.
The location, nature and height of fences, walls and screens shall be such
that they will not hinder the appropriate development and use of adjacent
land and buildings or impair the value thereof. Fences, other than a wire
fence with barbs, enclosure walls, shrubbery or hedges, are permitted in
any yard subject to the requirements of this article.
A. Solid fences, walls or similar enclosures are permitted in any front yard;
provided, the height of such fence, wall or enclosure shall not exceed
four feet above the adjacent ground level. No fence, wall or screen shall
extend within the right-of-way at any street.212
B. In Residential and Conservancy Districts, ornamental or screening
walls, wire or solid fences may be erected in any required side or rear
yard or within the buildable area to a height not exceeding 6 1/2 feet
above the adjacent ground level.
C. In Commercial and Industrial Districts, wire fences, walls, hedges or
similar enclosure screens not exceeding six feet in height are permitted
in any yard except abutting a street. Where parking is permitted in a
portion of required yards, a fence or enclosure wall may extend into a
required yard abutting a street but not closer to a street line than the
area in which parking is permitted. (See § 300-91G.)
D. In R Districts, fences or screens are required along certain property
lines, as specified in § 300-94, when abutting C or M Zoning District
uses, and such fence shall be permitted to exceed the height limits of
Subsection B hereof, where required.
E. Where determined by the Zoning Hearing Board to be necessary in
conjunction with any use permitted or made as a special exception,
such required fences, walls and screens may exceed the height limits of
this section.
F. Wire fencing or chain-link fencing shall be permitted in farm areas or
large areas for the purpose of enclosing animals in pastures or fields.
Barbed-wire fence is permitted when required as part of normal
accepted farm practice.
G. All public sidewalks, except at driveways, shall be protected from
automobiles extending on or over them by wheel barriers or guard rails.
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-94
1:489
§ 300-94. Screening of commercial uses.
In any Commercial or Industrial District, where a required yard abuts
property in a Residential District, the commercial use shall be screened
from the residential property as follows:
A. If a portion of a required yard in a C or M District abutting an R District
is used for parking, or if a parking area abuts the required yard,
screening shall be provided as prescribed in §§ 300-91 and 300-93.
B. If a required yard in a C or M District abuts a Residential District and is
not included in the provisions of § 300-91, such yard shall be screened
from the R District by a five-foot-high solid fence, wall, or deciduous or
evergreen hedge four feet high at time of planting.
C. In addition to Subsections A and B hereof, all common boundaries of
developed C or I District properties with R District properties, if
determined by the Planning Commission as essential to carry out the
intent of this chapter, shall have a screen planting strip of deciduous or
evergreen plants a minimum of four feet high at time of planting or a
solid fence or wall a minimum of five feet high.
D. Trees required by § 154-10 are excluded from the height limitations
stated herein.
§ 300-94 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-94
1:490
ARTICLE XIII
Accessory Structures and Uses
§ 300-95. Accessory buildings.
(See § 300-164.) Accessory uses in accessory structures, which are
customarily incidental to permitted uses, shall be permitted by the Zoning
Officer in any zoning district, provided:
§ 300-96. Temporary structures.
Temporary structures incidental to development or the erection of
structures, or the temporary use of a building in a housing development as
a real estate sales office or demonstration unit, shall be permitted by the
Zoning Officer in any zoning district, provided:
A. The principal use is permitted in the district in question; and the
accessory building or structure shall be located within the buildable
area of the lot unless otherwise specified by provisions of this chapter.
(1) No accessory building in any zoning district shall be permitted in a
required front or side yard.
(2) No accessory building to be constructed in a required rear yard
shall exceed 18 feet in height. [Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord. No.
4-2003]
(3) No accessory building to be constructed in a required rear yard
shall be closer than five feet to any property line, and on corner lots
nearer a street lot line no closer than the minimum depth of any
front yard required along such street.
(4) No accessory building to be constructed in a required rear yard
shall occupy more than 25% of the area of a required rear yard. A
permanent accessory building or structure shall not be constructed
on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal
buildings to which it is accessory. The accessory building, structure
or use shall conform to the definitions in Article XIX and the
regulations listed in §§ 300-97 and 300-146 when appropriate.
A. Reasonable safeguards are established to protect adjacent uses from
detrimental effects.
B. A permit shall be issued for a period no longer than six months.
C. Residing in the basement or foundation structure before the completion
of the total structure shall not be permitted.
§ 300-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-97
1:491
§ 300-97. Accessory uses as special exceptions.213
All accessory uses shall be permitted only under the same ownership and on
the same zoning lot as the principal use which may be a special exception
and when all restrictions are met. No accessory use shall be considered or
permitted when the principal use is itself a nonconforming use.
§ 300-98. Relationship to principal uses.
§ 300-99. Home occupations.
A home occupation, including small home appliance repair, insurance sales,
art studios, seamstress, dressmaking, teaching with musical instruction
limited to one pupil at a time, beauty or barber shop, or the professional
office of physician, writer, teacher, dentist, lawyer, realtor, engineer,
architect or accountant, shall be permitted in all residential zones (except
beauty or barber shops shall be limited to R-3 only) if the occupations
comply with the following requirements:
A. Accessory use as a principal use. The Zoning Hearing Board may
consider an accessory use as a principal use for the owner of a dwelling
on another zoning lot; however, this exception shall in no way be
construed or used to permit home occupations, accessory businesses or
signs, excepting signs as noted in § 300-35, as principal uses either
directly or indirectly. Specifically, an existing or new integral or minor
garage cannot be used for the above uses by virtue of the construction
or renting of another garage or space. (See § 300-35.)
B. Principal uses permissible as accessory uses. Community parking,
farming, general gardening, greenhouses and horticultural nursery, ice
sales, and storage, nursery stocking, private swimming clubs, public
reservation, recreation areas, reforestation, restaurant in conjunction
with a recreation area, single-family dwelling and tree growing may be
permitted.
A. The home occupation shall be carried on by members of the family
residing in the dwelling unit.
B. The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal or
accessory structures, and shall not occupy a space greater than 25% of
the ground floor area.
C. Exterior displays or signs other than those permitted under Article XIV,
exterior storage of materials, exterior indication of the home
occupation, or variation from the residential character of the principal
structure shall not be permitted.
D. Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare shall
not be produced. Liquid waste and refuse shall be controlled in
approved manner.
213. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-97 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-99
1:492
§ 300-100. Community garages or parking areas.
(See Article XVIII.) Community garages or uses of land for a community
parking area for parking of noncommercial vehicles by residents of a
neighborhood, on a lot having a buildable area of not less than 350 square
feet for each vehicle stored, shall be permitted, provided the Zoning
Hearing Board determines that such use is reasonably necessary in the
particular neighborhood to facilitate the provision of automobile parking
space as required by this chapter in § 300-91; and provided:
E. Articles not produced on the premises shall not be sold on the premises.
F. Adequate off-street parking must be provided for the maximum number
of clients or customers and in no case shall this parking be less than the
parking required for such commercial use noted in § 1101.214 All
parking areas shall be paved with approved surfacing.
G. There shall not be involved the keeping of a stock-in-trade in connection
therewith. No mechanical equipment shall be used, other than normal
household equipment, and no commodity shall be sold. Dancing
instruction, band instrument instruction in groups, tea rooms, tourist
homes, convalescent homes, mortuary establishments and stores,
trades or businesses of any kind not herein excepted shall not be
deemed home occupations.
A. The maximum height of such structures shall be 15 feet, not exceeding
one story.
B. The maximum yard requirements of the zoning district where a
community parking garage is to be located shall be applied.
C. On a lot less than 110 feet in depth, front and rear yards may be
reduced to not less than 15 feet, provided each is no less than the depth
of front and rear yards on adjoining lots.
D. On a corner lot less than 65 feet in width, the side yard abutting the
street may be reduced to not less than 15 feet, provided such yard
width is no less than the width or depth of the yard on the adjacent lot.
On an interior lot less than 70 feet in width, side yard widths may be
reduced to not less than eight feet, provided each is at least 27% of the
lot width.
E. The Board determines in Subsections C and D hereof that
circumstances are such that the combination of such lot, with other
adjacent property to form one or more zoning lots cannot reasonably be
expected, and that otherwise the provisions of this chapter would be
confiscatory.
F. Other reasonable conditions are established to protect the amenities of
surrounding properties, as determined in each instance by the Board.
214. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 300-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-100
1:493
§ 300-101. Rear structure restrictions.216
G. A community parking garage or area shall serve specific uses,
structures and lots of which shall in turn determine the intermediate
area served.
H. In lieu of on-lot parking, required parking may be provided for one-,
two- and multifamily dwellings in a community parking area or
community garage within 300 feet of a structure; and for churches,
auditoriums or meeting rooms, stadiums, theaters or other places of
assembly in a garage or parking area within 500 feet of the structure,
provided that certification is made to the officer issuing the building
permit that the required number of spaces is available for the structure
during the peak hours of the use of the structure.
I. Every parcel of land hereafter used as a parking area (other than an
accessory use on the same zoning lot with a main, one-family dwelling
use) or as an automobile sales area, shall be paved and maintained with
an all-weather, cohesive, dust-free surface sufficient to carry the
imposed load; shall have appropriate bumper guards where needed,
and shall be enclosed with an ornamental fence or wall or compact
evergreen hedge having a height not less than three feet and not more
than 6 1/2 feet erected within the buildable area of the lot. Required
yards shall be landscaped and properly maintained in accordance with
provisions of this chapter.
J. A community garage or the use of land for a community parking area
for parking of noncommercial vehicles for residents of the
neighborhood, or when within 1,000 feet of property in a C-2 District to
serve uses permitted in such zoning district, is permitted on a lot having
a buildable area of not less than 350 square feet for each vehicle stored;
provided, the prescribed yard, lot width and height requirements are
met; and provided further that the Zoning Hearing Board determines
that such use is necessary in the particular neighborhood to facilitate
the provision of automobile parking space as required by this chapter,
and that reasonable safety provisions are established.215
K. A one-family dwelling on a zoning lot is permitted without the required
automobile parking space when the Board is satisfied that physical
conditions make it impossible to provide parking space on such zoning
lot, provided community parking is used.
A. Rear dwellings. A building in the rear of a principal structure and on the
same lot shall not be used in whole or in part as a dwelling unless
classified as nonconforming and in existence prior to this chapter.
B. Private garages. The construction of a private detached garage or
private parking area (detached carport) shall be permitted within a
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
216. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-100 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-101
1:494
required rear yard in the S, R-1 or R-2 District and for townhouse
structures in the R-3 District, provided:
(1) The detached building or structure shall not be closer to a side lot
line than five feet.
(2) The detached building or structure shall not be closer to a rear lot
line than 10 feet.
(3) No detached building or structure shall exceed 900 square feet and
exceed 18 feet in height.
(4) Detached carports shall be considered private garages and shall
not extend into any required side or front yard and may be located
in rear yards only in accordance with the preceding regulations
governing the location of private garages in rear yards. (See
§ 300-128D.)
(5) If the detached building or structure occupies a portion of the rear
as well as a portion of the buildable area of the lot designated for
the principal structure, or is totally within the buildable area, the
size of the detached building or structure shall be limited to the
same requirements as if located entirely within the required rear
yard.
(6) These above provisions do not apply to planned residential
developments.
C. Detached accessory buildings (utility sheds.) Detached accessory
buildings or utility sheds other than private garages may be located in
the rear yard of the principal building, provided they are located five
feet from any side and/or rear property. Accessory buildings (utility
sheds) shall be permitted without a building permit if they meet above
requirements and do not exceed 200 square feet in size and 12 feet in
height to any peak. Any accessory structure larger in size than 200
square feet shall require a building permit prior to placement or
construction.
D. Farm type buildings. See § 300-135.
§ 300-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-101
1:495

ARTICLE XIV
Signs
§ 300-102. Compliance and intent.
No sign, billboard or exterior graphic display shall be permitted in any
district except as herein provided. No sign other than for permitted uses
shall be allowed. Signs and their graphics can effectively express the
character of an establishment or a community and for that reason it is the
intent of this section to encourage owners and/or tenants to consider all
signage as it relates to the overall community image and compatibility with
the architecture of the structure and neighboring buildings.
§ 300-103. Sign permit required.
The alteration, erection, replacement or moving of a sign shall require
a sign permit. Alteration shall include any change in the type of use
advertised by a present owner or in the name of the owner for the now
existing use. (See also § 300-111F.)
§ 300-104. Signs not exceeding two square feet.217
In any zoning district, a sign attached to the building but not exceeding two
square feet in surface size is permitted which announces the name, address
or professional activity of the occupant of the premises on which such sign
is located. A sign perpendicular to and outside the right-of-way may be two
square feet in surface size on each side and not exceed four feet in height.
§ 300-105. Signs not exceeding six square feet.
In any zoning district, a sign not exceeding six square feet in area may be
mounted not over four feet high on an ornamental pole in the front yard
announcing the name, address and/or professional activity of the occupant
of the premises on which such sign is located. A sign perpendicular to and
outside right-of-way may be six square feet in surface size on each side.
Such sign shall not overhang any sidewalk, but any sign shall be set back
at least 10 feet in a C or M District, 30 feet in all other districts, from
any right-of-way line or greater as may be necessary in the opinion of the
Zoning Officer and Police Department to eliminate any obstruction to traffic
visibility. (See §§ 300-111 and 300-113.) Permission for larger signs may be
obtained from the Planning Commission or Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 300-106. Signs not exceeding 12 or 24 square feet.
A sign or bulletin board not exceeding 12 square feet in any S, R-1 and R-2
District nor 24 square feet in any other zoning district is permitted mounted
up to a maximum of 10 feet high on the same premises in connection
with any nonprofit service organization, church, school, college, hospital,
institution, park, playground or other similar public or semipublic use
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-106
1:497
located in the City. Such signs or bulletin boards are permitted so long
as they relate exclusively to the identity, regular meetings, special events,
activities and services of the above uses and provided that no more than
one such sign may be installed to face each street upon which the property
abuts.
§ 300-107. Street right-of-way; intersection unobstructed.
No signs in any zoning district shall be installed or replaced within the
established street right-of-way line of any street or highway. When erected
on any property at an intersection of streets or highways, signs may be
placed in a required front yard, provided no portion of the sign extends over
a sidewalk area, but signs shall be set back at least 10 feet in a C or M
District, 30 feet in all other districts, from any right-of-way line or such a
greater distance as may be necessary in the opinion of the Zoning Officer
and Police Department to eliminate any obstruction to traffic visibility. (See
§§ 300-111 and 300-113.)
§ 300-108. Interior designers; contractor signs.
Signs advertising the installation of interior furnishings or other equipment
upon existing residential premises are permitted, as are temporary signs of
carpenters, plumbers, painters, contractors, builders and other artisans or
craftsmen, provided that the surface size of any one side does not exceed
12 square feet. Such signs are permitted on the premises where the work is
being performed and only during the period in which such work is going on.
§ 300-109. Temporary signs.
A. Such signs or bulletin boards may be increased one square foot in size
over the first 10 feet the sign is set back from the right-of-way line.
B. A bulletin board which is at right angle to the street may exceed 12 feet
or 24 feet in this section, up to 24 feet or 48 square feet, respectively,
for each side in the two zoning groups above depending on location onsite
and when approved by the Building Inspector.218
C. The above regulations shall also apply to all signs not located on the
premises of the above organizations only which advertise their regular
meetings or special events.
D. Any two or more of the above organizations may jointly erect and
advertise on a single sign at the discretion of the Zoning Hearing Board
or double the surface sizes in Subsection B hereof.
A. In any zoning district temporary nonilluminated signs may be installed
and maintained on the premises by the owner, agent or firm interested
in the sale, repair or rental of such premises.
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-106 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-109
1:498
§ 300-110. Signs in C and I Districts.
In C and I Districts, signs shall be permitted in connection with any legal
business, service, trade or industry when located on the same premises, and
if they meet the following requirements:
§ 300-111. Wall; overhanging; roof; freestanding signs; permits.
B. During the course of development of a residential subdivision,
temporary directional signs may be installed or erected beyond the
premises of the subdivision, provided consent is secured from the
owner of the property on which the sign is placed; and provided that
such signs shall not exceed eight inches in height nor two feet in length
and that no more than one such sign for the same development shall be
erected on any block of any street and no more than two signs shall be
erected on any street or highway. Maximum height above ground level
shall be 10 feet and the minimum five feet.219
A. Signs shall not contain information or advertising for any product not
sold on the premises.
B. Only those signs described in § 300-111 shall be permitted. All such
signs must be approved by the Building Inspector as to their
construction, material, location and installation.
A. Wall signs shall pertain only to the identification of the business and any
component directly related to the business. Signs shall not have an
aggregate surface area greater than 10% of the surface of the wall on
or in front of which the sign is mounted nor extend at any point over one
foot from the wall and over two feet above the top of the building. The
bottom of any portion of all such signs shall be at least 10 feet above the
basic grade. When not projecting more than three inches from a wall of
a building, the sign need not conform to the ten-foot minimum height
limit.
B. Overhanging signs shall have the bottom edge attached to a building
and shall be at least 10 feet above the basic grade. Such overhanging
signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface size. Signs with two
sides may have the maximum surface size on each side. No such sign
(outer edge) shall project more than five feet at any one point from the
wall of the building to which attached. No more than one such sign may
be used on any building and must be hung at a right angle to the face of
the building except where the building is on a corner lot, and it then
may be hung on the corner of the building at an angle not to exceed
135° to either face of the building.
C. The length of any sign shall be contained within the bearing walls of the
building or that portion used by the business being advertised, if more
than one business is conducted in the building, or 100 square feet,
219. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-111
1:499
whichever is less. The height of any such sign shall not exceed 12 feet
above the top of a roof on which the sign is placed. (See § 300-115.)
D. Commercial and industrial districts.
(1) In commercial and industrial districts, one freestanding sign
affixed permanently to the ground may be erected no larger than
144 square feet on one side when advertising a unified shopping
center, or an industrial building, or a unit group of buildings on one
site, or on land adjacent but owned by the management of the
shopping center, building or unit group of buildings.
(2) The bottom of any such sign shall be at least 10 feet but no more
than 35 feet above ground level, and any such sign or support or
portions thereof shall be set back at least 15 feet above ground
level, and any such sign or support or portions thereof shall be set
back at least 15 feet from any road right-of-way. Signs placed on
any property at an intersection of streets or highways may be
placed at least 10 feet back from both right-of-way lines. Placement
closer to the street due to obstruction from adjacent buildings may
be requested up to five feet from the right-of-way; however, no sign
shall be permitted if it is deemed to constitute a traffic hazard by
either the Zoning Officer or the Police Department. (See
§ 300-107.)220
(3) Any request for a hearing to erect a sign at less than the required
setback or larger than stated above will be reviewed by the
Planning Commission. Permission granted or refused, based on
sign size in proportion and comparison to the building(s) size, shall
be rendered by the Zoning Hearing Board in the manner set forth
in Article XXIII.
(4) In addition to the one large sign permitted above, each business or
service or trade in a unified shopping center or unit group of
buildings shall be permitted one additional sign which may be
placed on or made part of any building and which advertises only
the name and logo of the business, service or trade conducted on
premises, provided such signs shall comply with the provisions
herein and be confined to that portion of the structure occupied.
The bottom of any such sign shall be at least eight feet above
ground level as approved by the Zoning Officer and Police Chief, to
insure that the location of the sign will not constitute a traffic
hazard. [Amended 8-11-2003 by Ord. No. 4-2003]
(5) In addition, one directory sign may be permitted either on the
building or freestanding listing the businesses, services or trades,
and shall not exceed 20 square feet in total area.
E. Signs in commercial and industrial areas and joint institutional or
directional signs may be illuminated.
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-111 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-111
1:500
§ 300-112. Illumination.
§ 300-113. Construction.
All signs shall be made, maintained and erected in a neat, safe and
workmanlike manner.
F. A permit for the moving, erection, installation or construction of any
sign shall be required and shall be issued by the Zoning Officer for a
minimum fee as established from time to time by resolution of City
Council per sign. Temporary signs for commercial establishments shall
be included.221
G. Freestanding and/or movable (ground level) signs, two feet by four feet
square and no greater than four feet high, not permanently affixed to
the ground, advertising prices or some special sales event may be
permitted; provided, they are in accordance with the Zoning Officer's
specifications. There may be only one such sign used for each business,
service or trade. Such signs shall be placed at least 10 feet back from
the established street right-of-way and when placed on any property at
an intersection of streets or highways, such signs shall be placed at
least 15 feet back from any right-of-way line. Such signs may be
displayed only when the particular business is open. No such sign shall
be permitted if it is deemed to constitute a traffic hazard by both the
Zoning Officer and the Chief of the Police Department and shall be
removed immediately or penalties prescribed in § 300-171 shall be
applied.
H. Where two or more businesses operate on a single tract or lot, there
shall be only one pole sign or marquee for all such businesses
permitted.
A. All electrical wiring and control devices shall be enclosed within the
sign. All electrical wiring for illuminated signs shall comply with the
standards of the National Electrical Code, as required by the City
Building Code.222 No rotating, flashing, flickering, glaring or running
signs causing the illusion of movement by reason of the lighting
arrangement shall be permitted.
B. Lights of illuminated signs shall be shielded to prevent the lights from
causing undue distraction, confusion or hazard to vehicular traffic or
from shining directly into nearby dwellings. No flashing lights similar to
traffic control or warning lights or rotating, beacon-style lights shall be
permitted. The body of all illuminated signs shall be constructed
entirely on noncombustible materials, and the source of illumination
shall be either internal or by reflected light, provided the source of the
reflected light is not directly visible or glaring.
221. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
222. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 300-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-114
1:501
§ 300-114. Height of signs.
The height of signs is governed by the specific provisions throughout this
article.
§ 300-115. Advertising space limit.
No single advertiser, excepting a regional shopping center (see
§ 300-111D), shall have more than 100 square feet total advertising space
on overhanging, freestanding or ground-level signs. Where building volume
may warrant, the Board may grant requests for a larger amount of
advertising space for a particular business when recommended by the
Planning Commission within the City.
§ 300-116. Streamers, banners, pennants.
No streamers, banners, pennants, holiday decorations or material of a
similar nature specific to private businesses shall be permitted. Special
civic events or holidays shall be permitted with explicit permission obtained
from the Zoning Officer. All such streamers, banners or pennants shall be
installed and removed by the applicant. The applicant shall provide a letter
with written permission from the Highway Department or utility company
to use their property, poles, etc., for display purposes.
§ 300-117. Directional signs.
Signs indicating various areas of the City and directions to same areas or
the City itself shall be permitted in locations so designated by Council.
Individual use directional signs may be installed beyond the premises by the
property owner as a special exception, provided:
A. Written consent is obtained from the property owner on which the sign
is placed and must agree to remove the sign if the Zoning Hearing
Board requests it.
B. Such sign requests do not exceed eight inches in height and two feet in
length. Requests up to eight square feet in area may be considered by
the Board.
C. Only one such sign request and location shall be considered to serve
both directions of traffic.
D. Placement is between seven feet and 10 feet from the ground.
E. No City street sign or utility pole shall be used for installation of
directional or area signs.
F. Such signs shall be for City located uses only.
§ 300-114 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-118
1:502
§ 300-118. Development entrance signs.
Development entrance signs may be erected by developers or property
owners on collector and regional streets to cover areas generally known by
a designated name and as per the following procedure:
§ 300-119. Nonconforming signs.223
A nonconforming sign may not be enlarged, but may be continued until
removed or made to conform. Such removal or conformity shall occur
within five years of the effective date of this section if such sign is initially
nonconforming, or within such time from the date any such sign later
becomes nonconforming.
§ 300-120. Liability or loss.
The owner shall indemnify the City against any liability or loss resulting
from any accident because of installation and maintenance of signs or
canopies.
§ 300-121. Political signs.
No political signs shall be permitted on any utility poles or trees in the
City, or on any property unless approved by the owner. The property owner
is required to remove all political signs the day following election day.
Maximum size of sign shall not exceed four feet by four feet and the
A. The Planning Commission shall review proposed sign, discuss and
adjust such sign with applicants should it deem the same necessary
prior to any such sign being erected.
B. The standards for any such development entrance sign shall be as
follows:
(1) All such signs shall be substantial structures, solid enough in
construction to not require undue maintenance and to endure
weather and customary wear and tear for such structures; and all
wood portions shall be chemically treated so as to resist rot.
(2) No flashing or animated signs shall be permitted. No signs shall be
permitted that will cause glare or annoyance to any other area. No
sign shall obstruct ingress or egress to premises or vision at
intersections or curves. Such signs shall be screened from adjacent
property owners by land forms and/or shrubbery.
(3) Such signs shall bear only the name of the subdivision. The height
of the letters shall be no more than six inches. The overall height of
the sign shall not be in excess of four feet above the lowest point of
the adjacent road.
223. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code. (See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
§ 300-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-121
1:503
sign shall not restrict traffic vision. Not meeting these requirements shall
require removal of the sign by the owner within 24 hours after notification
by the City. Otherwise, the sign will be removed by the City at a cost to the
applicant.
§ 300-122. Temporary or semipermanent advertising banners.224
All temporary or semipermanent banners of plastic, cloth, treated paper
or like materials used for advertising special services, products, food, etc.,
shall require permission from the Building Inspector as to size and location.
The purpose is to avoid placement that may cause visual barriers for moving
or stopped vehicles. All such streamers, banners or pennants shall be
installed and removed by the applicant. The applicant shall provide a letter
with written permission from the Highway Department or utility company
to use their property, poles, etc., for display purposes.
§ 300-123. Billboards. [Added 3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009;
amended 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015]
A. Billboards may be placed only along Route 56 and Route 366.
B. Definition. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BILLBOARD — An off-premises sign that advertises an establishment,
activity, person, product or service that is unrelated to or unavailable
on the premises where the sign is located.
C. Location.
(1) Billboards shall not be erected within 300 feet of the boundary line
of any R District or within 300 feet of any public or private school,
church or cemetery, said 300 feet being measured along the radius
of a circle from the centermost point of the billboard structure
extending in all directions.
(2) Billboards shall not be erected within 300 feet of an interchange or
safety rest area measured along the interstate or limited access
highway from the beginning or ending of the pavement widening at
the exit from or entrance to the main-traveled way.
(3) Billboards shall maintain a lateral minimum spacing between any
existing or proposed billboard structure of 1,000 feet. Required
spacing shall be measured along both sides of the same roadway
frontage from the centermost point of the billboard structure along
a line extending from the centermost point of the billboard that is
parallel to the center line of the roadway to which the billboard is
oriented.
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-121 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-123
1:504
(4) No part of the billboard shall be located closer than 15 feet to the
limited access federal highway right-of-way.
(5) For all other billboards not located along a limited access federal
highway right-of-way, the minimum front, side and rear yard
requirements applying to a principal structure as set forth within
the Zoning District in which the billboard is to be located shall
apply to all parts of each billboard structure.
(6) No billboard shall be erected in such a manner as to block the view
from the road or street, of any existing business identification sign,
residential or nonresidential structure, or limit or reduce the light
and ventilation requirements.
(7) No billboard shall be constructed within the clear sight triangle of
the public street or road on which it is situated, and shall not in any
case obstruct or impede traffic safety.
(8) No billboard shall be erected over any sidewalk or public right-ofway.
(9) Billboards shall not be part of a roof or wall, nor shall they be
mounted on the roof, wall or other part of a building or any other
structure.
D. Size and height. A billboard shall have a maximum allowable gross
surface area of 300 square feet per sign face. This gross surface area
shall be permitted, provided all of the following additional requirements
are met:
(1) A billboard shall have no more than two sign faces per billboard
structure, which may be placed back to back or in a V-shaped
configuration having an interior angle of 90° or less.
(2) Neither dimension of the billboard's sign face shall exceed 20 feet
in total height or 20 feet in total length, provided the total
allowable gross surface area for the sign face is not exceeded.
(3) A billboard structure shall have a maximum height above the curb
of the roadway from which it is intended to be viewed of 40 feet.
E. Construction methods. Billboards shall be constructed in accordance
with applicable provisions of the Uniform Construction Code, as now or
hereafter amended.225 Billboards shall meet all of the following
additional requirements:
(1) A billboard structure shall have a maximum of one vertical support
being a maximum of three feet in diameter or width and without
additional bracing or vertical supports.
225. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 300-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-123
1:505
(2) A billboard sign face shall be independently supported and have
vertical supports of metal that are galvanized or constructed of
approved corrosive-resistant, noncombustible materials.
Structures constructed with galvanized metal shall be painted.
(3) The one vertical support shall be capable of enabling the entire
sign face to be able to withstand a minimum one-hundred-mile-perhour
wind load. Structural design computations shall be made and
certified by a registered engineer and shall be submitted to the City
with the application for special exception.
(4) The base shall be installed using a foundation and footings
approved by the City Engineer for the type of construction
proposed.
(5) The entire base of the billboard structure parallel to the sign face
shall be permanently landscaped with suitable shrubbery and/or
bushes of minimum height of three feet placed in such manner as to
screen the foundation of the structure.
(6) Landscaping shall be maintained by the sign owner in an attractive
and healthy manner in accordance with accepted conservation
practices.
(7) No bare cuts shall be permitted on a hillside.
(8) All cuts or fills shall be permanently seeded or planted.
(9) A billboard with display lighting shall be constructed so that it does
not glare upon adjoining property and shall not exceed a maximum
of 1.0 footcandle upon the adjoining property.
(10) Display lighting shall not operate between 12:00 midnight and 5:00
a.m. prevailing local time.
(11)No billboard structure, sign face or display lighting shall flash or
emit noise. No display lighting shall cause distractions, confusion,
nuisance or hazard to traffic, aircraft or other properties.
F. Maintenance.
(1) A billboard structure shall be entirely painted every three years,
unless constructed of an approved corrosive-resistant material.
(2) Every 10 years, the owner of the billboard shall have a structural
inspection made of the billboard by a qualified Pennsylvania
registered engineer and shall provide to the City, a written report
and certification from that engineer certifying the billboard is
structurally sound.
(3) Annual visual inspections of the billboard may be conducted by the
City to determine continuing compliance with this article. Upon
§ 300-123 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-123
1:506
such inspection, the owner shall pay an annual inspection fee, as
established from time to time, by resolution of the City Council.
(4) Billboards found to be in violation of this article shall be brought
into compliance or removed within 30 days upon proper
notification by the City.
(5) Billboards using removable paper or other materials shall be
maintained in such condition as to eliminate loose or frayed
material protruding or handing from the structure. All paper and
other waste materials shall be removed from the site and disposed
of properly whenever any sign face is changed.
G. Liability insurance. The applicant for a sign permit to erect a billboard
shall provide a certificate of insurance for public liability and property
damage that holds the City harmless in an amount no less than
$500,000 or as may be adjusted, from time to time, by resolution of the
City Council. The insurance certificate shall contain a clause stating
that the insurance shall not be canceled or reduced without first giving
10 days notice to the City.
H. Permits.
(1) Prior to submission of an application for a sign permit, the
applicant for a billboard shall obtain and submit with the
application, approvals from the United States Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), when applicable.
(2) Approval of the special exception shall be valid for six months from
the date of action by the Zoning Hearing Board granting the special
exception. If the applicant fails to obtain a sign permit for the
approved billboard within the six-month period, approval of the
special exception shall expire automatically, without written notice
to the applicant.
(3) The issuance of a sign permit for a billboard that has been granted
approval of a special exception shall be conditioned upon the
approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) for billboards proposed to be located along state
highways. If the applicant fails to submit evidence of the required
approval by PennDOT within 30 days of the issuance of the
conditional sign permit, the sign permit shall be revoked by the
Zoning Officer who shall provide written notice to the applicant.
(4) The applicant may reapply for the required sign permit, upon
submission of evidence of PennDOT approval, without payment of
any additional sign permit fee, provided the application is filed
within the six-month period during which the special exception
approval is valid.
§ 300-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-123
1:507
I. Application fees. Said application shall be accompanied by an
application fee in an amount equal to that set from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.
J. Nonconforming billboards.
(1) Any billboard that does not conform to the requirements of this
section shall not be enlarged or moved unless the billboard
complies with all provisions of this section.
(2) Any billboard that is damaged or destroyed by more than 51% of its
replacement value at the time of damage or destruction shall be
reconstructed only in compliance with all provisions of this section.
K. The Zoning Hearing Board may attach conditions in the granting of a
special exception.
§ 300-123 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-123
1:508
ARTICLE XV
Height Requirements and Exceptions
§ 300-124. General height requirements.
The permitted heights of structures shall be measured from ground level
grade as herein defined. On a corner lot, the ground level grade shall be
the mean of the base grades along both frontages at the structure face. On
a through lot, the ground level grade of each structure frontage (front and
rear) shall limit the height of the structure to the stated permitted height as
measured at the midpoint of the side of the structure.
§ 300-125. Exceptions permitted by Zoning Officer.
§ 300-126. Height exceptions permitted by Board.
Upon application, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall determine the reasonableness and propriety
of an application for a height exception and may authorize the issuance
of an occupancy permit in conformity with the provisions prescribed in
this section and all other applicable regulations of this chapter unless
otherwise excepted hereunder. The Board shall permit exceptions to the
height regulations in each zoning district where the following conditions are
met:
A. The erection of roof structures shall be permitted above the height
requirements of the zoning district for the housing of elevators,
stairways, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate
and maintain the building; and skylights, flagpoles, farm silos or similar
structures in any zoning district where such uses or structures or parts
thereof are permitted.
B. A structure conforming as to use but not complying with the height
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located may be restored
if damaged or partially destroyed by fire, flood, wind or other calamity
or Act of God, in the same location, not exceeding the same height, and
for the same use as it was before the occurrence.
A. Building height in excess of the height above average ground level
allowed in any zoning district may be permitted, provided all front, side
and rear yard depths are increased beyond the minimum required, one
foot for each additional foot of height.
B. The following structures are exempt from height regulations, provided
it is demonstrated to the Board that they require such height
exemptions as are necessary and essential for proper function and they
do not constitute a hazard to an established airport or adjacent
development: television and radio towers and spires, belfries,
monuments, tanks, water and fire towers and scenery lofts, cooling
towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads,
smokestacks, conveyors and steeples.
§ 300-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-126
1:509
C. A structure conforming as to use, but not complying with the height or
area regulations, may be enlarged, provided an enlarged portion
thereof complies with all the regulations of this chapter.
D. The following structures or portions thereof may extend above the
height limit of the zoning district in which the same is located, provided
every structure or portion of such structure, above the height limit, is at
least the same distance from adjacent or opposite properties as that
structure or portion of structure is high:
(1) Multiple-family dwellings.
(2) Church towers and spires.
(3) Penthouse or roof structures for the housing of tanks.
(4) Chimneys, smokestacks, steeples and towers. (See § 300-156).
§ 300-126 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-126
1:510
ARTICLE XVI
Lot Area Requirements and Exceptions
§ 300-127. Existing lots of record.226
Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this chapter may be used
for the erection of a residence conforming to the use regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located, even though its area and width are
less than the minimum requirements of this chapter, subject, however, to
the further restrictions of § 300-148, Nonconforming lots of record.
§ 300-128. Area exceptions.
The area exceptions listed in this section may be permitted by the Zoning
Officer in the zoning districts and manner specified herein. Upon
application, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall determine the reasonableness and propriety of an
application for an area exception and may authorize the issuance of an
occupancy permit in conformity with the provisions prescribed in this
section and all other applicable regulations of this chapter unless otherwise
excepted hereunder.
A. Permitted obstructions; projections into all required yards.
(1) Overhanging eaves, window sills, gutters, cornices and like
architectural elements projecting 24 inches or less into the yard;
open balconies above first floor level projecting 24 inches or less
into the yard; removable operating awnings not including awnings
permanently affixed to the buildings; steps of a height above grade
of less than four feet; arbors, trellises, fences, walls and terraces
and porches, landings and platforms, open to the sky not exceeding
42 inches in height above grade may be permitted in all yards.
(2) Unenclosed open balconies may extend into side yards not more
than 2 1/2 feet and into front and rear yards not more than four feet
for one-family and two-family dwellings in residential districts.
Balconies on multifamily structures may extend not more than five
feet into required yards or open space between buildings.
(3) Open fire escapes may extend into the side or rear yards not more
than four feet and shall not be permitted in front yards.
(4) Minor utility fixtures (streetlights and telephone poles, fire
hydrants, gas and water line access) and articles of decoration
(bird baths, benches or any unattached article that will enhance the
appearance of a structure) around a main building may be located
in any required yard.
(5) An unenclosed porch no more than one story or 15 feet in height
and 12 feet in depth may be erected in the front yard; in the rear
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-128
1:511
yard, 20 feet in depth or 25% of yard depth, whichever is greater;
provided, that no portion of such porch shall be closer to a side
lot line than the required width of a side yard. This exception shall
in no way be construed to include off-street loading areas. (See
§ 300-92). Any and all projections from commercial and industrial
structures or parts of structures used for loading purposes shall
meet off-street loading requirements.227
(6) A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier or pilaster, projecting no more
than 12 inches from the wall of the building may project into a
required yard.
(7) A screening wall, trellises or fence no more than 6 1/2 feet in height
may be erected in any required side or rear yard or within buildable
area. A fence not exceeding 10 feet in height may be built in any
required yard for schools, playgrounds, parks or in any required
side or rear yard in Commercial or Industrial Districts.
B. Permitted obstructions in front, side and rear yards.
(1) Front and rear yards. One-story bay windows projecting two feet or
less into the yard may be permitted, as are permanent window
awnings and permanent door canopies. Canopies and awnings shall
project 3 1/2 feet or less into the yard and have no supporting
poles.
(2) Front yards on corner lots. Those uses permitted in required front
yards may be permitted so long as such fence, wall, hedge, shrub or
other object shall not in any way cause danger to traffic by
obscuring vision to street or highway traffic.
(3) Rear yards. Domestic laundry drying equipment, enclosed or
unenclosed accessory buildings and open off-street parking stalls
for use of the same zoning lot may be permitted.
C. Reduction of front yard depth. Where a zoning lot:
(1) Abuts the side lot line of only one lot occupied by a main building,
exclusive of unenclosed front porches, which is less than 25 feet
from the abutting common side lot line, the front yard requirement
of such zoning lot may be the average depth of the front yard of the
abutting occupied lot, and the depth required in the zoning district.
(2) Abuts, on both sides, lots occupied by main buildings, exclusive of
unenclosed front porches, which are less than 25 feet from the
abutting common side lot lines, the front yard requirement of such
zoning lot may be the average depth of the front yards of the
abutting occupied lots.
227. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-128 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-128
1:512
§ 300-129. Area requirements.
D. Reduction of rear yard depth. On a through lot, the rear yard depth
shall be not less than, but need not exceed, the required depth of the
front yard in the zoning district in which such lot is located.
A. Restoration after calamity. A structure conforming as to use but not
complying with the area regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located may be restored if damaged or partially destroyed by fire, flood,
wind or other calamity or Act of God, in the same location and for the
same use as it was before the occurrence.
B. Enlargement. A structure conforming as to use, but not complying with
the area or height regulations, may be enlarged, provided the enlarged
portion thereof complies with all the regulations of this chapter.
C. Utility easements. Public service (utility) easements for the
transportation and distribution and control of water, electricity, gas, oil,
steam, telegraph and telephone communications, railroad trackage
and/or supporting members other than buildings, shall not be required
to be located on an individual zoning lot nor be held to reduce the
required yard dimensions for other structures on a zoning lot.
D. Landscaping; vision clearance. Landscape features, such as trees,
shrubs or flowers, soil cultivation, plants and plantings, shall be
permitted in any required yard, provided that when in a front yard they
do not constitute a hedge effect more than four feet in height above the
ground level adjacent thereto, and provided such landscape features do
not constitute a hedge effect contrary to the provisions governing
fences in §§ 300-93 and 300-94 or obstruct vision contrary to the
provisions of.228
E. Front yards. The greater front yard requirement where two or more
zoning districts face upon the same street shall be extended for the full
block between intersecting streets. However, no structure shall be
within 10 feet of a public right-of-way.
F. Side and rear yards. The side and rear yard in any C or M District
adjoining any R or S-1 District shall be at least one foot for each one
foot of building height, other provisions of this chapter
notwithstanding.
G. Curbs. In all districts, along major roads, combination curbs and
gutters shall be provided at the owner's or developer's expense and as
shown on Illustration Nos. 8 and 9 of Appendix A.229 They shall be of the
rolled type, except at intersections, where the rolled curb shall be
warped into a straight curb for the distance of the curb return radius.
Curb radius shall be 15 feet for any minor street intersection, 20 feet
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
229. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
§ 300-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-129
1:513
§ 300-130. Retention of yards.
The retention of yards, courts and other open space as well as the minimum
lot area required for a building shall be the continuing obligation of the
owner of such building or of the property on which it is located, as long as
the building is in existence. No legally required yards, courts, other open
space or the minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue
of change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard,
court, other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other
new, existing or enlarged building.
§ 300-131. Division of zoning lots.
No lot shall hereafter be divided into two or more lots, and no portion of
a lot shall be sold unless all lots resulting from such subdivision or sale
conform with all regulations of the zoning district in which the property
is located. No lot shall be so reduced in area that any required yards or
open areas will be smaller than, or further reduced if already less than, the
minimum requirements for the zoning district in which such lot is located.
(See § 300-15).
§ 300-132. Use of lots.
All yards, courts and other open spaces, accessory uses, fences, off-street
loading space or off-street parking space allocated to a building shall be
located on the same zoning lot as such building. For the purpose of this
chapter, essential service requirements for nonconforming uses may be
fulfilled through the use of an adjacent lot.
for intersections of two collector streets, 35 feet for an arterial and
collector street and 50 feet or more determined after consultation
with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Asphalt curbs are
permitted on minor streets as per Illustration 8C.
H. Sidewalks. In R-1, R-2, R-3 and all S and M districts, sidewalks are
permitted at a minimum width of four feet, either adjacent to the curb,
set back three feet from the curb or set back seven feet if there are
street trees. All sidewalks shall be constructed so as to be continuous
from one property to those adjacent that have sidewalks meeting the
above setback requirements. Construction shall be concrete; where
sidewalks are paved with asphalt, they may be surface treated;
however, when replaced, such replacement shall be with concrete;
minimum depth shall be four inches with a six-inch base. In no case
shall sidewalks be installed prior to required utility installations or be
placed where they will interfere in any way with an easement without
prior consent of those granted the easement. Sidewalks are required
when and if considered necessary by the Planning Commission in R-3
and C Districts only along major streets and shall be placed adjacent to
the curb.
§ 300-129 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-133
1:514
§ 300-133. Right-of-way grading.230
No portion of a public right-of-way or driveway shall be graded by any
owner or occupant of abutting property to exceed a slope of 1/4 inch (plus
or minus) from the established elevation of the curb for every one foot of
horizontal distance between the curb edge and an abutting property line.
See Illustration No. 9a of Appendix A.231 See also definition of driveway in
§ 300-164.
§ 300-134. Required yards for existing buildings. [Amended
10-8-1985 by Ord. No. 3-1985]
No yards, now or hereafter provided for a building existing on the effective
date of this chapter, shall subsequently be reduced below, or further
reduced if already less than, the minimum yard requirements of this chapter
for equal new construction. However, existing building lines shall be
accepted for new construction.232
§ 300-135. Farm and agricultural operations.
Farm and agricultural operations are permitted in any zoning district
subject to the requirements of this section and all other applicable
regulations of this chapter.
§ 300-136. Number of principal buildings on a lot.
Except in an R-3 District, in land developments and in conjunction with
specified exceptions permitted in Residence Districts, not more than one
principal detached residential building shall be located on a zoning lot,
A. The site must contain at least 10 acres; truck gardens and nurseries
may contain between one and 10 acres.
B. All proposed new dwelling units located on farm premises shall conform
with all regulations of the zoning district in which they are located,
including permitted building types, density, minimum lot dimensions
and required yards.
C. Raising of farm animals is permitted on lot sizes of more than 10 acres.
However, farm animals shall not be permitted closer than 25 feet from a
residential dwelling or zoning district, and be within an enclosed fence
or barrier.
D. The site must contain at least five acres for domestic animals and
stables and must be within an enclosed fence or barrier.
230. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
231. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
232. Editor's Note: Original § 1809, Rear structure restrictions, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
§ 300-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-136
1:515
nor shall a principal detached residential building be located on the same
zoning lot with any other principal building.233
§ 300-137. Lot dimensions and minimum requirements for
residential, commercial, and industrial development.234
All lot areas shall be calculated from the street right-of-way lines. All
setback lines shall be measured from the right-of-way lines.
233. Editor's Note: Original § 1811, Visibility at intersections, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
234. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-136 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-137
1:516
ARTICLE XVII
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 300-138. Intent and purpose.
§ 300-139. Annexed areas; contested uses.
§ 300-140. Nonconforming uses of land.
The lawful use of land or structures thereon existing at the time of the
enactment of this chapter, or of an amendment thereto, not involving any
principal and/or accessory structure, although such use does not conform
to the provisions of this chapter, may be continued, provided that no such
nonconforming use of land shall be in any way be expanded, extended or
moved in whole or in part to any other lot of record or other portion of
the lot of record. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure
A. Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that
may later be adopted, there may exist structures, and uses of land and
structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or
amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under
the terms of this chapter or future amendment.
B. Although such uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts involved, it is the intent of this
chapter to permit such nonconformities to continue until they are
removed. It is further the intent of this chapter that existing
nonconformities shall not be used as justification for adding other
structures or uses prohibited in the same district.
A. Annexed areas. All land annexed to the City after the effective date of
this chapter shall be classified automatically as being in an S or
Conservancy District. The Planning Commission shall recommend to
the Zoning Hearing Board appropriate zoning for the annexed area
within not more than six months after the effective date of annexation.
However, until Council has adopted a zoning district for the annexed
area, the provisions of § 300-141C relative to nonconformity
termination, shall not apply to such annexed area.
B. Contested uses, areas and heights. All uses, areas and heights which
require interpretation due to conflicting definitions or requirements in
this chapter may be permitted or excluded under the maximum or more
exclusive requirements and may be considered as nonconforming by
the Board until such time as an interpretation is secured from the
proper authority. Amendments in this chapter based on the maximum
requirements shall control on an interim basis without amendment for
successive six-month periods after adoption of this chapter at which
time all amendments as applicable, shall be submitted to Council for
approval. Amendments may be requested by the Board if the Board
feels such are warranted at an earlier date.
§ 300-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-140
1:517
and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall
eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
§ 300-141. Nonconforming uses of structures.
The lawful use of a structure existing at the time of the enactment of this
chapter or of an amendment thereto, although such use does not conform
to the provision of this article, may be continued and such use may be
extended throughout the building; provided, that such extension of use does
not displace a use conforming to the zoning district designated by this
article, but not in violation of the area, height and yard requirements of the
zoning district in which such structure or premises is located.
§ 300-142. Nonconforming structures; mobile homes.
A. In any zoning district, a lawful nonconforming use may be changed to a
permitted use or a special exception for that zoning district, provided
no structural alterations to the exterior are made other than those
ordered by the Zoning Officer to assure the safety of the structure to
those persons necessary to convert the structure to a conforming use as
designated by this chapter.
B. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which the structure
is located; and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
C. Whenever a nonconforming use of a structure or land, or a portion
thereof, has been discontinued for a period of one year, it shall not
again be used except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning
district in which such structure is located.
D. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure and premises may be changed to another nonconforming use;
provided, that the Board, either by general rule or by making findings in
the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate
or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming
use. In permitting such change, the Board may require appropriate
conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this article.
A. A structure or part of a structure lawfully existing at the time of the
enactment of this chapter, or of an amendment thereto, although such
structure does not conform to the lot and yard requirements of this
chapter, may be continued in use, provided no structural alterations are
made to the nonconforming portion of the structure other than those
ordered by the Zoning Officer to assure the safety of the structure.
B. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to,
nonconforming signs and mobile homes. The nonconforming use of a
property for a mobile home may be continued, provided there is no
change in ownership other than to a direct heir of such mobile home, no
§ 300-140 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-142
1:518
§ 300-143. Reconstruction of damaged nonconforming structures.
§ 300-144. Duration and registration.
§ 300-145. Repairs and maintenance.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by the official charged with protecting the public safety.
expansion or extension of such use, no additions of service utilities
and no new foundation constructed. Whenever the nonconforming use
of property for a mobile home has been discontinued for a period of
at least one year, the use shall not thereafter be reestablished. (See
§ 300-140).
C. A nonconforming structure which is nonconforming only because of
failure to provide required automobile parking and off-street loading
space shall have all the rights of a conforming use and structure. This
provision, however, shall not be deemed to remove the obligation to
provide required automobile parking and off-street loading space for
the enlarged or changed portion of the use or structure at the time of
such enlargement or change.235
A. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means to an extent of
60% or more of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not
be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. If so damaged to a greater extent, any new structure and its
use shall conform to all requirements of this chapter, except that if a
single-family residence located in any zoning district is damaged or
destroyed, it may be reconstructed if such construction is performed
within 12 months of such casualty.
B. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means to an extent of
less than 60% of its replacement cost at time of destruction, a permit
for its reconstruction shall be issued, provided application for a permit
for such reconstruction is made within one year from the date of such
destruction, and if the restored structure covers no greater area and
contains no greater cubic content than before such casualty.
A. Duration. The Zoning Officer shall certify the existence of the
nonconforming use, which may continue for 20 years from the date of
such certification.
B. Registration. See §§ 300-119, 300-176 and 300-177.236
235. Editor's Note: Original § 1906, Nonconforming signs, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
236. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-146
1:519
§ 300-146. Uses under special exception provisions.
Any use for which a special exception permit is granted in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but
shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such zoning
district. Any use lawfully in existence on the effective date of this chapter
which is located in a zoning district in which such use may be permitted as
a special exception shall be considered a special exception and shall have
the same rights and privileges of continuance, maintenance, enlargement
and expansion that are permitted for a conforming use in the same zoning
district; however, no accessory use shall be added or enlarged on a zoning
lot where the principal use is itself a nonconforming use. (See § 300-128).
§ 300-147. Limited enlargement.
The extension of a nonconforming use or structure due to the normal
growth of business shall be permitted. In any zoning district, the
enlargement of a nonconforming commercial or industrial use or structure
shall be restricted as follows:
A. The gross floor area of the enlargement shall not exceed 100% of the
ground floor area of the nonconforming structure or nonconforming
portion thereof on the effective date of this section, or any amending
ordinance which later makes such structure, or portion thereof,
nonconforming.
B. It shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board
that such extension or enlargement is reasonably necessary at the
concerned location because of normal growth of business and that it
would be an unreasonable hardship on the applicant to provide for such
business growth in a zoning district where the concerned use and
structure are permitted.
C. All other applicable regulations and requirements of this chapter shall
be complied with.
D. The Board shall impose such conditions and safeguards as it deems
necessary in order to protect adjacent conforming uses and structures
against the adverse effects of such nonconformity.
E. Only one expansion shall be permitted to a maximum 100% in
Subsection A hereof, and any series of expansions shall not exceed
100% of the gross floor area at the time of enactment of the original
Zoning Ordinance No. 17-1960. (See § 300-155).
F. All enlargements or expansions are to be carried out by the owner or his
or her immediate heir for the nonconforming use registered with the
Zoning Officer at the time of enactment of the Zoning Ordinance in
Subsection E hereof.
§ 300-146 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-148
1:520
§ 300-148. Nonconforming lots of record.
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected
on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment
of this chapter; provided, such lot was not created in violation of prior
existing zoning and subdivision regulations. Such a lot must be in separate
ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same
ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet
the requirements for area or width or both that are generally applicable
in the district; provided, that yard dimensions and other requirements not
involving area or width or both of the lot shall conform to the regulations
for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of area, width and yard
requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Zoning Hearing
Board. (See § 300-127).
§ 300-149. Exceptions for nonconforming residences.
Notwithstanding the provisions above, the following regulations shall apply
to nonconforming residences located in any district:
A. An existing residence may be extended to the rear, without requiring a
variance, in spite of an existing side yard encroachment, provided the
side yard encroachment is not increased.
B. An existing structure which is destroyed by fire may be rebuilt on the
same foundation and to the preexisting dimensions, even though there
may be nonconforming uses relating to yard area, lot area or first floor
area requirements.
§ 300-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-149
1:521

ARTICLE XVIII
Special Exceptions
§ 300-150. Exceptions permitted by Zoning Hearing Board.
The special exceptions listed in this article and Articles III through VI may
be permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board in the zoning districts specified.
Upon application, in accordance with the provisions of § 300-183, the Board
shall determine the reasonableness and propriety of an application for
a special exception and may authorize the issuance of zoning permits
in conformity with the provisions prescribed in this article and all other
applicable regulations of this chapter unless otherwise excepted hereunder.
The Board shall request a report and recommendation from the Planning
Commission on the planning aspects of each application.
§ 300-151. Public and semipublic uses.
A. Public (government), semipublic and private nonprofit uses which are
of educational, cultural, institutional, social or recreational character
and which serve residents of the neighborhood, community or City may
be permitted in any of the zoning districts specified in accordance with
the requirements of this article. Such uses include fire stations,
libraries, museums, government office buildings, post offices,
neighborhood or community clubs, social and recreational clubs, but do
not include business, professional or fraternal associations or any use
involving the serving of alcoholic beverages on the premises. For
specific requirements other than those applicable herein for the various
types of educational institutions, see "Special exceptions" listed under
the zoning districts of this chapter. (See § 300-28C, 300-37 and 300-47).
B. Institutional uses include philanthropic and religious institutions. A
church or other place of worship may include a parish house, convent or
educational facility operated in compliance with a church or place of
worship. The above uses may be permitted in any of the zoning districts
specified in this chapter, provided:
(1) Side yards not adjoining a street shall be not less than 30 feet wide,
and other yards shall be not less than 10 feet more than required in
the zoning district for which application is made.
(2) When students, teachers or communicants are to be housed, the lot
area exclusive of that around principal buildings not devoted to
housing shall be, in relation to the number of sleeping rooms, such
as to permit no greater density than is permitted in any other type
of dwelling facility in the zoning district where the use is located.
(3) Minimum distances between buildings shall be equal to the heights
of buildings, or in the case of buildings of unequal height, to the
height of the taller building, but not less than 50 feet.
§ 300-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-151
1:523
§ 300-152. Parks, playgrounds and recreation areas.
Public and private nonprofit parks, playgrounds and other outdoor
recreation uses open to the public may be permitted in any of the zoning
districts specified in Article XIII of this chapter, provided:
(4) The use shall be located on a zoning lot which meets the yard
requirements of the zoning district.
(5) Building coverage shall not exceed 20% of the total lot area.
(6) The height of principal buildings shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories or
35 feet, except that this height limitation may be exceeded if all
required yard widths are increased by one foot for every one foot
by which a building exceeds 35 feet in height. (See Article XV).
(7) If the use for which application is made is one which generates
substantial amounts of traffic, the Zoning Hearing Board may
determine that such use shall have frontage on or direct access to a
major street or, where entrance into the traffic may be hazardous,
to a side street with a nearby intersection with a major street.
(8) The Board shall require the provision of a sufficient number of offstreet
parking spaces to accommodate the vehicles of the potential
average number of users of the facility at any one time.
(9) In considering applications for uses under this section, the Board
shall consider the character of the proposed use, probable method
and hours of operation and the kinds of activities which will be
carried on in relation to the character of the neighborhood and
zoning district, especially R and S, in which the proposed use would
be located.
(10) A site plan must be submitted for the review and comment of the
Board. (See § 300-183).
(11) Playgrounds, playfields and other active recreational facilities, if
designed and incorporated as an accessory use to the principal use,
shall not extend into required front or side yards or closer than 30
feet to a rear lot line.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board determines that such use is of reasonable
size, on topography and at a location to serve the public convenience
and welfare and is not seriously detrimental to the character of the
neighborhood.
B. Safeguards are established with respect to sanitation and general
safety.
C. No structure other than a fence, similar enclosure or landscape feature
shall be closer to a property line than the buildable area of lots in the
zoning district in question.
§ 300-151 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-152
1:524
§ 300-153. Water recreation or storage facilities.
Any natural or artificial facility for water recreation such as a public
swimming pool (including motel, apartment, private swimming pool club,
and private home), a commercial fishing pond or any other water storage
facility such as reservoirs, fish hatcheries, sewage lagoons. (See § 300-78)
and farm ponds shall comply with the following regulations:
D. Any public or private nonprofit swimming pool, open to the public,
constructed in a recreation area as listed above shall conform to the
requirements found in § 300-153.
E. Fences and planted buffer strips shall be provided, as determined by
the Zoning Hearing Board, to be necessary for safety purposes or to
protect adjacent or abutting properties from possible detrimental
influences from the recreation use.
F. For recreation uses which involve automobile traffic or parking, the
Board shall require provision for off-street parking spaces to
accommodate the potential average number of persons using the
premises and to comply with requirements in Article XIII.
A. Required yards, unoccupied except for fences and walls and landscape
features, shall not be less than 30 feet abutting a street, and 20 feet
along all other property lines and must meet the setback requirements
of the zoning districts where located, whichever imposes the greater
restriction, however.
B. A permanent in-ground or aboveground private swimming pool,
accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling, may be located within a
required rear yard, but shall not extend closer than 15 feet to a rear lot
line or closer to a side lot line than the required side yard depth. An inground
pool shall be enclosed with a four-foot-high wall or fence, either
around the perimeter of the rear yard, or around the pool, with an
entrance which can be latched or locked to prevent unauthorized,
uncontrolled or accidental entry. An aboveground pool (all sides a
minimum of four feet above grade) shall have retractable steps that
latch and prevent access to pool when not in use. For private, public or
commercial pools, a wall or face of a dwelling or building may be used
as part of the pool enclosure. (See § 300-164).
C. Before a permit is issued to the operator or owner of the facility, other
than a private swimming pool, a plan shall be submitted to the Zoning
Hearing Board showing the size of the facility, proposed use, parking
arrangement, use of the buildings and structures on the site,
surrounding properties and their usage and any other pertinent
information.
D. A swimming pool accessory to a multifamily use or to a motel or hotel
shall be located within the buildable area of the lot or parcel.
§ 300-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-153
1:525
§ 300-154. Land development projects.
(See § 300-164.)
E. No part of a public swimming pool and adjacent lounging area as
defined by the required fence or wall enclosing such area, shall be
closer than 200 feet from any residential property line.
F. Lot coverage by a private apartment or motel swimming pool, adjacent
lounging area and accessory buildings shall not exceed 15% of the total
area.
G. A public swimming pool and adjacent lounging area shall be enclosed
with a fence or other barrier 6 1/2 feet in height with doors or a gate
equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device on pool side
keeping the door or gate securely closed at all times when not in use to
prevent unauthorized, uncontrolled entry; a barrier four feet in height
and latch shall be sufficient for private pools. (See Subsection B hereof).
H. All illumination shall be directed away from abutting properties, and all
floodlights shall be appropriately shielded so as to eliminate any direct
sight of light bulbs from outside the property lines.
I. When construction of a swimming pool is undertaken in conjunction
with and on the same parcel of land as a planned residential or unit
development, it may be considered as a part of such planned
development and deviations from lot coverage, yards and distance
requirements and parking requirements may be permitted in order to
promote a more efficient or attractive development plan but not to
permit a less adequate standard of development. (See § 300-154).
J. An adequate number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided to
accommodate the potential average number of persons using the
premises at any one time as determined by the Zoning Hearing Board,
but shall not be less than one space for every 60 square feet of water
surface in a swimming pool. The facility, if operated to attract visitors,
must comply with parking requirements established under Article XIII.
K. All public swimming pools shall comply with current "Regulations for
Bathing Places" or the most recent equivalent of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.237
A. Residential land development.
(1) In the R-2, R-3 and C Zoning Districts, residential land development
projects for multifamily units of a single type (townhouses, garden
apartments, or high-rise units) or a mix of housing types, including
urban renewal, may be permitted if the land development meets
the requirements of this section.
237. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-153 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-154
1:526
(2) Land development projects are not to be interpreted as planned
residential developments. (See Article VIII). The provisions of
planned residential developments are meant to encourage original
and unique planned developments as special exceptions
throughout the City. Developers may decide, depending on unique
circumstances, density and site constraints, between developing
according to the provisions under land development projects or
planned residential development.
(3) When the Zoning Officer is satisfied that all requirements are met,
he shall refer the land development plan to the Zoning Hearing
Board for review and approval. After the plan is approved by the
Board, all development, construction and use shall be in
accordance with that plan, unless a new land development plan is
submitted and approved by the Board in accordance with this
section. Any deviation from the approved land development plan
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(a) The area of the land to be developed shall not be less than four
acres, except:
[1] In C Zones, only when a single high-rise apartment
structure is proposed to be constructed for either
subsidized or conventional rental, sale or ownership. Such
structure shall be reviewed and judged as having adequate
lot area based on the presentation of an overall site plan
that shows conformance to all other applicable provisions
of this section and this chapter. (See Article VII).
[2] No high-rise structure shall exceed 10 stories.
[3] No main or accessory building shall be located within 75
feet, and no parking area within 50 feet, of any boundary
line of the land development.
[4] The lot area per dwelling unit shall be not less than 4,000
square feet of total land development area for a
townhouse, and 3,500 square feet for garden apartments.
(See § 300-32). High-rise apartments shall not exceed 40
dwelling units per acre.
[5] The minimum distances between main buildings shall be
the same as specified in § 300-151C.
[6] Buildings shall cover not more than 25% of the lot area.
B. Properties adjacent to the land development project or immediately
opposite on a public right-of-way shall not be adversely affected.
C. Limited business facilities, fully integrated into the design of the
project, may be considered.
§ 300-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-154
1:527
§ 300-155. Public utilities.
Use of land in any zoning district for public utility purposes such as a gas
company regulating station, water pumping station, electric distribution
station or substation and similar uses, all without rotary (generating)
motors may be permitted, provided:
D. An overall land development site plan shall be prepared and presented
to the Planning Commission for review of traffic circulation, grading,
screening, access, landscaping and relationship to adjacent residential
or commercial structures.
E. Architectural plans must be presented to the Planning Commission for
review of design and aesthetics.
F. The land development projects shall be reviewed and recommendations
made by the Planning Commission to determine and assure that the
proposed plan is in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan, meets
all applicable provisions of this article, and is in the best interest of the
City. The Commission may recommend reasonable controls and/or
restrictions.
G. Recommendations of other agencies or officials required elsewhere in
this article with regard to elements of the land development including
off-street parking requirements shall be incorporated prior to
submitting the land development plan to the Board for approval.
A. The use of structure is located on a zoning lot complying with the yard
requirements of the zoning district.
B. The use does not involve company offices or storage areas or
structures, generating major trucking operations or excessive traffic or
heavy equipment movements, except where specified in this chapter.
C. The portion of the use not within a building, including exposed
transformers shall be enclosed on all sides by a solid wall or fence
erected to a height suitable to shield the use from surrounding
properties, retard the noise and obstruct the view of the passage of
persons and material to and from the installation, as determined by the
Zoning Hearing Board; and it is proven to the Board or the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission upon petition that such use is reasonably
necessary at the proposed location for the convenience or welfare of the
public.
D. Utility regulator stations or substations in the required front yard or
public right-of-way shall be constructed below the grade of the
adjoining ground. Installations above ground shall comply with lot and
yard requirements and shall be housed in a structure with an
architectural design, exterior material and appearance harmonizing
with the adjacent structure or surroundings.
§ 300-154 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-156
1:528
§ 300-156. Towers.
Water storage, smokestacks, electric transmission, satellite dish, telephone
or radio or television transmission or receiving towers and facilities (not
including broadcasting studios, or business offices, operated under
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission) may be permitted
in any district, provided:
§ 300-157. Multifamily required open space.
See § 300-65C regarding planned unit developments.
§ 300-158. Addition of canopies to existing gasoline service
stations.
An existing gasoline service station may add a service island canopy,
provided no portion of same shall be placed closer to the road right-of-way
line than 30 feet nor closer thereto than the line fixed by this chapter or
buildings on adjoining lots.
§ 300-159. Indoor recreation in commercial or industrial areas.
Indoor recreation facilities shall be permitted as a special exception in C-2,
C-3 and M districts for racquet sports, skating and bowling, and provided:
A. The use and structure are located on a zoning lot complying with the
yard regulations of the zoning district.
B. No portion of the structure is closer to any dwelling in a residence
district than a distance equal to the height of the tower structure.
C. It is demonstrated to the Zoning Hearing Board that such use is
reasonably necessary at the proposed location; and when the proposed
location is in a residence district that the use cannot reasonably provide
service from locations in any other type of zoning district. (See Article
XV).
A. The building or buildings and site plan thereof are presented for review
and approval by the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. A landscape plan is submitted for review and approval by the Zoning
Hearing Board.
C. An adequate number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided as
determined by the Zoning Hearing Board to meet the needs of the
particular facility and service provided.
D. The use shall be located on a zoning lot which meets the zoning
requirements of the zoning district.
E. All other applicable provisions of this chapter shall apply as to parking,
lighting, site conditions, performance standards, safety, health and
welfare.238
§ 300-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-160
1:529
§ 300-160. Adult businesses. [Added 10-13-1997 by Ord. No.
9-1997]
A. Findings of fact and conclusions of the City Council.
(1) The quality of life in the Lower Burrell community will be preserved
and protected by making some areas available for adult businesses
while preventing such businesses from locating in other areas.
(2) Prohibiting the location of adult businesses in close proximity to
residences, schools, hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums,
retirement or convalescent homes, group homes, personal care
homes, public parks, churches and establishments which are
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or to other adult businesses will
further the public health, safety and welfare in Lower Burrell and
serve to:
(a) Protect and maintain property values.
(b) Preserve an environment suitable to residential, educational
and institutional uses.
(c) Reduce crime and vagrancy.
(d) Promote appropriate commercial growth and development.
(e) Protect the quality of life in Lower Burrell.
(3) The Council is aware of and concerned about the proliferation of
businesses which offer, at one location, entertainment of an adult
nature, mixed with otherwise non-adult activities, such as
establishments offering food or beverages, the sale of merchandise,
personal services, etc.
(4) Such mixture of activities at one location makes the proper,
uniform and predictable application of this chapter extremely
difficult and may adversely affect the commercial and business
environment of the City.
B. Special exceptions. Adult businesses, subject to the following express
standards and criteria, and to any other standards and criteria
generally applicable to all special exceptions:
(1) Adult businesses may be established in a C-2 District.
(2) Persons or owners who intend to open an adult business must
obtain from Lower Burrell a license to operate such an enterprise
and must pay an investigative fee in an amount as established from
time to time by resolution of City Council to Lower Burrell. In
addition, such persons or owners must supply to the City detailed
238. Editor's Note: Original § 2011, Cabinet making; industrial zone, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-160 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-160
1:530
§ 300-161. Communication towers. [Added 7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
5-1998; amended 3-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2-2009]
information as to the ownership and financing as required on the
licensing application form. This form can be obtained at the office
of the Ordinance Officer.239
(3) No adult business can be located within 500 feet of a preexisting
residence, school, hospital, nursing home, sanitarium, retirement
or convalescent home, group home, personal care home, public
park, church, establishment which is licensed to and does sell
alcoholic beverages or other adult beverages.
(4) No adult business can be located within 1,000 feet of an area zoned
residential.
(5) An adult business shall be initially licensed, where it has met all
ordinance requirements, through December 31 of the year in which
the license is issued. For each year thereafter that the adult
business intends to continue its business as an adult commercial
enterprise, it must seek from the office of the Ordinance Officer a
renewal of this license. The application for renewal is due in the
Ordinance Officer's office no later than November 1 of the year
preceding the year for which the license renewal is sought. The
lack of a license or the failure to seek license renewal on a timely
basis shall be a proper basis for the City to deny or revoke an
occupancy permit to an adult bookstore, adult movie theater or
similar adult commercial enterprise or other adult establishment.
Council may establish the license fee by resolution.
(6) Any booths, cubicles or enclosures of any type including, but not
limited to peep show booths, contained on the premises shall be
open to the view of the other patrons in the establishment. No door,
curtain or obstruction of any type which blocks or hinders the plain
view of others shall be permitted.
(7) Any adult bookstore, adult movie theater or similar adult
commercial enterprise or other adult entertainment found to be in
violation of this chapter shall be subject to the enforcement
penalties provided for in this chapter and/or the Municipalities
Planning Code.
(8) No person under 18 years of age shall be given access to sexual
conduct or nudity materials as defined in this chapter in
accordance with 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503.
A. Permitted in the, S-1 and S-2 as a special exception, provided that all of
the following criteria are met, as well as all criteria at §§ 300-156 and
300-126.
239. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-161
1:531
(1) The lot on which a tower is located must meet the minimum lot size
for the particular zoning district. The lot on which a tower is
located shall not be within 2,500 feet of any other existing tower
site measured from the nearest property line to nearest property
line. Only one tower shall be permitted per lot.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed communications
tower and the electromagnetic fields associated with the antennas
proposed to be mounted thereon comply with safety standards now
or hereafter established by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC). Additionally, the owner shall submit to the City,
annually, an inspection report at the owner's expense that the
tower is in compliance with FCC guidelines.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the
communications tower is the minimum height necessary to function
effectively.
(4) Tower height shall be measured from the ground level to the top
point of the tower or top point of the highest communications
antenna, whichever is higher.
(5) The communications tower shall be designed and constructed to all
applicable standards of the American National Standards Institute,
ANSI/EIA-222-Manual, as amended.
(6) A soils report complying with the standards of Appendix I,
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222-E-Manual, as amended,
shall be submitted to the City to document and verify design
specifications of the foundation of the communications tower and
anchors for the guy wires, if used. The soil report shall be signed
and sealed by an engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(7) Equipment cabinets and equipment buildings shall comply with the
height and yard requirements of the zoning district for accessory
structures. Setbacks shall be measured from the lease or right-ofway,
etc., lines.
(8) Recording of a plat of subdivision shall not be required for the lease
parcel on which the tower is proposed to be constructed, provided
the equipment building is proposed to be unmanned and the
required easement agreement for access is submitted for approval
by the Township.
(9) The owner of the communications tower shall be responsible for
maintaining the parcel on which the tower is located, as well as the
means of access to the tower, including clearing and cutting of
vegetation, snow removal and maintenance of the access driveway
surface.
§ 300-161 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-161
1:532
(10) The owner of any communications tower that exceeds 50 feet in
height shall submit to the Township proof of an annual inspection
conducted by a structural engineer at the owner's expense and an
updated tower maintenance program based on the results of the
inspection. Any structural faults shall be corrected immediately
and reinspected and certified to the City by a structural engineer at
the owner's expense. Additionally, owner shall submit to the City,
annually, that the tower is in compliance with FCC guidelines.
(11) All tower structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices as
approved by the manufacturer for the type of installation proposed.
(12) The exterior finish of the tower shall be compatible with the
immediate surroundings shall be properly maintained and the
tower shall be at least 1,000 feet from R districts.
(13)No antenna or tower structure shall be illuminated, except as may
be required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
(14) The applicant will submit a copy of its FCC license. Any grant of
special exception hereunder will automatically lapse if said license
ever expires or lapses.
(15) Shared use of towers and tower sites shall be encouraged. If shared
use of an existing or approved tower or an existing or approved
tower site is not proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate that the
proposed equipment cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower or an existing or approved tower site for one of the
following reasons:
(a) The proposed equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of the existing or approved towers and reinforcement of the
existing or approved towers cannot be accomplished at a
reasonable cost.
(b) The proposed equipment will cause RF (radio frequency)
interference with other existing or proposed equipment for
that tower or that existing or approved tower site and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(c) Existing or approved towers or the existing or approved tower
site do not have adequate space to accommodate the proposed
equipment.
(d) Addition of the proposed equipment would result in NIER
(Non-Ionizing Electromagnetic Radiation) levels which exceed
any adopted local, federal or state emission standards.
(e) Any applicant proposing a new freestanding commercial
communications tower shall demonstrate that a good faith
effort has been made to obtain permission to mount the
§ 300-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-161
1:533
antenna on an existing building or other structure or an
existing commercial communications tower. A good faith effort
shall require that all owners within a 1/2 mile radius of the
proposed site be contacted by regular U.S. Mail, First Class,
postage prepaid, 10 days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting.
(f) There are other valid reasons, including but not limited to
denial of access, that make it impossible or impractical to place
the proposed equipment on any existing or proposed tower or
any existing or approved tower site. A letter shall be submitted
showing that shared use has been granted or denied.
(16) Communication towers may exceed the height limitations of the
zoning district, provided they shall be set back from adjacent
property lines the largest of the following distances as may be
applicable:
(a) A distance of 100% of the tower height from any adjacent
property.
(17) Unless the communication tower is located on a building, the tower
structure shall be completely enclosed by a ten-foot-high chain-link
or similar fence with self-latching gate to limit accessibility to the
general public, unless the entire property is secure by such a fence.
The property shall be landscaped and screened.
(18) All guy wires and all guyed towers shall be clearly marked so as to
be visible at all times. All guy wires shall be located a minimum of
20 feet within the property line.
(19) All communication towers must be stealth towers. A "stealth tower"
is a communications tower which is not recognizable as a
conventional communications tower (e.g., a metal lattice
structure), but instead is disguised or concealed in such a fashion
as to conform to its surroundings. Examples of such stealth towers
include a tower which looks like a tree or one which is concealed in
a church steeple. In determining conformity to surroundings, the
Zoning Hearing Board will consider the following factors, at a
minimum:
(a) Height and types of trees (if applicable and when compared
with the proposed communication tower);
(b) Height and types of structures within sight distance of the
proposed communication tower;
(c) Nature of neighborhood (e.g., residential, church, golf club);
and
(d) Proximity of the communication tower to neighboring
properties and structures.
§ 300-161 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-161
1:534
(20) The applicant must use applicant's best efforts to fly an all-weather
balloon or place an alternative object at or near the proposed
location of the communication tower for at least 14 days prior to
the public hearing on the application. The balloon or object must be
red and at least 18 inches in diameter, if spherical, or 18 inches in
height and width, if rectangular. The top of the balloon or object
must be at the maximum proposed height of the communications
tower.
(21) In granting the use, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach
reasonable conditions warranted to protect the public health,
safety and welfare, including, but not limited to, location, fencing,
screening, increased setbacks and the right to use said facilities for
public purposes.
(22) All special exception uses approved under this section will
automatically lapse if not used for six continuous months. In such a
case, all portions of the communications tower will be taken down
by the applicant, its successors or assigns, as soon as possible, but
not longer than four months after the conclusion of said six-month
period. In the event that the applicant, its successors and assigns
fail to take down the tower, the owner of the property upon which
the tower is located will be responsible for taking it down.
(23) A previously approved special exception use will lapse if an entity
operating an existing communications tower in the City does not
provide reasonable cooperation with another applicant attempting
to co-locate on said existing tower.
(24) All approvals will be only for the specific facilities set forth in the
application. No additions or alterations thereto will be permitted
without a new application.
(25) The applicant shall submit evidence that the tower and its method
of installation (including design installation during erection) has
been designed by a registered engineer and is certified by that
registered engineer to be structurally sound and able to withstand
wind and other loads in accordance with accepted engineering
practice and the Uniform Construction Code.240 The applicant shall
include, from a registered engineer or architect responsible for
designing and the proposed tower, a specification of the maximum
collapsible fall zone of the proposed tower.
(26) The tower shall be subject to any applicable Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), Pennsylvania Bureau of Aviation and airport
zoning regulations.
(27)No sign or other structure, shall be mounted on the tower, except
as may be required or approved by the FAA, Federal
240. Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 300-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-161
1:535
Communications Commission, Pennsylvania Bureau of Aviation or
other applicable governmental agency.
(28) All lighting, other than required aviation lighting, shall be shielded
and reflected away from adjoining properties.
(29) At least a minimum of one off-street parking space shall be
provided on the tower site, plus one off-street parking space for
each on-site personnel.
(30) Existing vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.
(31) A minimum twenty-foot easement or right-of-way from a public
street for access shall be provided to the tower to accommodate
maintenance and emergency vehicles and which is improved with
an all-weather surface sufficient to accommodate the weight of
vehicles proposed to use the easement or right-of-way subject to
approval by the City council. The right-of-way or easement shall be
maintained by the landowner or lessee.
(32) Even if the tower site is an easement or leased, a site plan shall be
prepared to show the site to receive the tower described by
bearings and distances within the property from which the site has
been leased or sold. In addition, a scaled site development plan
shall be prepared to show precisely the location of the tower in its
site, support buildings on the ground, guy anchors, access to the
site and parking areas. Such plans shall be reviewed and decided
as required by Chapter 260, City Subdivision and Land
Development.
(33) The applicant shall submit proof that it has guaranteed removal of
any tower which becomes obsolete or not used for one year and
that adequate financial security exists or has been posed to cover
the cost of such removal. Upon removal of the tower and accessory
structures, the property must be returned to its same or similar
original condition. This involves removing any foundations and
grading and planting.
(34) Each tower owner shall inform the City of any changes in
ownership or responsibility for a tower immediately after the
change occurs.
(35) If there is reasonable cause, the applicant may be required to
perform an environmental impact study.
(36) Applicant shall demonstrate that the tower is needed.
(37) Applicant shall submit information as to how the tower will be
brought to the site. Applicant shall try to avoid moving such
structures through residential areas.
§ 300-161 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-161
1:536
§ 300-162. Oil and gas development. [Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
5-2011]
(38) The applicant shall have both the duty of initial presentation of
evidence and the burden of persuasion with respect to the criteria
at Subsection A(1) through (38).
(39) If technical fees are incurred by the City, an additional application
fee may be assessed upon the applicant.
A. Purpose.
(1) The regulation of well sites herein will permit reasonable access to
a significant portion of the gas resources in the City, while
protecting certain other uses and by regulating gas and oil well use
in a manner consistent with traditional zoning regulations without
primarily regulating the technical aspects of oil and gas well
functioning.
(2) The City of Lower Burrell recognizes that the regulation of oil and
gas operations is the primary responsibility of the regulatory
agencies of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, but that the City
maintains it Zoning power as set forth in 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as
amended, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, and
through this chapter.
(3) A City also has the ability to regulate land under its police powers.
[Third Class City Code, 53 P.S. 37403]
B. Roads.
(1) Prior to any construction, the applicant shall provide a map of the
proposed routes of all trucks to be utilized for hauling to and from
the gas and oil well site, and shall minimize impact upon City roads
whenever feasible. The City reserves the right to designate
alternate routes in the event the applicant's proposed routes are
deemed inadequate, unsafe or overly disruptive to normal
vehicular traffic by the Municipal Engineer. The applicant shall also
show satisfactory evidence to the City Engineer that intersections
along proposed hauling routes provide a sufficient turning radius
for trucks, such that all turns can be safely made without damage
to vehicles, sidewalks, curbs or surrounding property. The
applicant or operator shall post a bond or other financial security in
favor of the City and in a form acceptable to the City and enter into
an excess maintenance agreement, prior to beginning operations,
regarding maintenance and repair of City roads that are to be used
by vehicles for development activities. The applicant shall conduct
an inventory, analysis and evaluation of existing road conditions on
City roads along the proposed transportation route identified by
the applicant, including photography and video. The City Excess
Maintenance Agreement will identify the responsibilities of the
§ 300-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-162
1:537
applicant to prepare, maintain, and repair City roads before, during
and immediately after drilling operations associated with the gas
resources development. The applicant shall take all necessary
corrective action and measures as directed by the City pursuant to
the agreement to ensure the roadways are repaired and maintained
during and immediately after drilling operations associated with
the gas resources development.
(2) In addition, should the City Engineer reasonably determine that
preventative measures, such as shoring of bridges or putting
protective mats over utility lines, should be taken to prevent
damage to City roads, bridges or utilities, then the applicant shall
install such protective measure as directed by the City Engineer,
prior to beginning operations.
(3) The City of Lower Burrell declares that oil and gas development is
conditional use in the Conservancy (S) and Industrial (I) Zoning
Districts in the City, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Where gas and oil resource development constitutes a land
development, all provisions of the applicable City ordinances
shall apply, except as preempted by state or federal law. The
well site, natural gas compressor stations or natural gas
processing plants shall comply with all setback and buffer
requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.
Equipment and drilling rigs shall be setback (a fall zone) from
protected structures, property lines, streets or buildings a
distance of one foot for every foot of height of equipment.
(b) Applicant responsibilities; construction requirements.
[1] The applicant shall take the necessary safeguards to
ensure that the City roads utilized remain free of dirt, mud
and debris resulting from development activities and/or
shall ensure such roads are promptly swept or cleaned if
dirt, mud and debris occur. Beginning with its intersection
with a public street, any access road for the development
shall be at least 20 feet in width and shall be paved with an
impervious material for the first 50 feet and consist of the
following material:
[a] Compacted subgrade.
[b] PennDOT Class 4 Geotextile Fabric.
[c] Eight inches AASHTO No. 2 Crushed Aggregate Base
Course.
[d] Two inches PennDOT 2A Aggregate (Choke Material).
[e] Four inches Compacted - Superpave 25 mm Binder
Course.
§ 300-162 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-162
1:538
[2] The remainder of the driveway or access road to the well
pad shall be constructed with the following material:
[a] Compacted Subgrade.
[b] Eight inches AASHTO #2 Crushed Aggregate Base
Course.
[c] Two inches PennDOT 2A Aggregate (Choke Material).
[d] The City Engineer may approve alternate design
standards that keep the driveway access road
improved to a dust free, all-weather surface for its
entire length. Operator shall take the necessary
safeguards to ensure appropriate dust control
measures are in place.
[3] Accepted professional standards pertaining to minimum
traffic sight distances for all access points shall be adhered
to.
(c) An off-street area within the development site for vehicles to
stand while gaining access to the gas well site shall be
provided so that the normal flow of traffic on the public street
is undisturbed.
(d) The applicant shall take all necessary precautions to ensure
the safety of persons in area established for road crossing and/
or adjacent to roadways. During periods of anticipated heavy
or frequent truck traffic associated with the development, the
applicant will coordinate with the City to develop a safety plan
which may include flagmen to ensure the safety of motorists
and pedestrians and take measures that include adequate
signs and/or other warning measures for truck or vehicular
traffic. Where traffic associated with the development is in
proximity of school bus stops, the operator will coordinate with
the City and School District on a safety plan to avoid truck
traffic during peak school bus activity time periods, which may
include providing flagmen to ensure the safety of children
waiting for or leaving school buses.
C. Noise. The City recognizes and acknowledges that oil and gas
development is accompanied by inherent noise. However, the operator
shall take the following steps to minimize, to the extent practicable, the
noise resulting from the development:
(1) Prior to drilling of an oil and gas well, the operator shall establish a
continuous seventy-two-hour ambient noise level at the nearest
protected structure property line or 100 feet from the nearest
protected structure (as measured to the closest exterior point of
the building), whichever is closer to the protected structure or,
alternatively, and in lieu of establishing the above seventy-two-hour
§ 300-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-162
1:539
ambient noise level, the operator may assume and use, for the
purposes of compliance with this section, a default ambient noise
level of 55 dBA. The sound level meter used in conducting any
evaluation shall meet the American National Standard Institute's
standard for sound meters or an instrument and the associated
recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent
data.
(2) The operator shall provide documentation of any established,
seventy-two-hour evaluation, relied upon to establish an ambient
noise level greater than 55 dBA to the City's Zoning Officer within
three business days of such a request from the Zoning Officer.
(3) The noise generated during drilling and hydraulic fracturing
activities when measured at the nearest protected structure
property line or 100 feet from the nearest protected structure (as
measured to the closest exterior point of the building), whichever is
closer to the protected structure, shall not exceed the average
ambient noise level (as determined by the seventy-two-hour
evaluation) or default level, whichever is higher:
(a) During drilling activities by more than seven decibels during
the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.;
(b) During drilling activities by more than five decibels during the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; or
(c) By more than 10 decibels during hydraulic fracturing
operations.
The operator shall inform the City which level (average
ambient noise level or default level) is being used.
(4) Adjustments to the foregoing noise limits may be permitted in
accordance with the following:
Permitted Increase
(dBA)
Duration of Increase
(minutes)*
5 15
10 5
15 1
20 1
* Cumulative minutes during any one hour.
(5) If a complaint is received by the City from any person, whether a
resident or otherwise using the protected structure as defined
herein for any lawful purpose; regarding noise generated during
drilling or hydraulic fracturing activities, the operator shall, within
24 hours of receipt of the complaint from the City, continuously
§ 300-162 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-162
1:540
monitor for a forty-eight-hour period at a point which is the closer
to the complainant's building of:
(a) The complainant's protected structure property line nearest to
the well site or equipment generating the noise; or
(b) One hundred feet from the protected structure.
(6) If the operator engages in any noise testing as required by this
section, it will provide preliminary data to the City no later than 10
business days following the completion of the noise testing. Once
the monitoring is complete, operator will meet with City
representatives and affected residents to discuss whether possible
noise abatement measures are warranted, if the permitted levels
set forth herein were exceeded. If noise levels violate the standards
set forth in this section, sound-mitigating techniques and/or
devices may be required to meet acceptable levels.
(7) Exhaust from any internal combustion engine or compressor used
in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any
production equipment or used in development shall not be
discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with: an exhaust
muffler; or an exhaust box. The exhaust muffler or exhaust box
shall be constructed of noncombustible materials designed and
installed to suppress noise and disruptive vibrations. Moreover, all
such equipment with an exhaust muffler or exhaust box shall be
maintained in good operating condition according to
manufacturer's specifications.
(8) All work-over operations shall be restricted to the hours of 6:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m., except in the extent of an emergency, as
reasonably determined by the Operator. "Work-over operations"
shall mean work performed in a well after its completion in an
effort to secure production where there has been none, restore
production that has ceased, or increase production.
D. Emergency services.
(1) The operator shall, prior to drilling, provide the City adequate
information to deal with any potential dangerous conditions that
may result due to development activities. First responders shall
have on-site orientation and be provided adequate awareness
information. Upon request from the City, operator will, prior to
drilling of an oil and gas well, make available with at least 30 days'
notice, at its sole cost and expense, an appropriate site orientation
for first responders. Such site orientation shall be made available at
least annually during the period when the operator anticipates
drilling activities in the City.
(2) Operator shall provide appropriate maps, material safety data
sheets and/or its hydraulic fracturing formula and emergency plan
and Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency Plan (PPC)
§ 300-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-162
1:541
documents to the City Manager. The operator shall provide 24/7
contact information, including a supervisor's name and a toll-free
number, to all City emergency service providers, the City Manager
and on signage at the entrance to the well site. Warning signs must
be posted providing notice of potential dangers at the well site.
E. Lighting.
(1) Recognizing that adequate and appropriate lighting is essential to
the safety of those involved in the development of oil and gas, the
operator shall take steps, to the extent practicable, to direct sight
lighting downward and inward toward the drill site, wellhead, or
other area being developed so as to attempt to minimize glare on
public roads and adjacent buildings within 300 feet of the drill site,
wellhead, or other area being developed.
(2) Recognizing that the specific location of equipment and facilities is
an important an integral part of oil and gas development, as part of
the planning process, operator shall strive to consider location of
its temporary and permanent operation, where prudent and
possible, so as to minimize interference with City residents'
enjoyment of their property.
F. Pre-drilling notice. Prior to drilling an oil and gas well, but not later
than two weeks prior to drilling, the operator shall provide the
following information to each resident within 1,000 feet of the planned
surface location of the well:
(1) A copy of the well survey plat showing the locations of the planned
wells;
(2) A general description of the planned operations at the planned well
and associated equipment used in the development of the well;
(3) The contact information for the Operator; and
(4) The availability of the operator to hold a meeting with such
residents to present operator's plans for the well and to allow for
questions and answers. The meeting shall be hell prior to well site
construction.
G. Application.
(1) Any applicant desiring approval of a conditional use application
pursuant to this section shall submit a written application. Before
submitting an application, the applicant is strongly encouraged to
meet with the municipal staff to determine the requirements of and
the procedural steps for the application. The intent of this process
is for the applicant to obtain necessary information and guidance
from the staff before entering into any commitments or incurring
substantial expenses with regard to the site and plan preparation.
§ 300-162 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-162
1:542
(2) The application shall not be considered complete and properly filed
unless and until all items required by this section, including
application fee, have been received. Such application shall include
the following in formation and plans:
(a) Application for land development other than a subdivision
according to the Planning and Zoning Code, as applicable and
not preempted by the Pennsylvania Oil and Gas Act, as
amended,241 or DEP regulations.
(b) Applicant shall comply with all City of Lower Burrell
ordinances. An addendum listing the various ordinances of the
City which may apply is attached; this addendum is for
reference purposes and is not meant to be all-inclusive.242
(c) Provide written evidence that legal notice pursuant to the Oil
and Gas Act of the intent to drill has been given to the property
owner(s) who have legal or equitable title in and to the surface
of the proposed development.
H. Site plan and other application documents.
(1) Each application for conditional use shall have attached thereto a
site plan. The proposed site development plan shall be a
topographic plan, prepared and sealed by a professional engineer
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to a scale no
greater than one inch equals 200 feet, on a standard sheet 24
inches high by 36 inches wide, to include the following:
(a) Title block giving name of development, property owner,
developer, North point, key location map, registration stamp,
date and scale on a standard sheet with index;
(b) Property lines, Zoning Ordinance district boundary lines and
total acreage of parcel proposed for development;
(c) All existing streets, rights-of-way and easements related to the
development;
(d) Owners of adjacent properties, including the location of any
existing structures and driveway locations;
(e) The location of relevant natural features on site, including, but
not limited to, streams or other natural watercourses and
adjacent areas which are subject to flooding, and significant
stand of existing trees;
(f) The location of relevant natural features abutting properties
within 300 feet, including, but not limited to, streams or other
241. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 2-14-2012 by P.L. 87, No. 13; see now 58 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3201 et seq.
242. Editor's Note: Said addendum was an attachment to the original ordinance.
§ 300-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-162
1:543
natural watercourses and adjacent areas which are subject to
flooding, and significant stand of existing trees;
(g) The location of structures on abutting property within 300 feet
of common property lines and the location of any protected
structures;
(h) The location of all proposed gas and oil well structures,
facilities, equipment or buildings showing that they meet the
setback and buffer requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located;
(i) The location of existing structures, buildings and accessory
uses on site;
(j) The location of vehicle and equipment cleaning and tire
cleaning areas and a description of the proposed program for
removing mud and other well sire generated debris from public
streets;
(k) The location of proposed access roads and proposed haul
roads;
(l) The location of stormwater and sediment controls and any
water impoundment facilities.
(2) The operator shall provide to the City Zoning Officer, at least 10
days prior to well site construction:
(a) A copy of any Environmental Impact Study submitted to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection which
includes the following:
[1] A description of existing conditions in the area and the
land use history of the property;
[2] A description of the proposed gas and oil well operations in
abutting, surrounding uses;
[3] A historical record of previous gas and oil well operations
at the site; and
[4] A description of existing conditions, including gas and oil
well facilities, structures, buildings or equipment.
(3) A copy of an approved permit or permit application issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, and any
applicable Pennsylvania Department of Transportation highway
occupancy permit. Access to City roads will require a City driveway
permit.
(4) Copies of any and all permits and applications submitted to the
various local, county, state and federal agencies. Permits and plans
shall include but not be limited to the Pennsylvania Department of
§ 300-162 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-162
1:544
Environmental Protection well application and permit, ESCGP-1 or
other erosion and sedimentation permits and all air, water and
waste management permits.
(5) The location, depth, and profile of any proposed pipelines for water,
gas, oil or other substance will be provided to the City in an as-built
format upon completion.
(6) The applicant shall provide the GIS location and make application
to the City for a 911 address of the well site. The applicant must
mark the site at the entrance where it intersects with a City road
using a reflective address sign, in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standards, as amended.
(7) During construction, the operator shall remove and dispose of all
uprooted trees, stumps, rubbish, construction materials and debris
promptly in the interest of public safety. All refuse stored on site for
final off-site disposal shall be located within a building, covered
dumpster or other enclosure designed and constructed for the
proper storage of such material.
(8) No employees, subcontractors or other persons shall be housed on
the well site, compressor station site or processing plant site
except supervisory personnel necessary for safety reasons. Any
applicant must register all supervisory personnel occupying a bunk
house with the City Tax Collector in accordance with the Planning
and Zoning Code, requiring the owners of all occupied structures to
register the occupants. The operator shall meet all state and local
water and sewage standards.
(9) The City recommends that condensate tanks located on drilling
sites, compressor stations and/or processing plants be equipped
with vapor recovery and/or vapor destruction units or the best
technology available.
(10) The applicant shall make reasonable efforts to avoid and/or
mitigate any disruption or loss of radio, telephone, cellular phone,
television or similar signals, and shall mitigate any harm caused by
the oil and gas development in a timely manner.
(11) Drip pans or other containment devices are required on equipment
that could potentially leak, discharge or spill hazardous liquids. The
operator is responsible for any spills involving waste materials, oil,
gas, toxic or hazardous substances and shall notify the City of any
such spill.
I. Fencing.
(1) Install chain-link fencing at least six feet high and install
permanent fall protection fencing meeting OSHA requirements
around any pit for impoundment of liquid at a depth greater than
two feet. A sample standard follows for guidance:
§ 300-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-162
1:545
(a) Support posts shall be set in concrete and imbedded into the
ground to a depth sufficient to maintain the stability of the
fence. Temporary fence posts shall not be required to be set in
concrete;
(b) The chain-link fence shall have a minimum thickness of 11
gauge;
(c) Tension rods shall be three-eighths-inch round steel bolt stock.
Adjustable tighteners shall be turnbuckle or equivalent having
six-inch minimum take-up. Tension bars shall have minimum
thickness of 1/4 inch by 3/4 inch;
(d) All chain-link fences shall be equipped with at least one gate.
The gate shall meet the following specifications:
[1] Each gate opening shall not be less than 12 feet wide and
be composed of two gates, each of which is not less than
six feet wide, or one sliding gate not less than 12 feet wide.
If two gates are used, gates shall latch and lock in the
center of the span.
[2] The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and
locking attachment device for a padlock, and shall be kept
locked except when no one is working on the site.
(e) Security fencing shall not be required at oil or gas well sites
during the initial drilling, or redrilling operations, as long as
manned twenty-four-hour on-site supervision and security are
provided.
(f) Upon completion of drilling or redrilling, including hydraulic
fracturing and associated processes, security fencing
consisting of a permanent chain-link fence shall be promptly
installed at the oil or gas well site to secure wellheads, storage
tanks, separation facilities, water or liquid impoundment
areas, and other mechanical and production equipment and
structures on the oil or gas well site.
(g) The (City) First Responders shall be given means to access oil
and gas well sites in case of an emergency. Applicant must
provide County 911 Communications Center necessary
information to access the well pad in case of an emergency.
(h) Warning signs shall be placed on the fencing surrounding the
Oil or Gas Well Site providing notice of the potential dangers
and the contact information in case of an emergency. During
drilling and hydraulic fracturing, clearly visible warning
signage must be posted on the pad site.
§ 300-162 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-162
1:546
(2) Operator shall comply with all FAA requirements for equipment,
where applicable, and inform medical helicopters of any
equipment, where applicable.
J. Conventional gas and oil wells. The following provisions shall apply to
conventional gas and oil wells:
(1) Applicant shall submit a copy of its Preparedness, Prevention and
Contingency Plan (PPC), material safety, data, sheets and/or its
fracturing formula.
(2) The applicant shall provide the GIS location and make application
to the City for a 911 address of the well site. The applicant must
mark the site at the entrance where it intersects with a City road
using a reflective address sign, in accordance with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standards, as amended.
(3) The access road to the well site shall be improved with a dust-free,
all-weather surface in such a manner that no water, sediment or
debris will be carried onto any public street.
(4) An off-street area for maintenance vehicles to stand while gaining
entrance to the access road shall be provided that does not disrupt
the normal flow of traffic on the public street. Public road bonding
may be required as determined by the City Engineer.
K. This section is interpreted to be applied so that it meets all federal and
state constitutional and statutory requirements. This section is to be
interpreted and applied to impose zoning regulations identifying where
gas and oil well uses are permitted in the City and not to regulate
technical aspects of gas and oil well operation, including technical
aspects of oil and gas well functioning and matters ancillary thereto
governed by the Pennsylvania Oil and Gas Act243 and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto. The provisions of this section are severable.
If any provision or part thereof if held to be illegal or invalid, the
remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. If any
provision hereof is held to be preempted by the Pennsylvania Oil and
Gas Act, then such provision and all remaining provisions shall be
applicable to the extent it is consistent with and not preempted by the
Act.
L. Technical standards. Technical standards contained within this section
may be amended from time to time by resolution of the Council of the
City of Lower Burrell.
243. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 2-14-2012 by P.L. 87, No. 13; see now 58 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3201 et seq.
§ 300-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-162
1:547

ARTICLE XIX
Terminology
§ 300-163. Word usage.
§ 300-164. Definitions. [Amended 10-13-1997 by Ord. No. 9-1997;
7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 5-1998]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING (ANCILLARY BUILDING) — A subordinate
building, the use of which:
A. In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained
in this article shall be observed and applied, except when the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
(1) Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural
and singular; and words used in the present tense shall include the
future.
(2) The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
(3) The word "may" is permissive.
(4) The word "lot" includes the words "piece," "tract" and "parcel."
(5) The word "building" includes all other structures of every kind
except "accessory buildings" when there is no "building" required
for a particular use; and the word "building" shall be construed as if
followed by the words "or part thereof."
(6) The phrase "used for" includes the phrases "arranged for,"
"designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for."
(7) A "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, company, corporation or heirs, agents, assigns or successors
as well as an individual person who is the responsible party
directing a zoning action.
(8) The first letter or letter and number of the zoning districts are their
abbreviations.
(9) The words "see" or "see section or illustration" are provided for
reference to related sections of this chapter.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby
defined.
Is customarily incidental to that of the principal building on the same
lot.
A.
§ 300-163 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:549
ACCESSORY BUSINESS (ANCILLARY BUSINESS) — See "business use,
accessory" and § 300-35.
ACCESSORY USE (ANCILLARY USE) — A use which is subordinate to and
customarily associated with the principal use of a lot or building and located
on the same lot, provided that it is not noxious or offensive to neighboring
permitted uses by reason of appearance or emission of odor, dust, smoke,
gas, vibration or noise. All such uses must be permitted uses under this
chapter, and must meet performance standards. For the purposes of this
chapter, the uses shall be customarily and clearly incident and subordinate
to the principal use of the main structure or land. The following uses are
included:
Is not used for dwelling purposes nor normally occupied permanently
by personal associated with any use.
B.
Is not attached to the principal building by a covered passageway or
wall more than three feet high, and shares no wall in common with the
principal building.
C.
Greenhouse, accessory to a dwelling and used exclusively by occupants
of the premises to cultivate plants as an avocation.
A.
B. Loading space.
C. Farm building, such as a barn, silo, etc.
D. Sign.
E. Community garages or parking areas.
F. Fence, enclosure or screening wall or planting strip.
G. Accessory business. (See § 400-35).
Swimming pools, any pool permanently located either above or below
ground.
H.
I. Off-street parking space.
The following shall not be considered as permitted accessory uses:
Mobile homes or trailer homes located on a lot for more than 60
days.
(1)
Vehicles not in running condition which are located on a lot for
more than 60 days and which are not completely enclosed by a
building.
(2)
J.
The following may be permitted:
(1) Community garages or parking areas.
(2) Fence, enclosure or screening wall or planting strip.
(3) Gift shop related to motel/hotel uses.
K.
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:550
ACT 247 or THE ACT — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act
247, of the Commonwealth General Assembly, dated July 31, 1968, with the
effective date of January 1, 1969, as amended.244
ADULT BOOKSTORE — Any commercial establishment in which is offered
for sale any book or publication, film or medium which depicts nudity or
sexual conduct.
ADULT BUSINESS — An adult bookstore, movie theater or movie house or
other adult entertainment as defined herein. In the event that a use includes
activities which constitute an adult bookstore, adult movie theater or movie
house or adult entertainment as defined herein, then such use shall be
considered an adult business and shall be subject to all provisions in this
chapter applicable to adult business uses, even if such activities are not the
only activities conducted upon the premises.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — An establishment providing, either as sole
use or in conjunction with or in addition to other uses, entertainment
consisting of the use of live dancing, posing, displaying, acting or other
live presentation or use of persons whose action are distinguished or
characterized by emphasis on use of the human body in a manner intended
to or resulting in arousal of the human body in a manner intended to or
resulting in arousal of sexual excitation or sexual titillation or a prurient
interest or intended to or resulting in producing lustful emotions.
ADULT MOVIE THEATER OR MOVIE HOUSE (including ADULT MINITHEATERS)
— Any movie theater which shows films rated "X" by the
Motion Picture Coding Association of America or any movie theater which
presents for public viewing so-called "adult films" depicting sexual conduct,
as defined by this chapter.
ALLEY, LANE or WAY — A public way open to public travel which affords
generally a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting lots and is not
intended for general traffic circulation. An alley, lane or way shall be at least
20 feet wide.
AMENDMENTS — See Article XXIV.
ANIMAL CARE — The boarding, breeding, housing, keeping or medical
treatment of five or more animals six months old or older.
ANTENNAS — Equipment that transmits or receives broadcast signals
such as wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio service or
any other wireless communication signals, including but not limited to
(4) Restaurant related to motel/hotel uses.
(5) Pharmacy related to motel/hotel uses.
(6) Personal services related to motel/hotel uses.
Fruit and vegetable sales in an enclosed building in conjunction
with grocery sales.
(7)
244. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:551
omnidirectional or whip antennas, directional or panel antennas and
microwave dishes owned and operated by any person or entity licensed
by the FCC to operate such equipment. This definition does not include
supporting structures, satellite dishes, or antennas used solely for purposes
such as ham radio, citizens band radio.[Amended 3-9-2009 by Ord. No.
2-2009]
ANNEXED AREAS — See § 300-139.
APARTMENT — See "dwelling."
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer or his authorized agent, as
hereinafter defined, who has filed an application for development, including
his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior to the start of
construction or development, including but not limited to an application for
a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or plan or for the
approval of a development plan.
AUTOMOBILE POUND — A service garage, when especially designated by
Council, where vehicles, wrecked, abandoned or not in running condition,
may be temporarily stored.
AUTOMOBILE AND/OR UTILITY TRAILER SALES AREA — An open area
in conjunction with a new automobile sales establishment, other than a
street or way, used for the display or sale of new and used automobiles or
utility trailers and where minor repair work may be done within an enclosed
building. (See § 300-44A).
AUTOMOBILE REPAIRS — See "garage, service" and § 300-44B.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — See "gasoline service station."
AUTOMOBILE (CAR) WASH — A building, or portion thereof, where
automobiles are washed, including the use of a chain conveyor, and blower
or steam cleaning device. See § 300-44B.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR, MINOR — An establishment primarily engaged in
the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar mechanical
equipment, including brake, muffler, upholstery work, tire repair and
change, lubrication, tune-ups, and transmission work, which is conducted
within a completely enclosed building.[Added 4-8-2013 by Ord. No.
1-2013]
AWNING — A nonpermanent structure which overhangs a public or private
pedestrian walkway to provide protection from the elements.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground, but
having 1/2 or less of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground. A basement shall not be counted as a story for
purposes of height measurement unless 1/2 or more of its volume is above
the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building. An
improved basement shall be counted as part of the floor area for a dwelling.
A residential dwelling may be permitted as an accessory use in basements
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:552
if all other requirements of this or other ordinances are met. This shall not
be construed to permit a residential dwelling in a cellar.
BASIC GRADE — The average elevation of the proposed grade line of the
ground at the front of the structure as shown on the construction plans;
in the case of a structure abutting the front property line, the elevation of
the curb in front of the center of the structure, or if there is no curb, the
elevation of the proposed grade line at the center of the front lot line; in
case no grade line is established, the actual existing grade of the traveled
roadway shall apply.
BEVERAGE DISTRIBUTOR, RETAIL AND WHOLESALE — Includes liquor
(state) stores and beer distributors.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets or other definite physical
or natural barriers, or by a combination of streets and public parks,
cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or municipal
boundary lines of the City.
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance or
under this chapter to render final adjudications.245
BOARDING HOUSE — See "rooming house" and § 300-33C.
BODY SHOP — See "garage service."
BUILDABLE AREA — That portion of a zoning lot bounded by the required
front, side and rear yards; when a yard is not required, the boundary is the
lot line. (See Subsection J of the definition of "lot").
BUILDING — A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used
for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or goods.246
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance and the number of stories
measured from the basic grade to:
BUILDING LINE — An imaginary line fixed by the required yard depth
measured back from and parallel to the nearest road right-of-way line or lot
line.
BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL — The building housing the principal use
of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING, MINOR — A detached accessory building or portion of a main
building; may be used for the parking or temporary storage of principal use
automobiles. (See "accessory use.")
A. The highest point of the roof adjacent to the front wall, for flat roofs.
B. The deck line of mansard roofs.
The main height between eaves and ridge, for gambrel, hipped or
gabled roofs. (See illustration No. 1 of Appendix A.247)
C.
245. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
246. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
247. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:553
BUILDING, UNIT GROUP — Two or more main commercial, institutional
or industrial buildings grouped upon an area of land controlled by the
landowner; such as a shopping center, school, church, hospital,
development or industrial plant. (See "land development.")
BULK — Indicates the size, setbacks and location of buildings with respect
to each other, and includes the following:
BUNK HOUSE — A housing facility designed and intended to be used for
a temporary period of time to house oil and gas exploration workers. Such
facility is not intended to accommodate families or school aged children. A
bunk house may be a travel trailer, camper, mobile home or a structured
manufactures for this particular use.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
5-2011]
BUSINESS — Commercial, and when referring to zoning districts, is an
interchangeable and equal reference.
BUSINESS SERVICE — Any business activity which renders service to other
commercial or industrial enterprises.
BUSINESS USE, ACCESSORY — A special exception use including C-1
retail stores and personal services establishments. (See "accessory use" and
§ 400-35.)
CAMP SITES — Areas which are located in S Districts, excluding
floodplains, which are used for camping. They should have a good access
road and several outlets which campers may tap into. The area should
be segregated into parcels not less than 50 square feet with the specific
purposes either mobilized camping facilities such as trailers or
nonmobilized facilities such as tents. In addition, adequate vehicle parking
space should be provided for each camp site. The City may assess a small
fee on the mobilized campers to cover the cost of the electric service
provided when on City owned land. No single trailer or tent may occupy
a camp site and no more than one site in the City for more than 60 days
per year. Adequate arrangements must be made to guarantee the sanitary
storage, pickup and removal of solid waste (garbage).
CARPORT — A structure arranged, used or intended to be used for the
shelter of a car and which includes a roof and is open from the roof to the
ground on two or more sides [see § 300-101B(4)].248
A. Size of building.
Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot line, streets or to
other buildings.
B.
C. Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area.
D. All open spaces allocated to buildings.
248. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:554
CARTWAY — In the case of an improved road, the portion which is paved
or improved for travel, and in the case of an unimproved road, the entire
graded surface.
CATERING ESTABLISHMENT — A catering establishment may be an
accessory use in a restaurant.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground,
and having 1/2 or more than 1/2 of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground. Residential dwellings shall not
be permitted in cellars, but may be so permitted in basements as accessory
uses, if all other requirements of this chapter or other ordinances are met.
CEMETERY — See § 300-28.
CHILD-CARE FACILITIES — Daytime, temporary care for preschool
children, accredited and listed with the controlling commonwealth agency.
CITY — City of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.[Added
12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
CLEAN FILL — Excavated earth. This shall not include scrap from
commercial or industrial operators, used building materials or vehicles not
in running condition.
CLINIC, HEALTH CARE CENTER, INCLUDING COUNSELING — A building
designed and used for the medical, dental and surgical diagnosis and
treatment of human patients under the care of doctors, nurses and trained
personnel, but such patients are not provided with board or room or
hospitalized overnight on the premises. Also permits counseling of patients.
CLUB — An establishment operated for social, recreational or educational
purposes but open only to members and not the general public.
COLLEGES — See "educational institutions."
COMMERCIAL — Indicates business when referring to zoning districts.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Lower Burrell.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel of land or an area of water, or
combination of land and water, within a development site and designed
and intended for use or enjoyment of residents of a particular planned
residential development, planned unit development or residential
subdivision not including streets, off-street parking or loading areas and
areas set aside for public facilities. Common open space shall be
substantially free of structures, but may contain such improvements as are
in the development plan or subdivision plat as finally approved and as are
appropriate for the recreation of the residents. (See Article VIII).
COMMUNICATION TOWERS — A structure including, but not limited to,
steel towers, equipment sheds or cabinets, and monopoles, self-supporting
or guyed tower, the principal use of which is for public or private wireless
communication purposes including, but not limited to, wireless telephone,
pager, mobile domestic cellular telephone services and personal
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:555
communication services, or any other wireless communications signals and
is owned and/or operated by an entity or person licensed by the FCC to
operate such equipment but not subject to regulation by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission. Not included are structures used solely for
purposes including, but not limited to, ham radios, and citizen band radios
or municipal services communications. The term "communication towers"
and "towers" shall be treated as synonymous.[Amended 3-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 2-2009]
COMPLETION GUARANTEE — See "improvement (performance bond)."
CONDOMINIUM — Joint ownership with clear title by an individual of
one or more dwelling units in a multiunit project. The individual owner
has unrestricted right of disposal of same, with the land and all other
parts of the project held in common with owners of the other units. The
multiunit structure and/or the individual units held in common ownership
as described above are referred to as condominiums; with joint ownership
of the common areas and an easement in their use and in the common
appurtenances, including the walls, roof, entrance halls, elevators, heating
system, electrical and plumbing system. Also denotes a joint responsibility
for the maintenance of common areas and facilities.
CONVENTIONAL GAS AND OIL WELLS — Those gas and oil wells drilled
to depths shallower than the base of the Elk Sandstone or its stratigraphic
equivalent, and such oil and gas wells that are planned to involve drilling of
a single well on a well site for no more than seven consecutive days total in
any calendar year.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
CONVERSION APARTMENT — The remodeling of a single-family dwelling
unit into two or more separate living units each having a minimum of 2,000
square feet of lot area and 500 square feet of habitable area, one bathroom
and three habitable rooms, separate and private, sanitary, cooking and
dining facilities and a minimum of 1 1/2 off-street parking spaces per
dwelling unit. Basement and/or cellar dwellings shall not be defined as
conversion apartments.
COURT — An open, unoccupied and unobstructed space, other than a yard,
on a zoning lot, bounded by two or more sides of a building, including
similar area open to the sky, but not necessarily beginning at the ground
level.
COURTS HAVING JURISDICTION — See § 300-181.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the plot or lot area covered by buildings.
(See Illustration No. 3 of Appendix A.)
CUL-DE-SAC — A dead-end street having a suitable turnaround.
CURBS — The composition of required curbs shall be of concrete; where
such are not paved with asphalt, they may be surface treated; however,
Type A: court completely surrounded by building walls, or by building
walls and an interior lot line.
A.
B. Type B: any court other than a Type A Court.
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:556
when replaced, such replacement shall be with concrete. (See § 300-129
and Illustration Nos. 8 and 9 of Appendix A.249)
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this chapter to do so, either by
reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the court of common
pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the municipality lies.250
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with
the administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder,
except the following:251
DEVELOPMENT — The act, process or state of erecting all structures
except farm dwellings and structures.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The plan for development of a parcel of land,
including a plot of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and
bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and
public facilities.
DEVELOPER — Landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with the
permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DISTRICT — Indicates zoning district unless specified otherwise.
DORMITORY — See § 300-33B.
DRIVE-IN BUSINESS — A retail establishment providing service to
automobiles or the occupants thereof directly, usually requiring the
occupants to leave their automobiles. Such service includes minor repairs,
replacements or services to the automobiles, serving food or drink to the
occupants, or providing entertainment or facilities for transacting business
without leaving the automobile. Some drive-in businesses such as gasoline
service stations are described separately. Further, the provision of an offstreet
parking lot for the convenience of customers served for doing
business within a building or structure does not constitute a drive-in
business.252
A. The City Council;
B. The Zoning Hearing Board; or
The Planning Commission, only if and to the extent the Planning
Commission is charged with final decision on preliminary or final plans
under the subdivision and land development or planned residential
development ordinances. Determinations shall be appealable only to
the Boards designated as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
C.
249. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
250. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
251. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
252. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:557
DRIVEWAYS — Shall be dust free; minimum width shall be 10 feet or 12
feet when used also as an entrance walk; minimum transition radius at
the curb shall be three feet to five feet with a twelve-foot curb radius
for commercial, industrial or other high-volume driveways; where crossing
required sidewalk and curb-or right-of-way areas, driveways shalt be paved
with concrete. As shown in Illustrations Nos. 9a and 9b of Appendix A,253
right-of-way grading requirements shall apply to driveways and in any case,
change in grade shall not exceed one inch vertical for every one foot
horizontal within any 10 feet of distance. (See §§ 300-91O and 300-156).
DRIVEWAY OPENING (CURB CUT) — See "driveways." The regulations in
§ 300-91O shall apply in all zoning districts, unless stated otherwise, for all
uses. Ten-foot openings are the minimum and are to be used with those of
25 feet; intermediate openings are to be discouraged.254
DUST — See § 300-77B.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or
used for residential purposes. The word "dwelling" shall not include hotels,
motels or other structures used for transient residence. See Illustration No.
2 of Appendix A.255
ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for and used
exclusively for occupancy by one family.
A.
TWO-FAMILY (DOUBLES) — A building designed or remodeled for and
used exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of
each other. (See "conversion apartment").
B.
MULTIFAMILY (APARTMENT) DWELLING — A building designed for
and used exclusively for occupancy by three or more families, living
independently of each other and characterized by a common entrance.
(See "townhouse.")
C.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multifamily structure, not exceeding three
stories in height, sometimes designed around courts or common open
areas, frequently having private balconies or patios.
D.
ROW DWELLING or TOWNHOUSE (terms interchangeable) — A
multifamily dwelling on a zoning lot consisting of three but not more
than six one family dwelling units attached side by side sharing a
common wall. (See "townhouse.")
E.
ROOMING HOUSE — A dwelling with not more than one dwelling unit,
where lodging is provided for more than two persons in addition to the
family unit. (See "rooming house.")
F.
HIGH-RISE DWELLING (MULTISTORY, MULTIFAMILY DWELLING) —
A dwelling unit building of more than three stories not exceeding 10
G.
253. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
254. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
255. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:558
DUMPING — Deposit of any material other than clean fill without Zoning
Officer approval.
EASEMENT — A grant by the owner of land by use by others, including the
public. (See § 300-129C).
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS — Public, private or parochial, preschool,
elementary, secondary, junior and senior high school; child-care facilities,
nursery schools; colleges; universities and business and vocational
institutes of higher learning. (See §§ 300-28C, 300-37 and 300-47.)
ENCLOSED PORCH — A porch with at least a parallel wall permanently
located. Such wall shall extend from the floor (deck) to the roof of the porch,
or any structure more than 6 1/2 feet in height even though open spaces
or windows are a part of such wall. Whichever requirement is greater shall
apply. (See § 300-128A and B.)
ERECTED — Includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon or any
physical operations on the land required for the building. Excavation, fill,
drainage and the like shall be considered part of the erection.
EROSION — The removal of earth surface materials by the action of natural
elements.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities, municipal or other governmental agencies
of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission,
disposal or distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduit cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, street signs, off-street parking spaces and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary
for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal
or other governmental agencies or for the public health, safety or general
welfare. (See § 300-88.)
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
(See § 300-32F, 300-65B and 300-154.)
FAMILY —
stories; plan of same to be reviewed by Planning Commission and
Council for approval of architectural design. (See §§ 300-32F, 300-65B,
300-154.)
A. A single person occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a household.
Two or more persons related by blood or marriage, occupying a
dwelling unit, living together and maintaining a common household,
including not more than two boarders or roomers; but
B.
Not more than five unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit, living
together and maintaining a common household. (See "transient.")
C.
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:559
FARM — Any parcel of land containing at least 10 acres which may be used
for gain in the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry and dairy
products. It includes necessary farm structures within the prescribed limits
and the storage of farm equipment; provided, that such buildings, other
than one dwelling, are not within 300 feet of all property lines. Appeals
by an applicant may be heard by the Zoning Hearing Board to determine
variance on this distance. Truck gardens and nurseries shall be considered
to be farms and may contain between one and 10 acres. (See § 300-135 and
"manure piling.")
FENCE or WALL — A fabricated barrier, the sole function of which is to
enclose or set apart an area of land.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other soil material
is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location
above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface
and includes the conditions resulting therefrom; the difference in elevation
between a point on the original ground and a designated point of higher
elevation on the final grade; the material used to make a fill.
FIRE STATION — A fire station shall be considered a public use for the
purpose of this chapter.
FLOOD — The general and temporary condition of partial and complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers,
watercourses or other inland water from any source.256
FLOODPLAIN — The area along a natural watercourse which is periodically,
or at least once in 25 years where substantial property damage occurs,
overflowed by water therefrom.257
FLOOR AREA —
FRATERNITY HOUSE — See § 300-33B.
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of one or more floors of a
building excluding cellar, attic, garage, open breezeway, open porches
and terraces. "Floor area," when prescribed as the basis of
measurement for off-street parking spaces and loading berths for any
use, shall mean the sum of gross horizontal areas of the floors of the
buildings, or portion thereof, devoted to such use, including, space,
counters, racks or closets and any basement floor processing of goods,
or to business or professional offices.
A.
The area of storage space not devoted to such use (i.e., used as storage
exclusively, hallways and stairwell shall not be included in the floor area
and used for determining off-street parking and loading requirements
except that the area so excluded shall not exceed 30% of the total floor
area per floor.
B.
256. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
257. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:560
FRONTAGE — The distance between the points of intersection of the side
lot lines with the front lot line. On a corner lot, frontage is the distance
along the front lot line between the side lot lines of the lot. On lots arranged
around the cul-de-sac, where the radius of curvature of the street is less
than 150 feet, "frontage" shall be deemed to have the same meaning as "lot
width."
FUMES — See § 300-77C.
FUNERAL HOMES — See § 300-33C.
GARAGE — A building or portion thereof, used for the storage and/or
service of motor vehicles.
GARAGE, COMMUNITY — One garage, or a group of detached garages
arranged in a row or surrounding a common means of access, one story in
height, and used exclusively for the parking of automobiles by residents,
customers or persons engaged in conduct of establishments in the
immediate vicinity of its location. (See § 300-100.)
GARAGE, MINOR — An accessory building or part of a principal building
used only for the storage of private motor vehicles and other personal
effects of the occupants of the principal structure. A minor garage may be
substituted for required parking space. (See § 300-101.)258
GARAGE, SERVICE — A building or part thereof used for the repair of
motor vehicles for remuneration, but not used for dismantling or scrapping
of motor vehicles; a garage building available to the public and operated
for gain and which is used for storage repair, greasing, washing, servicing,
adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles. Where more
than two vehicles are located which are not in running condition and are
not completely enclosed in a building, such premises shall be deemed
a junkyard rather than a repair garage. This provision shall not apply
to garages especially designated as automobile pounds by Council. (See
§ 300-44B.)
GASES — See § 300-77C.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any building or premises used for the
retail sale of liquefied petroleum products or other fuels for the propulsion
of motor vehicles and including such products as kerosene, fuel oil,
packaged naphtha, lubricants, tires, batteries, antifreeze, motor vehicle
accessories and other items customarily associated with the sale of such
products; for the rendering of services and making adjustments and
replacements to motor vehicles, and the washing, waxing and polishing
of motor vehicles, as incidental to other services rendered, and repairs to
motor vehicles except those of a major type. Repairs of a major type are
defined to be spray painting, body, fender, clutch, transmission, differential,
axle, spring and frame repairs; major overhauling of engines requiring the
removal of engine cylinder head or crankcase pan; repairs to radiators
requiring the removal thereof or complete recapping or retreading of tires.
(See § 300-44C.)
258. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:561
GENERAL GARDENING — Growing of household vegetables.
GOLF COURSES — Must be of such a size and design as to satisfy, where
applicable, requirements of the Professional Golfer's Association. In
addition, a club house with locker and sanitary facilities shall be an integral
part of the course design.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the City of Lower Burrell,
Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania.
GOVERNMENT USES — See "public uses," "semipublic uses" and
§ 300-151.
GRADE — The degree of inclination of a road or slope.
GRADING FOR DRAINAGE — See § 154-14.
GREENHOUSE — May be an accessory use. (See § 300-98B.)
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area of a shopping center
designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements,
mezzanines and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet.
GROUND FLOOR — A floor shall be deemed to be a ground floor if it does
not vary in elevation more than four feet from the level of the adjacent
ground to which it has direct access. A building on a sloping lot can have a
ground floor on two different levels.
HOME OCCUPATION —
HOSPITAL — See § 300-33C.
HOTEL; MOTEL — A building containing sleeping rooms principally for use
of transients and sometimes containing accessory uses, such as a kitchen
and dining facilities, lounge, meeting rooms and convention facilities, and
other business uses permitted within the zoning district. (See § 300-34.)
One carried on within the principal dwelling or ancillary structure, by
the resident thereof, as a customary secondary use in connection with
which there is no person employed, no display, no sign other than a
nameplate, no mechanical equipment other than normal domestic or
household equipment; provided, such use does not occupy more than
25% of the total floor area of one floor, and does not require internal
or external structural alterations or involve construction features not
customary in dwellings and has an off-street area to accommodate
patrons. Within a dwelling, the conduct of professional services,
lawnmower sharpening and repairs, personal services and retail sale
of articles produced on the premises provided such use is subordinate
may be permitted. (See § 300-21.)
A.
Home office of a doctor of medicine, minister of religion, or other
professional person situated in a dwelling unit which is the home of the
practitioner; provided, that not more than one assistant is employed, no
colleagues or associates use such office and no sign is used other than
a nameplate.
B.
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:562
HOUSE TRAILER — See "mobile home."
ICE SALES AND STORAGE — See § 300-98.
IMPROVED (BASEMENT, CELLAR, ATTIC, GARAGE) — Any use other than
the family laundry or storage of personal articles of the family dwelling
within the structure. (See "floor area.")
IMPROVEMENT (PERFORMANCE) BOND — A deposit of cash, bond,
certified check or negotiable securities and an agreement to the effect
that the landowner or developer will install required improvements. An
improvement bond may be considered a completion guarantee. [See
§§ 154-13 and 300-174B(4).]
INDUSTRIAL — Indicates manufacturing when referring to zoning districts.
JUNKYARD — An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packaged, disassembled or handled.
Materials include but are not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper,
rags, rubber tires and further includes an auto wrecking yard, but does not
include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. Any use of land
which contains more than two vehicles which are not in running condition
and which are not completely enclosed in a building shall be deemed a
junkyard.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee having a remaining term of
not less than 40 years or other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LAUNDRY AGENCY — Retail outlet for a laundry, providing for deposit and
distribution only.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The assembly, fabrication, manufacture,
processing, production, storage and/or wholesale distribution of goods or
products where no process involved will produce noise, vibration, fire
The improvement of one or more continuous lots, tracts or parcels of
land for any purpose involving:
(1) A building; or
The division or allocation of land between or among two or more
existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose
of streets, common areas, leaseholds, building groups or other
features; a division of land into lots for the purpose of conveying
such lots singly or in groups to any person, partnership or
corporation for the purpose of erection of buildings by such person,
partnership or corporation.
(2)
A.
Land development includes planned unit and planned residential
developments and unit group buildings. (See "subdivision," Article VIII
and § 300-46.)
B.
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:563
hazard, air pollution or other emissions noxious or dangerous to
neighborhood properties within 400 feet. Such goods or products include
advertising signs and displays; artificial limbs, braces and orthopedic
devices; awnings, tents and tarpaulins; bakery, dairy and food products, but
not animal slaughtering, curing nor rendering of fats; books, magazines,
newspapers and printed material; cabinets, custom millwork and
woodworking; ceramics, nonstructural tile and cement products; clothing
and wearing apparel; custom sheet metal work; dies and gauges; draperies;
upholstery and slipcovers; electrical instruments and electronic devices;
home appliances, radio and television; jewelry; lightweight nonferrous
metal castings; lithographic plates and photo engravings; machines; optical
goods and instruments; patterns; pharmaceutical products and medicines;
plastic moldings or extrusions but not the formulations of basic plastic
material; precision instruments; sporting goods; timepieces; toys; type
composition; and Venetian blinds. Also, the cleaning, maintenance, repair
and/or service of all products permitted above, batteries, bicycles, boilers,
guns, locks and rugs. Also animal care, exterminators, freezer lockers and
cold storage, laboratories, laundries, light machine shops, machinery rental
moving and storage, packing and crating service, research laboratories
with pilot plants, taxidermists and commercial welding are included in this
definition for the purpose of this chapter.
LIQUID WASTE — Storage and disposal, see § 300-78.
LIQUOR STORE — State liquor stores are considered as retail and
wholesale beverage distributors.
LODGER — See "transient."
LODGES — See § 300-25B.
LOT —
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit. In determining the area of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of
a street, alley or crosswalk may be included.259
A.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot in an S or R District which:
(1) Fronts upon a street;
Is insufficient in size to meet the requirements for a one-family
dwelling; and
(2)
By documentary evidence acceptable to the Zoning Officer, is
shown to be prior to and continuously since the effective date of
this chapter, in separate and distinct ownership. (See § 300-149.)
(3)
B.
CORNER LOT — A lot situated at and abutting the intersection of two
streets, having an interior angle of intersection not greater than 135°.
See Illustration No. 4 of Appendix A.260
C.
259. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:564
MAJOR STREET — See "street."
MANUFACTURING — "Industrial" when referring to zoning districts.
MANURE PILING — Manure piling on farms and in conjunction with
stabling horses and ponies must conform to Department of Environmental
Protection, Chapter 243, Title 25, Rules and Regulations and be a minimum
distance of 100 feet from any dwelling, and 50 feet from any property line.
(See § 300-135 and "farm".)263
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — A chartered, nonprofit organization, the primary
purpose of which is the advancement of its members or of the community
in educational, recreational, fraternal, cultural, social or civic pursuits and
INTERIOR LOT — A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage
on a street. See Illustration No. 4 of Appendix A.261
D.
FRONT LOT LINE — That boundary of a lot which is along an existing
or dedicated public street, or where no public street exists, along a
public way. The front lot line of a corner lot is along the street on
which the principal building faces. It is the intent of this definition
that all principal buildings will face public streets or public ways. (See
"frontage," "street line.")262
E.
REAR LOT LINE — That boundary of a lot which is most distant from
and is most nearly parallel to the front line, except for through or
corner lots which have no rear lot line.
F.
SIDE LOT LINE — Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot
line.
G.
THROUGH LOT LINE — A "double frontage" lot, the front and rear lines
of which abut streets. See Illustration No. 4 of Appendix A.
H.
ZONING LOT — A parcel of land, fronting on a street, which is or
may be occupied by a main structure or a unit group of buildings with
accessory uses and structures permitted by this chapter and the open
spaces required under this chapter.
I.
LOT AREA — The total space on a horizontal plane within the boundary
lines of a zoning lot, not including any part of a street or alley.
J.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot line.
K.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lines of the zoning lot
measured at the shortest distance at or between the front and rear
building lines as determined by the prescribed front and rear yard
requirements.
L.
260. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
261. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
262. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
263. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:565
activities. It shall not include living quarters for persons other than those
engaged in the conduct of it; it shall not be operated for profit and alcoholic
beverages shall not be served. (See § 300-33C.)
MINERAL EXTRACTION — See § 154-11D.
MINERAL REMOVAL — Not to include gas and oil wells and oil and gas
development. (See § 154-11D.)[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
MINUTES — See § 300-166.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.264, 265
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.266
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.267
MOBILE HOME STAND — See § 300-36F.
MOTEL — See "hotel; motel" and "tourist court."
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Lower Burrell, Westmoreland County,
Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipalities
Authority Act of 1945."268,269
NATURAL GAS COMPRESSOR STATION — A facility designed and
constructed to compress natural gas that originates from an oil or gas well
or collection of such wells operating as a midstream facility for delivery
of oil and gas to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline, natural
gas processing plant, or underground storage field, including one or more
natural gas compressors, associated buildings, pipes, valves, tanks and
other equipment.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
NATURAL GAS PROCESSING PLANT — A facility used to remove materials
such as ethane, butane, and other constituents or similar substances from
264. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
265. Editor's Note: Original definition "mobile homes court," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
266. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
267. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
268. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
269. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:566
natural gas to allow such natural gas to be of such quality as is required
or appropriate for transmission or distribution to commercial markets but
not including facilities or equipment used primarily to remove water, water
vapor, oil or naturally occurring liquids from natural gas. This includes a
dew point control facility.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
NATURAL PRODUCTION USES — See §§ 154-11 and 154-14.
NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING CENTER — The neighborhood commercial or
shopping center provides mostly for the sale of convenience goods: foods,
drugs and sundries; and personal services: laundry, dry cleaning, barbering
and shoe repairing; for day-to-day living needs.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reason of such adoption or amendment.270
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign lawfully existing at the time of the
enactment of this chapter (or as later amended), which does not conform to
the sign regulations applicable in the zoning district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the use or extent of use provisions
of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or
amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include,
but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.271
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment, or prior
to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation.272
NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING — See § 300-184 and "use."
NOXIOUS MATTER OR ODOR — Material which is capable of causing
injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing
detrimental effects upon the psychological, social or economic well being of
individuals.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area
or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering or the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.273
270. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
271. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
272. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
273. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:567
NURSERY — See "farm."
NURSING HOME — A home operated similarly to a boarding house, but
not restricted to any number of guests or guest rooms and the operator of
which is licensed by the state or county to give special care and supervision
to his or her charges, and in which nursing, dietary and other personal
services are furnished to convalescents, invalids and aged persons, but
in which homes are kept no persons suffering from a mental sickness,
mental disease, disorder or ailment, or from a contagious or communicable
disease, and in which homes are performed no surgery, maternity or other
primary treatments such as are customarily provided in sanitariums or
hospitals, and in which no persons are kept or served who normally would
be admittable to a mental hospital.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — The written authorization issued by the Zoning
Officer for use of land or buildings. (See § 300-174B.)
ODOR — See § 300-77.
OFF-STREET PARKING LOT — Any areas arranged, designed, used or
intended for use for the parking of five or more motor vehicles. (See
"parking area.")
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES — An essential service; a parking area or
garage, either minor, private or community, may be substituted for each
other and may be a principal use. (See § 300-91.)
OIL and GAS — Crude oil, natural gas, methane gas, coal bed methane
gas, propane, butane, and/or any other constituents or similar substances
that are produced by drilling a well of any depth into, through, and below
the surface of the earth. It is not to include the term "minerals."[Added
12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
OIL AND GAS DEVELOPMENT — The well site preparation, well site
construction, drilling, hydraulic fracturing, and/or site restoration
associated with an oil and gas well; water and other fluid storage,
impoundment and transportation used for such activities; and the
installation and use of all associated equipment, including tanks, meters,
and other equipment and structures, whether permanent or temporary; and
the site preparation, construction, installation, maintenance and repair of
oil and gas pipelines and associated equipment and other equipment and
activities associated with the exploration for, production and transportation
of oil and gas other than natural gas compressor stations and natural
gas processing plants or facilities performing the equivalent functions that
operate as midstream facilities.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
OIL AND GAS WELLS — The drilling and operation of oil or gas wells but
not including conventional gas and oil wells. The underground activities and
processes used and the migration of gas or oil from a subsurface area to a
gas or oil well site at the surface shall not in and of themselves constitute
mineral removal and are allowed to occur in Conservancy (S) and Industrial
(I) Zoning Districts as a conditional use.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
5-2011]
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:568
OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land and/or an area of water within
a municipality and designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of
all municipal residents, not including areas set aside for public facilities.
Such space shall be substantially free of structures but may contain such
improvements (recreation space) as are indicated in the County or City
Comprehensive Plans and/or are appropriate for the recreation of County or
City residents. [See § 300-65C and Act 247, Art VII, § 705(d)(1).274]
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership, company, corporation and its
subcontractors and agents who has an interest in real estate for the purpose
of exploring or drilling for, producing, or transporting oil or gas and also
any "well operator" or "operator" as defined in the Pennsylvania Oil and Gas
Act.275[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
OWNER — Any person or legal entity having a proprietary interest in the
land that is zoned.
PARCEL — See "lot."
PARKING AREA — An open space other than a street or alley used
exclusively for the parking of automobiles. (See "off-street parking.")
PARTICULATE MATTER — Material which is suspended in or discharged
into the atmosphere in finely divided form as a liquid or solid at atmospheric
temperature.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A criterion established to control noise,
odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards,
glare or heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PERMITTED USE — See "use."
PERSONAL SERVICES — Any commercial establishment providing services
pertaining to the person, his apparel or personal effects commonly carried
on or about the person and including hair dressing, shoe repair, tailoring
and cleaning on the premises of wearing apparel brought to the
establishment by the customer.
PICNIC FACILITIES — Includes tables, pavilions or some other type of
shelter, rest rooms within the defined picnic area, an athletic field, fresh
water, barbecue areas, and where feasible, playground equipment. Where
these facilities are provided by the City through tax revenues, such facilities
may be available free of charge to the residents of the City.
MINOR PARKING AREA — A parking area which is an accessory use on
the same zoning lot.
A.
COMMUNITY PARKING AREA — A parking area used exclusively by the
residents, customers or persons engaged in conduct of establishments
in the immediate vicinity of its location. (See "off-street parking.")
B.
274. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10705(d)(1).
275. Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 2-14-2012 by P.L. 87, No. 13; see now 58 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3201 et seq.
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:569
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling, or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district created, from time to time,
under the provisions of this chapter.276
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — The same as "planned residential
development."
PLANNING COMMISSION — See "commission" and Article XX.
PLAT — The map, plot plan or plan of a subdivision or land development,
whether preliminary or final.
PLOT PLAN — See "plat."
POINT OF INTERSECTION — A point in the center of a traffic intersection
where the two streets or road center lines meet.
PREFABRICATED HOME — A dwelling being or consisting of one or more
units designed to be folded, collapsed or telescoped when towed, to be
expanded later into one integral unit for additional cubic capacity and
placement on permanent foundations.
PRINCIPAL USE — That use or purpose for which a building, structure
and/or land or major portion thereof, is designed, arranged, intended or
for which it may be occupied or maintained under this chapter. The use of
any minor portion of a building, a structure and/or land on the same lot
for incidental, subordinate or supplementary uses to the principal use and
permissible under this chapter shall be considered an accessory use. (See
§§ 300-98 and 300-137.)
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Any office or establishment of those whose
training qualifies them to provide specialized services to the community
in the commonly recognized professions (education, engineering, law,
medicine, music, philosophy, science, theology, the arts (architecture,
drama, music, painting, photography, writing) and similar activities
(insurance, real estate).
PROTECTED STRUCTURE — Any occupied residence, commercial
business, school, religious institution or other public building located within
1,000 feet of the surface location of a well that may be impacted by noise
generated from drilling or hydraulic activity at a well site. The term shall
not include any structure owned by an oil and gas lessor who has signed
a lease with the operator granting surface rights to drill the subject well
or whose owner (or occupants) has (have) signed a waiver relieving the
operator from implementation of the measure established in this chapter for
the owner's (occupants') benefit.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:277
276. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
277. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:570
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
City Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain public
comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.278
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Such notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.279,280
PUBLIC USES — Schools, parks, playgrounds, administrative, cultural and
service buildings owned and operated by a government agency, but not
including public land or buildings devoted primarily or solely to the storage
or maintenance of equipment and material unless adequately screened.
(See § 300-151.)
REFINERY — A building and equipment for refining or processing oil or gas
or similar products.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER — A shopping center providing primarily
for the retail sale of goods and services. It is built around a "chain"
department or variety store as the major tenant. It serves as a general
business district (see § 300-39) for people beyond the City limits and within
30 minutes driving time. Minimum gross leasable area shall be 100,000
square feet for purposes of definition only. Minimum site area shall be 10
acres. (See §§ 300-42E, 300-46 and 300-111D.)
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to
any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost
of reproduction.281
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
278. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
279. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
280. Editor's Note: Original definition "public preservation (public grounds), which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
281. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:571
RETAIL USES — Any commercial establishment offering goods,
merchandise or other items for sale at retail to the customer, including bake
shops and candy shops where foods are prepared for sale on the premises.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as a street or for other public use.
ROOMING HOUSE — A residential building other than a hotel where
lodging is offered by prearrangement for a definite period for compensation
for three or more persons; however, they are not open to transient guests,
in contrast to hotels, motels or tourist homes which are open to transients.
These uses are located in zoning lots with a minimum area of 10,000 square
feet, plus 300 square feet for each sleeping room in excess of four, provided
one-family area and height requirements are met. Boarding houses are
similar, but include the provision of meals.
ROW HOUSE (same as TOWNHOUSE) — See "dwelling" and "townhouse."
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of the land.
RUNOFF FROM A FULLY DEVELOPED AREA UPSTREAM — The surface
water runoff that can be reasonably anticipated upon maximum
development of that area of the watershed located upstream from he
subject tract, as permitted by prevailing zoning.
SCHOOLS — See "educational institutions."
SCRAP YARD — A place where waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or
handled, including auto wrecking yards, places or yards for use of salvaged
wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, but excluding such
uses when conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, and
excluding pawn shops and establishments for sale, purchase or storage and
used cars in operable condition, salvaged machinery, used furniture and
household equipment and the processing of used, discarded or salvaged
material as part of manufacturing operations; included as solid waste
disposal sites.
SECRETARY — See § 300-166.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water or gravity. Once this
matter is deposited, or remains suspended in water, it is usually referred to
as "sediment."
SEMIPUBLIC USES — Churches, Sunday schools, parochial schools,
colleges, hospitals and other institutions of an educational, religious,
charitable or philanthropic nature. (See § 300-151.)
SEWAGE LAGOON — See § 300-78.
SEWERAGE — See § 300-89.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representation or descriptions
of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, and
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:572
patented representations, descriptions or acts of masturbation, excretory
functions, homosexuality, sodomy, sexual intercourse or physical contact
with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if
such person be female, breast.
SHOPPING CENTER — See "building, unit group."
SIDEWALK — Four feet shall be the minimum width required, concrete
shall be the composition and the required front and side yards may be the
location. (See § 300-129H.)
SIGHT DISTANCE — The maximum distance of unobstructed vision, in a
horizontal or vertical plane, along a street from a vehicle located at any
given point on the street which shall take into account the visibility over
a crest vertical curve and the extent of headlight illumination across a
sag vertical curve. See PennDOT Publication 201, Engineering and Traffic
Studies.282
SIGN — Any single surface, device or structure exposed to public view
fixed or movable having lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter designed
and placed to direct attention to an object, product, menu, place, activity,
person, institution, organization or business. The term "sign" does not
apply to a religious, patriotic, fraternal, national or cultural symbol, if
unaccompanied by lettering, when applied to the cornice, wall, tower or
spire as part of a building.
GROSS SURFACE AREA (SURFACE SIZE) — The entire area within the
dimensions of the sign device or structure usable for display and lighting.
However, such gross surface shall not include any structural elements lying
outside the dimension limits of such sign and not forming an integral part
of the display. (See Article XIV.)
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet of horizontal distance.
SMOKE — See § 300-77A.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment of a mass of soil
to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise to improve its engineering
properties.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITES — See § 300-79 and "scrap yard."
SORORITY HOUSE — See § 300-33B.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Articles VI and IX of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10601 et seq., 10901
et seq.283
282. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
283. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:573
STABLE, PRIVATE — A structure or portion thereof, accessory to a
residential use, used as a shelter for horses and/or ponies. An adequate
fence or barrier shall be provided. (See § 300-28B.)
STORY —
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private.285
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.286
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor
above it, the space between such floor and the next ceiling above it, but
not including a basement when more than 1/2 of such basement volume
is below the finished grade level of the lot.
A.
HALF-STORY — A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof the wall
plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior walls, are not more
than two feet above the floor of such story. (See Illustration No. 1 of
Appendix A.284)
B.
ARTERIAL STREET — A street which is used primarily for high-speed or
heavy traffic of an intercommunity nature, includes major state, county
and City roads, streets or highways having regional as well as local
significance. Arterials are major streets.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which carries traffic from minor
streets to the arterial system. Collectors are major streets.
B.
STREET LINE — The line defining the edge of the legal width of a
dedicated street right-of-way. The street line is also the front lot line.
C.
MAJOR STREET, ARTERIAL OR COLLECTOR — A street intended for
large volumes of traffic. See Subsections A and B hereof.
D.
MINOR STREET (LOCAL) — A street which is primarily for access to
the abutting properties. Certain minor streets may be culs-de-sac.
E.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Detached, subordinate structure, utilized
for the principal or an accessory use, including all permanent
structures of such type.
A.
ALTERATION OF STRUCTURE — Any change, other than incidental
repairs, which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns or girders.
B.
284. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
285. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
286. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:574
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.287
SUPPLY YARD — A commercial establishment storing or offering for sale
building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain
and similar goods. Supply yards do not include the wrecking, salvaging,
dismantling or storage of automobiles and similar vehicles.
SURFACE SIZE — See "gross surface area."
SWALE — A stretch of land to gather or carry surface water contained,
graded or directed to be lower than adjacent land.
SWIMMING POOL OR CLUB —
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE (other than a building) — The vertical
distance measured from the basic grade to the highest point of the
structure.
C.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure that is removed seasonally
or more often, including structures that comply with the requirements
in § 300-96, private swimming pools not permanently located, boats
and utility trailers which are located from only one day to two weeks
in a sixty-day period in rear yard or completely closed building. The
following shall not be considered as a temporary structure:
Mobile homes or trailer homes located on a lot for more than 60
days; and
(1)
Vehicles not in running condition, which are located on a lot for
more than 60 days and which are not completely enclosed by a
building.
(2)
D.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of
land into two tracts or parcels and containing not more than six acres
of total land area. Any lots further subdivided from any portion of the
original lot, tract or parcel, if divided within five years, must meet the
requirements of major subdivision.
A.
SWIMMING POOL — An artificially created body of water used for
recreation and including any apparatus and equipment necessary to
maintain the premises and the healthful condition of the water. Such
facility may be publicly, privately (nonprofit) or commercially owned
and operated. Pools are considered an accessory use when permanent
or may be a temporary pool if moved seasonally; however, temporary
pools shall not include those that are inflatable.
A.
287. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:575
TELEPHONE BOOTH — See § 1104.288
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — See Subsection D of the definition of
"structure."
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or human debris.
Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer call the "A Horizon." (See
§ 154-11.)
TOURIST COURT — A group of attached or detached buildings containing
only individual sleeping rooms or living units, except in the case of quarters
for the resident manager or proprietor, with separate accessory facilities,
designed for temporary use by automobile tourists or transients, and
includes auto courts, motels, hotels or motor lodges.
TOWER SITE — Any lot or building lot, or any structure located on any lot
or building lot, on which communication towers are located or proposed to
be located. Only one tower shall be permitted per lot.[Amended 3-9-2009
by Ord. No. 2-2009]
TOWNHOUSE (same as ROW HOUSE) — A residential structure containing
three or more attached single-family dwelling units. Each dwelling unit has
a recorded lot in addition to a vested interest in common open space when
required. The structure may be one or two stories in height. (See Subsection
E of the definition of "dwelling" and "row house.")
TOXIC MATERIALS — Those materials which are capable of causing injury
to living organisms by chemical means when presented in large or relatively
small amounts.
TRACT — See "lot."
TRAILER —
PRIVATE SWIMMING CLUB — A private club incorporated as a
nonprofit organization, maintaining and operating a swimming pool,
without buildings or structures or other outdoor recreation facilities,
with specified limits upon the number of members or with specified
limits on the area of residence of members, for the exclusive use of
members and guests.
B.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — A swimming pool and the apparatus
and equipment necessary for its operation, accessory to a residential
use, which is maintained solely for the use of residents of the premises
on which the pool is located and for their guests, without charge for
admission and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any
building operated for profit.
C.
D. PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL — See § 300-153.
COMMERCIAL TRAILERS AND SEMITRAILERS — Vehicles not
equipped with automotive power, constructed for attachment to
A.
288. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:576
TRANSIENT — Any individual residing or stopping in the City for less than
30 days at any one time. A maximum of two transients or lodgers shall be
included as a part of the family in a one or two-family dwelling. (See "family"
and "rooming house.")
TREES, REQUIRED — See § 154-10.
TRUCK GARDEN — See "farm."
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. The
term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any
nonconforming use. (See Article XVIII.)
UTILITIES — See § 300-89.
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq.289
VEHICLE ENTRANCE AND EXITS — See "driveway opening."290
commercial automobiles or to tractors to supplement the carrying
capacity of such automobiles or tractors.
B. HOUSE TRAILER — See "mobile home."
TRAVEL TRAILER (related camping and recreational equipment) —
Camping and recreational equipment including travel trailers, pickup
coaches, motorized homes, boats and boat trailers, as defined below:
A travel trailer is a vehicular, portable structure mounted on a
chassis and designed for temporary (short-term) occupancy for
travel, recreation and vacation purposes; permanently identified as
a travel trailer by the manufacturer of the trailer; and, when factory
equipped for the road, having a body width not exceeding eight feet
and provided its gross weight does not exceed 4,500 pounds or any
weight provided its body length does not exceed 17 feet.
(1)
A pickup coach is a structure designed primarily to be mounted
on a pickup or truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it
suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and
vacation use.
(2)
A motorized home is a portable dwelling designed and constructed
as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle which is usually used
for camping or vacation purposes.
(3)
A boat is a vessel not exceeding 20 feet in length and designed to
travel on water.
(4)
(5) A boat trailer is a trailer designed to haul a boat as defined above.
C.
UTILITY TRAILER — Trailers not used for commercial purposes and
designed for use with private passenger automobiles but excluding
mobile homes or house trailers.
D.
§ 300-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:577
VEHICLE NOT IN RUNNING CONDITION — Any vehicle, which by routine
inspection can be determined to be seriously or permanently disabled,
abandoned or in process of being dismantled, shall be considered to be not
in running condition. The absence of a currently valid license or inspection
sticker shall be deemed evidence that a vehicle is not in running condition.
A vehicle not in running condition for more than 60 days is not considered
to be an accessory use.
WASTE — See "scrap yard" and § 300-78.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream, river, spring,
brook, creek or a channel or ditch for water whether natural or man-made.
WATER SYSTEM — See § 300-89.
WELL SITE — A graded pad designed and constructed for the drilling of one
or more oil and gas wells.[Added 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
YARD — A required open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise provided and
not including any portion of a street or alley. (See Illustration Nos. 5, 6 and
7.291)
ZONING DISTRICT MAP — A map indicating the zoning districts of the City
together with all amendments thereto subsequently adopted.
ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Officer or his authorized representatives,
appointed by Council.
ZONING ORDINANCE or ORDINANCE — Ordinance 3-1985, passed
October 7, 1985, as amended.
FRONT YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot
and abutting the front lot line, the required depth of which yard is
a prescribed minimum distance between the front lot line and a line
parallel thereto on the lot known as the front line of the buildable area
of the lot. (See Illustrations Nos. 5, 6 and 7.)
A.
REAR YARD — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
abutting the rear lot line, the required depth of which yard is prescribed
minimum distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto
on the lot known as the rear line of the buildable area of the lot. (See
Illustrations Nos. 5, 6 and 7.)
B.
SIDE YARD — A yard abutting a side lot line, extending from the front
yard to the rear yard, the require width of which yard is prescribed
minimum distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto
on the lot known as the side line of the buildable area. (See Illustrations
Nos. 5, 6 and 7.)
C.
289. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
290. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
291. Editor's Note: Appendix A, including said illustrations, is on file in the City offices.
§ 300-164 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-164
1:578
ARTICLE XX
Planning Commission
§ 300-165. Specific intent.
It is the purpose of this article to cite the responsibilities of the Planning
Commission in the administration of this chapter and other duties according
to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 as amended.292
§ 300-166. Administration and procedure.
A. Appointment. The members of the Planning Commission of Lower
Burrell are appointed by Council in the manner prescribed by law.
B. Rules of procedure (as derived from Pennsylvania Act 247293). The
Planning Commission shall adopt such rules of procedure as required in
accordance with the provisions of other City ordinances, and as
necessary to provide the required reviews and recommendations
relative to this chapter. The rules of procedure with regard to zoning
matters shall be in accordance with the provisions of Pennsylvania Act
247 and any other City ordinances pertinent to the review functions of
the Planning Commission.
C. Meetings. The Planning Commission shall meet monthly at a regularly
prescribed date and meeting place, and at other times as the Chairman
may deem necessary. All regular meetings of the Planning Commission
shall be open to the public. The Secretary of the Planning Commission
shall keep minutes of all meetings.
D. Recommendations regarding zoning matters. Within 45 days after any
referral for review, requested report or hearing regarding a zoning
matter, and unless a different time is required within this chapter, the
Planning Commission shall record its review, analysis and
recommendations in written form, copies of which shall be forwarded to
the appropriate body, such as Council, the Zoning Hearing Board, or, in
certain cases, to the Building Inspector. The forty-five-day period for a
decision shall be computed from the day of the Planning Commission
meeting at which subject matter was presented requiring such
decision. If any public hearing is required during the course of the
review, the forty-five-day period prescribed above shall be applicable
only after the holding of a required public hearing in accordance with
public notice required by Act 247 and this chapter.
E. Limitations. The Planning Commission shall function as an advisory
board to Council in accordance with Article II, Pennsylvania Act 247,
and shall be restricted in its duties to applying the conditions,
requirements, regulations and standards imposed by the various
sections of this chapter in keeping with its overall intent.
292. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
293. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 300-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-166
1:579
§ 300-167. Powers and duties related to this chapter and other
functions.
F. Appeals of Planning Commission, review and recommendations. Any
applicant or affected persons may, within 10 days of a decision of the
Planning Commission, appeal to Council for review. Such review shall
be conducted during a regularly scheduled meeting. Council may
affirm, reverse or modify the findings of the Planning Commission.
A. The Planning Commission shall function and have all powers prescribed
by law, and shall be required to:
(1) Maintain and keep on file records of its actions.
(2) Hold public hearings and meetings.
(3) Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision development and
procedures for plat approval, review for compliance all site
development plans under § 300-56 and review all planned
residential developments as per regulations set forth in Act 247294
and this chapter under Article VIII.
(4) Require from other departments and agencies of the City such
available information as relates to the work of the Planning
Commission.
(5) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and surveys with the consent of the owner.
(6) Do such other acts or make such studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by Act 247 and this
chapter.
(7) Promote public interest in and understanding of, the
Comprehensive Plan and planning.
B. The Planning Commission, at the request of Council, has the power and
shall be required to:
(1) Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the City as
set forth in Act 247 and this chapter.
(2) Make recommendations to Council concerning the adoption or
amendment of an Official Map.
(3) Prepare and present to Council a zoning ordinance, and make
recommendations to Council on proposed amendments to it as set
forth in Act 247 and this chapter.
294. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 300-166 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-167
1:580
(4) Prepare and present to Council a building code and a housing code
and make recommendations concerning proposed amendments
thereto.
(5) Prepare and present to Council an environmental study.
(6) Submit to the appointing authority of Council a recommended
capital improvements program.
(7) Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies and individuals.
C. In the performance of its powers and duties, any act or
recommendation of the Planning Commission which involves
engineering consideration shall be subject to review and comments of
the Engineer, which shall be incorporated and separately set forth in
any report, written act or recommendation of the Planning Commission.
D. The Planning Commission may, with the consent of Council, accept and
utilize any funds, personnel or other assistance made available by the
county, the commonwealth, or the federal government or any of their
agencies, or from private sources. The Council may enter into
agreements or contracts regarding the acceptance or utilization of the
funds or assistance in accordance with the governmental procedures of
the City of Lower Burrell.
E. Removal. Any member of the Planning Commission may be removed
from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for
other just cause by a majority vote of the City Council which appointed
the member, taken after the member has received 15 days advance
notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in
connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing. Any
appointment to fill a vacancy created by removal shall be only for the
unexpired term.
§ 300-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-167
1:581

ARTICLE XXI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 300-168. Appointment and powers of Zoning Officer.295
§ 300-169. Enforcement notice.296
A. For the administration of this chapter, a Zoning Officer, who shall not
hold any elective office in the City, shall be appointed by Council from a
list of candidates who have been qualified by the appropriate civil
service exam.
B. The Zoning Officer shall meet the qualifications established by the City
and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City a
working knowledge of municipal zoning.
C. The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with its
literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction or
any use or change of use which does not conform to this chapter.
D. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of
his employment.
E. The Zoning Officer/Building Inspector shall:
(1) Administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, including the
collection of fees required by this chapter. (See § 300-187.)
(2) Issue zoning certificates.
(3) Maintain permanent files of all zoning certificates and applications
as public records.
(4) Provide a copy of site plans (see § 300-173) for proposed
developments in all zoning districts for review by the Commission.
(See § 300-184.)
A. If it appears to the City that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the
Zoning Officer shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an
enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
295. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
296. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-168 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-169
1:583
§ 300-170. Causes of action.297
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to
be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or
used in violation of this chapter, the City Council or, with the approval of
the City Council, an officer of the City, or any aggrieved owner or tenant of
real property who shows that his property or person will be substantially
affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute
any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate
such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such
premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When
any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action
shall be served upon the City at least 30 days prior to the time the action
is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the City Council. No such
action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
§ 300-171. Enforcement; violations and penalties.298
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the City intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must he
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a period of 30 days.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the City, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the City as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the City may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
297. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
298. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-169 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-171
1:584
§ 300-172. Method of appeal.
Any person or City official aggrieved or affected by any decision of the
Zoning Officer may, within 30 days, appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board as
provided in § 300-181, by filing a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof. Upon denial of the appeal, one year from the date of the Board's
denial shall elapse before reappeal. Reappeal may only be made when the
grounds for the denial have been eliminated.299
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial
District Judge determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership
or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was
no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been
only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
B. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the City the right to commence
any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under this section.
299. Editor's Note: Original § 2306, Penalty, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-172
1:585

ARTICLE XXII
Certificates and Permits
§ 300-173. Building permits.300
A. Required. No structure shall be erected, added to or structurally
altered until a building permit is issued by the Building Inspector. Any
general maintenance such as exterior painting, replacement of roofing
shingles, windows, doors, sidings, etc., will not require a building
permit. A building permit shall state that the proposed structure or
proposed alteration shall comply with all laws of the City relating
thereto and shall be approved for zoning compliance by the Zoning
Officer, based upon representations made in the permit application.
B. Requisites. A building permit shall be issued if all the following
requirements are met:
(1) A zoning certificate has been requested and is approved subject to
final inspection by the Zoning Officer; however:301
(a) If work authorized by the issuance of a zoning certificate is not
initiated within six months from the date of issuance, the
zoning certificate shall be null and void.
(b) If the work is not completed within 18 months from the
issuance of the permit, the zoning certificate shall be null and
void.
(2) The nature, location and dimensions of the proposed structure and
its proposed use comply with the requirements of this chapter as
well as with any other applicable laws and ordinances.
(3) All zoning, building code and public utility provision fees are paid,
and all improvement bonds are deposited to the City.
(4) Where the connection with a public sewer is feasible, such
connection shall be complete and the cost of all the connections to
such sewer are understood and agreed in writing to be borne by the
developer or, where it is demonstrated that on-site sewage disposal
facilities in conformity with the City and commonwealth
requirements are better suited to the lot, the installation of such
facilities by the developer is understood and agreed upon in
writing.
(5) The site is located on a street improved to City standards, or the
developer agrees in writing to improve the street on and to the site;
costs are the responsibility of the owner; any other ways must be
on rights-of-way dedicated to the public and improved in
300. Editor's Note: Original § 2401, Zoning certificates, which immediately preceded this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
301. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-173
1:587
§ 300-174. Certificates of occupancy.
accordance with City specifications. Such improvement must be
completed or security provided for completion on or before 50%
of the building lots are conveyed. No further building permits will
be issued until this requirement is met. All lots must have primary
access via a street, secondary public access by alleys, lanes, ways
may be provided if desired. Secondary access need not be improved
to City specifications, nor will they be City maintained.
(6) The parking, sidewalk and curb requirements shall be fulfilled;
costs are the responsibility of the owner.
(7) Adequate protection from storm sewer and surface water runoff
during and after construction is provided and costs are the
responsibility of the owner.
(8) If property is located in a floodplain, see Floodplain Map of Federal
Emergency Management Association. Applicant shall comply with
all provisions under Chapter 170, Floodplain Management.
A. Completion; final inspection.
(1) No use of land shall be made, and no structure hereafter erected or
structurally altered shall be occupied or used until a certificate of
use, occupancy and compliance has been issued by the Zoning
Officer. A similar certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be
sought and shall be issued before an existing use of a structure or
land shall be changed.
(2) A certificate of occupancy shall state that the proposed use of a
structure or land complies with the regulations of this chapter, and
all other laws of the City. It shall be sought coincident with the
application for a building permit and shall be issued upon
examination of the completed structure and certification by the
Zoning Officer, within 10 days after the erection or structural
alteration of such structure or part thereof shall have been
completed, if in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and
all other laws of the City. However, such certificates shall be void if
not exercised within six months of the date of issue or renewal.
(3) In the case of a certificate of occupancy in connection with
restoration of a structure which is damaged or partially destroyed
by fire, flood, wind or other calamity or act of God, the form shall
show the estimated cost of restoration of the entire new structure,
sustained by appraisal or contractor's estimate. (See § 300-173.)
B. Requisite.
(1) A certificate of occupancy shall be issued upon completion of the
work in accordance with this chapter, in conjunction with the
§ 300-173 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-174
1:588
§ 300-175. Certificates of nonconformance.
§ 300-176. Record of certificates; charges.
§ 300-177. Application forms.
All applications for building permits, occupancy permits or certificates of
nonconformance shall be made on printed forms as approved by Council,
and shall contain accurate information as to the size and location of the
lot, the size and location of the structures on the lot, the dimension of all
yards and open spaces and such other information as may be necessary to
provide for the enforcement of this chapter. A file of such applications shall
be kept in the office of the Zoning Officer; and in the case of a building
Building Code and any other appropriate regulations relating to
land development and use.
(2) No permit shall be issued until the requirements of § 300-174 are
fulfilled. Where an agreement between the City and developer has
been made to fulfill requirements at a later date and those
requirements are not fulfilled as agreed, the Zoning Officer shall
comply with §§ 300-169 and 300-171.
A. No rights or privileges of maintenance, continuance, enlargement or
alteration of any nonconforming use of land or structure or sign shall be
allowed under the provisions of this chapter, unless there is issued a
certificate of nonconformance for each such nonconforming structure,
nonconforming use or nonconforming sign.
B. A certificate of nonconformance shall state in what specific respects the
structure, use of a structure or land or sign does not comply with the
provisions of this chapter. Such certificate shall be sought not less than
180 days after the effective date of this chapter, or in the case of
nonconformity due to reclassification, not less than 30 days after the
effective date of reclassification ordinance, and shall be issued after
verification of such nonconformity by the Zoning Officer within 30 days
after application. Failure of the Zoning Officer to note and give notice of
nonconformity shall not free the owner of such property from the
obligation to conform to these provisions. (See Article XVII.)
A. A record of all permits and certificates shall be kept on file in the office
of the Zoning Officer and copies shall be furnished on request to any
persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land
affected.
B. A fee as established from time to time by resolution of City Council shall
be charged for each certificate of occupancy or copy thereof issued. No
fee shall be charged for a certificate of nonconformance.302
302. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 300-174 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-177
1:589
permit, a duplicate copy shall be kept at the structure at all times during
construction. (See § 300-173.)
§ 300-178. Use approval procedure.
Written application for the approval of the uses referred to in this Zoning
Ordinance shall be filed in the public office of the Zoning Officer upon forms
prescribed for that purpose by the Zoning Hearing Board. Upon the filing of
such application, the matter shall be set for public hearing where necessary
before the Board. Notice, determinations and decisions of such hearings
shall be given as set forth in Articles XXI and XXIV.
§ 300-179. Permits previously issued; deferral.
A. All structures for which permits have been obtained and the
construction of which or a portion of which has been begun, or for
which a contract or contracts has or have been let pursuant to a permit
issued prior to the passage of this chapter, may be completed and used
in accordance with the plans on which such permit was granted.
B. During a period of 60 days from the date of introduction of any
ordinance which proposes changing the regulations, zoning district
boundaries or classification of property, unless Council has acted upon
the ordinance within such sixty-day period, the Zoning Officer shall
accept no applications for permits within the area involved in such
change for any use or structure which would be forbidden under the
proposed ordinance.
§ 300-177 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-179
1:590
ARTICLE XXIII
Zoning Hearing Board
[Amended 5-11-1992 by Ord. No. 4-1992; 11-12-2007 by Ord. No.
4-2007303]
§ 300-180. Membership.
The membership of the Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five residents
of the City appointed by the City Council. Their terms of office shall be
five years and shall be so fixed that the terms of office of one member
shall expire each year. The Board shall promptly notify the City Council
when vacancies occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for
the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold no
other elected or appointed office in the City, including membership on
the Planning Commission and the position of Zoning Officer. No member
shall be an employee of the City. The membership of the Zoning Hearing
Board may be decreased to three members by Resolution of City Council
in accordance with the provisions of Section 903(a) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC) (Act 247, as amended)304 and may
subsequently be increased back to five members by resolution of City
Council.
§ 300-181. Jurisdiction of Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudication in the following matters:
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except
curative amendments brought before the City Council.
B. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption,
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after
the effective date of the ordinance.
C. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not
limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the
application therefor, the issuance of any cease-and-desist order or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or
lot.
D. Appeals from a determination by the City Engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
E. Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance
pursuant to MPC Section 910.2.305
303. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
304. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10903(a).
§ 300-180 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-181
1:591
§ 300-182. Variances.
The Board, upon appeal, shall have the power to authorize variances from
the requirements of this chapter, and to attach such conditions to the
variance as it deems necessary to assure compliance with the purposes of
this chapter. A variance may be granted if all of the following findings are
made where relevant in a given case:
F. Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or floodplain or
flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance,
pursuant to this section and MPC Section 912.1.306
G. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section 916.2 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC) (Act 247, as
amended).307
H. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or City Engineer
in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof
with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater
management insofar as the same relate to development not involving
subdivision and land development or planned residential development.
A. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property and that the necessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by
the provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in which
the property is located.
B. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with
the provisions of this chapter and that the authorization of a variance is
therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
C. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
D. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located, not
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
E. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
necessary to afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue.
305. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
306. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
307. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 300-181 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-182
1:592
§ 300-183. Uses by special exception.
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide on applications for
uses by special exception where such uses are not specifically listed as a
permitted or conditional use in any zoning district as authorized by this
chapter, in harmony with its general purpose and intent, and in accordance
with the standards set forth in this chapter. The Board shall approve a
use by special exception only if it meets all applicable requirements of this
chapter. In granting a use by special exception, the Board may attach such
reasonable safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it
may deem necessary to properly implement this chapter and protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
§ 300-184. Hearings.
The hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may appoint any
member or an independent attorney as a Hearing Officer. The decision, or
where no decision is called for, the findings, shall be made by the Board, or,
if all parties agree to a Hearing Officer, shall accept the decision or findings
of the Hearing Officer as final. The conduct of the hearing shall meet the
following standards:
F. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter and protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
A. Public notice as defined by the MPC shall be given and written notice
shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning Officer, such other persons
as the governing body shall designate and to any person who has made
timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given, at such time
and manner as set by rules of the Board. In addition to the written
notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be
conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the hearing.
B. The first hearing before the Board or Hearing Officer shall be
commenced within 60 days from the date of receipt of the applicant's
application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension
of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Board or Hearing Officer
shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise
agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant
shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days of
the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Board or
Hearing Officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven
hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first hearing.
Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of
their opposition to the application within 100 days of the first hearing
held after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief, provided the
persons opposed to the application are granted an equal number of
§ 300-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-184
1:593
additional hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon
written consent or consent on the record by the applicant and City,
be granted additional hearings to complete their opposition to the
application, provided the applicant is granted an equal number of
additional hearings for rebuttal.
C. The parties to the hearing shall be the applicant, the City, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of record
before the Board and any other person, including civic or community
organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. The Board may
require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter
appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
D. The Chairman of the Board or the Hearing Officer shall have the power
to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
E. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
F. Formal rules of evidence do not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
G. The Board, or Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee of a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the party requesting
the transcript. The cost of additional copies shall be paid by the party
requesting such copy or copies.
H. The Board or Hearing Officer shall not communicate directly or
indirectly with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, report, staff
memoranda or other materials, except advice from its solicitor, unless
the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings, after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representatives unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
I. The Board or Hearing Officer shall render a written decision or, when
no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within
45 days after the last hearing before the Board or Hearing Officer. Each
decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon, together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provision of this chapter or of any act, law, rule or regulation shall
contain a reference to the provision relied upon and the reasons why
the conclusions is deemed appropriate in light of the fact found. If the
hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer and there has been no
stipulation that his decision or findings of fact are final, the Board shall
§ 300-184 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-184
1:594
§ 300-185. Failure to render decision.
§ 300-186. Mediation option.
make his report and recommendations available to the parties within 45
days, and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations
thereon to the Board prior to the final decision or entry of findings, and
the Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the
report of the Hearing Officer.
J. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings, shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
no later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Zoning Hearing Board no later
than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or
otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the
place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
A. Where the Board fails to render a decision within the required fortyfive-
day period or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days of
the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to
have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has
agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
B. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of
failure of the Board to meet or render a decision, the Board shall give
public notice of the decision within 10 days from the last day it could
have met to render a decision. If the Board shall fail to provide such
notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this section shall prejudice
the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to
the Court of Common Pleas.
A. Parties to proceedings authorized in this chapter may utilize mediation
as an aid in completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the
Zoning Hearing Board, in no case shall the Zoning Hearing Board
initiate mediation or participate as a mediating party. Mediation shall
supplement, not replace, those procedures in this chapter once they
have been formally initiated. Nothing in this Subsection shall be
interpreted as expanding or limiting municipal police powers or as
modifying any principles of substantive law.
B. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. Any
municipality offering the mediation option shall assure that in each
case, the mediating parties, assisted by the mediator as appropriate,
develop terms and conditions for:
(1) Funding mediation.
§ 300-184 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-186
1:595
§ 300-187. Fees and expenditures.
(2) Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and
demonstrated skills in mediation.
(3) Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
(4) Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this chapter or in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as
amended),308 provided there is written consent by the mediating
parties, and by an applicant or City decisionmaking body, if either is
not a party to the mediation.
(5) Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
(6) Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the
mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
(7) Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the
parties, and become subject to review and approval by the
appropriate decisionmaking body pursuant to the authorized
procedure set forth in this chapter.
(8) No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding
the final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as
evidence in any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
A. Fees. The City Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may
include compensation for the secretary and members of the Zoning
Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants
or expert witness costs.
B. Stenographer's appearance fee and transcripts. The appearance fee for
a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or Hearing Officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
C. Expenditures. Members of the Board may receive compensation for the
performance of their duties as may be fixed by the City Council, but in
no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to
308. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 300-186 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-187
1:596
§ 300-188. Time limits.
§ 300-189. Stay of proceeding.
the members of City Council. Within the limits of funds appropriated
by the City Council, the Board may employ or contract for secretaries,
clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical
services.
A. No person shall file any proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board
later than 30 days after preliminary or final application for development
has been approved by an appropriate City officer, agency or body, if
such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval
in any manner, unless such person alleges and proves that he had no
prior notice, knowledge or reason to believe that such approval had
been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest after such
approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in
interest.
B. The failure of anyone, other than the landowner, to appeal from an
adverse decision on an application for tentative approval of a planned
residential development or from an adverse decision by a Zoning
Officer on a challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map filed
pursuant to Section 916.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code (Act 247, as amended),309 shall preclude an appeal from a final
approval, except in the case where the final submission substantially
deviates from the approved tentative approval.
C. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed
by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is
issued.
A. Upon filing of any proceeding and during its pendency before the
Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance,
order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body, and all
official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or
any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property,
in which case the development or official action shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the
Board or by the Court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition
after notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body.
When an application for development, preliminary or final, has been
duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the
approval are filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant,
the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of the zoning
appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing
the proceedings before the Board. The question whether or not such
309. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 300-187 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-189
1:597
petition should be granted and the amount of the bond shall be within
the sound discretion of the court.
B. All appeals from decisions rendered by the Zoning Hearing Board shall
be taken to the Westmoreland County Court of Common Pleas and shall
be filed within 30 days after the entry of the decision or, in the case of a
deemed decision, within 30 days after the date upon which notice of
said deemed decision is given.
§ 300-189 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-189
1:598
ARTICLE XXIV
Amendments
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 300-190. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance amendments.
§ 300-191. Procedure for landowner curative amendments.
A. The City Council may from time to time amend, supplement, or repeal
any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter. The procedure for
the preparation of a proposed zoning ordinance as set forth in § 607 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10607, is
hereby declared optional.
B. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the City Council shall
hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. In addition, if
the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change, notice of said
public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the City at points
deemed sufficient by the City along the perimeter of the tract to notify
potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted
at least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
C. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall submit each such amendment to the
Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such
proposed amendment to provide the Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations.
D. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially, or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the City Council shall hold another public
hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the
amendment.
E. At least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by the
City Council, the City shall submit the proposed amendment to the
County planning agency for recommendations.
F. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the County planning agency.
A. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map or any provision thereof
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he
has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the City Council
with a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be
heard and decided as provided in § 916.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S. § 10916.1. The
curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to the Planning
Commission and the County planning agency as provided in § 609 and
§ 300-190 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-191
1:599
§ 300-192. Procedure for City curative amendments.
notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as provided in §§ 610 and
916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609, 10610, and 10916.1.
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with § 908 of the MPC, 53
P.S. § 10908, and all references therein to the Zoning Hearing Board
shall, for purposes of this section, be references to the City Council. If
the City does not accept a landowner's curative amendment brought in
accordance with this section and a court subsequently rules that the
challenge has merit, the court's decision shall not result in a declaration
of invalidity for this entire chapter and Zoning Map, but only for those
provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's curative
amendment and challenge.
C. The City Council, if it determines that a validity challenge has merit,
may accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or without
revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the
challenged defects. The City Council shall consider the curative
amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of this chapter or Zoning Map;
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features;
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
A. If the City determines that this chapter, or any portion hereof, is
substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
(1) The City shall declare by formal action, this chapter or portions
hereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days of such
declaration and proposal, the City Council shall:
§ 300-191 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-192
1:600
§ 300-193. Amendments.
(a) By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter, which may include:
[1] References to specific uses which are either not permitted
or not permitted in sufficient quantity;
[2] Reference to a class of use or uses which requires revision;
or
[3] Reference to this entire chapter which requires revisions.
(b) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
B. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the City
shall enact a curative amendment to validate, or reaffirm the validity of,
this chapter pursuant to the provisions of § 609 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S. § 10609, in
order to cure the declared invalidity of this chapter.
C. Upon the initiation of the procedures as set forth in Subsection A, the
Planning Commission shall not be required to entertain or consider any
landowner's curative amendment filed under § 609.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
§ 10609.1, nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a
report requested under § 909.1 or 916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10909.1
or 10916.1, subsequent to the declaration and proposal based upon the
grounds identical or substantially similar to those specified by the
resolution required by Subsection A(1). Upon completion of the
procedures set forth in Subsections A and B, no rights to a cure
pursuant to the provisions of §§ 609.1 and 916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
§§ 10609.1 and 10916.1, shall, from the date of the declaration and
proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
invalidity of this chapter for which there has been a curative
amendment pursuant to this section.
D. The City, having utilized the procedures set forth in this section, may
not again utilize said procedure for a period of 36 months following the
date of enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the
validity of this chapter; provided, however, if after the date of
declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty imposed
upon the City by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a
Pennsylvania appellate court decision, the City may utilize the
provisions of this section to propose a curative amendment to this
chapter to fulfill said duty or obligation.
A. Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice. A brief summary setting forth
the principal provisions of the proposed amendment and a reference to
the place within the City where copies of the proposed amendment may
be secured or examined shall be incorporated in the public notice.
§ 300-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-193
1:601
§ 300-194. Rejected petitions.
If, after a public hearing, Council rejects a petition for changing zoning
district boundaries for any lot, combination of lots or portion of a lot, no
person shall file a petition for changing the zoning district boundaries for
any lot, combination of lots or portion of lots or any part thereof which was
rejected by Council for at least one year from the date of Council rejection.
Unless the proposed amendment shall have been prepared by the
Planning Commission, the City Council shall submit the amendment
to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on
such amendment to provide the Planning Commission an opportunity
to submit recommendations. In addition, at least 30 days prior to the
public hearing on the amendment, the City shall submit the proposed
amendment to the County planning agency for recommendations.
B. Within 30 days after adoption, the City shall forward a certified copy of
the amendment to the County planning agency.
C. Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of proposed
enactment is given in the manner set forth in this section, and shall
include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be
considered, a reference to a place within the City where copies of the
proposed amendment may be examined without charge or obtained for
a charge not greater than the cost thereof. The City Council shall
publish the proposed amendment once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City not more than 60 days nor less than seven days
prior to passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall include
either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary, prepared by
the City Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable
detail. If the full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the City at the time the public notice is published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in the
County law library (or other County office designated by the County
Commissioners).
D. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the City Council shall, at
least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise, in one newspaper of
general circulation in the City, a brief summary setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail together with a summary of the
amendments.
§ 300-193 LOWER BURRELL CODE § 300-194
1:602
DISPOSITION LIST
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2015 6-8-2015 Zoning Map amendment NCM
3-2015 4-11-2016 Dangerous buildings and
structures amendment;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 134; Ch. 221
4-2015 12-14-2015 2016 tax levy NCM
5-2015 12-14-2015 2016 budget NCM
1-2016 4-11-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
2-2016 2-8-2016 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 65
3-2016 6-13-2016 Animal nuisances Ch. 124, Art. III
4-2016
5-2016 2-13-2017 Local economic
revitalization tax assistance
Ch. 266, Art. VIII
6-2016 12-12-2016 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
7-2016 12-12-2016 2017 tax levy NCM
8-2016 12-12-2016 2017 budget NCM
9-2016 12-12-2016 Engine brake retarders Ch. 285, Art. I
1-2017 4-10-2017 Stormwater management Ch. 252
2-2017 4-10-2017 Erosion and sediment
control
Ch. 154
3-2017 6-22-2017 Bond NCM
4-2017 6-22-2017 Bond NCM
5-2017 8-14-2017 Police Pension Plan
amendment
NCM
6-2017 8-14-2017 Traffic regulations and
restrictions
See Ch. 285, Art. II
7-2017 8-14-2017 Immobilization, towing and
storage of vehicles
Ch. 285, Art. III
8-2017 12-4-2017 Tax Rate NCM
§ 300-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:603
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-2017 12-4-2017 Appropriation NCM
1-2018 5-7-2018 Pensions Amendment See Ch. 55
2-2018 6-4-2018 Street Vacation NCM
4-2018 7-2-2018 Position Created NCM
5-2018 8-6-2018 Stop Signs NCM
8-2017 12-4-2017 Tax Rate NCM
9-2017 12-4-2017 Appropriation NCM
1-2018 5-7-2018 Police Pension Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. II
2-2018 6-4-2018 Street Vacation NCM
4-2018 7-2-2018 Position Created NCM
5-2018 8-6-2018 Stop Signs NCM
6-2018 10-1-2018 Police Pension Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. II
7-2018 10-1-2018 Police Pension Plan
Amendment
See Ch. 55, Art. II
8-2018 11-19-2018 General Obligation Note NCM
9-2018 12-10-2018 Tax Rate NCM
10-2018 12-10-2018 Appropriation NCM
Res. No.
1-2019
2-4-2019 Sewers Amendment Ch. 238
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
1-2019 3-4-2019 Traffic Regulations
and Restrictions
See Ch. 285,
Art. II
7
2-2019 5-6-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Installation of
Gaslines
Underground
Amendment; Snow
and Ice Removal
Amendment;
Excavations
Amendment; Road
Bonding Amendment
Ch. 256, Art. I;
Ch. 256, Art.
II; Ch. 256,
Art. III; Ch.
256, Art. IV
7
3-2019 5-6-2019 Traffic Regulations
and Restrictions
See Ch. 285,
Art. II
7
§ DL-1 LOWER BURRELL CODE § DL-1
1:604
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
4-2019 7-1-2019 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM 7
6-2019 12-2-2019 Tax Rate NCM 7
7-2019 12-2-2019 Appropriation NCM 7
8-2019 1-6-2020 Nonuniformed
Employees Pension
Plan Amendment
See Ch. 55,
Art. I
7
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:605