Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-2-2007 by Ord. No. 982]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Lewisburg,
County of Union, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters, Articles and sections by General Code, and
consisting of Chapters 1 through 360, together with an Appendix, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of
the Borough of Lewisburg, which shall be known and is hereby designated
as the "Code of the Borough of Lewisburg," hereinafter referred to as the
"Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this Ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Lewisburg, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Lewisburg and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this Ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 7-18-2006.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this Ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 LEWISBURG CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
Ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Nonsubstantive changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the legislation and 1987 Code for publication
as the 2006 Code of the Borough of Lewisburg, no changes in the meaning
or intent of such ordinances have been made. Certain grammatical changes
and other nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces
of legislation. It is the intention of the Borough Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
A. Chapter and Article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:5
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the enactment of this Ordinance in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment and application of this
Ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notices of such enactment,
as required by law, and the availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-8 LEWISBURG CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this Ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, Article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
Article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
Ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, Article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this Ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after February 21, 2007.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 11
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
Sewers — See Ch. 255.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 290.
§ 1-15 LEWISBURG CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE I
Lewisburg Area Sewer Authority
[Adopted 2-18-1970 by Ord. No. 607]
§ 11-1. Organization.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Lewisburg, Union County,
Pennsylvania, being the municipal authorities of the said Borough, hereby
signifies its intention and desire to organize, together with the Board of
Supervisors of East Buffalo Township, an authority under the provisions of
the Municipal Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.
§ 11-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary of the Lewisburg Borough Council are hereby
authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the Borough of Lewisburg,
Articles of Incorporation for said authority in the form required by said Act,
which Articles of Incorporation shall set forth among other things:
A. That the name of said Authority is Lewisburg Area Joint Sewer
Authority;
B. That said Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.
C. That no other Authority organized under said Act or under the Act of
June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, is in existence in and for the incorporating
municipalities, except East Buffalo Municipal Authority heretofore
organized pursuant to Certificate of Incorporation dated June 28, 1948,
Lewisburg Municipal Authority heretofore organized pursuant to
Certificate of Incorporation dated March 22, 1950, Lewisburg School
Authority heretofore organized pursuant to Certificate of Incorporation
dated June 28, 1950, Eastern Union County Authority (school)
heretofore organized pursuant to Certificate of Incorporation dated
March 13, 1951, Lewisburg Joint Secondary School Authority
heretofore organized pursuant to Certificate of Incorporation dated
January 24, 1952.
D. That the names of the incorporating municipalities are the Township of
East Buffalo and the Borough of Lewisburg, both situate in Union
County, Pennsylvania; and
E. That there shall be nine members of the Board of the Authority, five
appointed by the Township of East Buffalo and four appointed by the
Borough of Lewisburg. The said Articles of Incorporation shall set forth
the names and addresses of the municipal authorities of the Township,
and of the Borough, and the names, addresses, appointing municipality
and terms of office (which shall commence on the date of appointment)
of the first members of the Board of the Authority which are as follows:
(Here followed the names, addresses, terms of office of the first
Authority Board members.) [Amended 5-15-2012 by Ord. No. 1015]
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-3
1:9
§ 11-3. Procedures for incorporation.
The proper officials of the Borough are hereby directed as required by the
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended, to publish notice of this
article and of the day upon which said Articles of Incorporation will be
filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; to file said
articles, together with a certified copy of this article, and the necessary
proofs of publication with the Secretary of the Commonwealth; and to do
all other things necessary and appropriate to effect the incorporation of
Lewisburg Area Joint Sewer Authority.
§ 11-3 LEWISBURG CODE § 11-3
1:10
ARTICLE II
Buffalo Valley Recreation Authority1
[Adopted 4-15-1980 by Ord. No. 80-3]
§ 11-4. Intention to create Authority.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Lewisburg, Union County,
Pennsylvania, constituting the "Municipal Authority" of that Borough, as
defined in the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, May 2, P.L. 382, as
amended and supplemented (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) signifies its intention to
organize, together with East Buffalo, Kelly, Buffalo and/or Union Townships,
a joint authority under the provisions of the Act.
§ 11-5. Name.
The name of the proposed joint authority is the "Lewisburg Area Recreation
Authority, referred to throughout this article as "the Authority."2
§ 11-6. Articles of Incorporation. [Amended 7-17-1990 by Ord. No.
860]
The Articles of Incorporation of the Authority as set forth herein are hereby
approved and adopted.
LEWISBURG AREA RECREATION AUTHORITY3 ARTICLES OF
INCORPORATION
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
In compliance with the requirements of the "Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945" (the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented,
53 P.S. § 301 et seq.), the Township of East Buffalo and the Borough of
Lewisburg, County of Union, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, pursuant to
ordinances duly enacted by the Township and the Borough which authorize
and direct the formation of an Authority under the Act, do hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority shall be the Lewisburg Area Recreation
Authority.4
2. The Authority is formed under the "Municipality Authorities Act of
1945."
1. Editor’s Note: Resolution No. 13-01, adopted 2-19-2013, changed the name of the
Authority from the "Lewisburg Area Recreation Authority" to the "Buffalo Valley
Recreation Authority."
2. Editor’s Note: Resolution No. 13-01, adopted 2-19-2013, changed the name of the
Authority from the "Lewisburg Area Recreation Authority" to the "Buffalo Valley
Recreation Authority."
3. Editor’s Note: Resolution No. 13-01, adopted 2-19-2013, changed the name of the
Authority from the "Lewisburg Area Recreation Authority" to the "Buffalo Valley
Recreation Authority."
4. Editor’s Note: Resolution No. 13-01, adopted 2-19-2013, changed the name of the
Authority from the "Lewisburg Area Recreation Authority" to the "Buffalo Valley
Recreation Authority."
§ 11-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-6
1:11
3. Except for the following, no other authorities have been organized
by the municipalities named in paragraph 4 under the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945" or under the Act approved June 28, 1935, P.L.
463:
3.1. Lewisburg Area Joint Sewer Authority—incorporated by East
Buffalo Township and the Borough of Lewisburg on March 3,
1970.
3.2. East Buffalo Municipal Authority—incorporated by East Buffalo
Township on June 28, 1948.
3.3. Lewisburg Municipal Authority—incorporated by the Borough of
Lewisburg on February 6, 1950.
4. The names of the incorporating municipalities are:
4.1. Township of East Buffalo.
4.2. Borough of Lewisburg.
5. The names and addresses of the municipal authorities of each of
the incorporating municipalities are as follows: (Here followed the
names and addresses of various municipal officials from each of the
incorporating municipalities)
6. The names, addresses, and initial terms of office of the first members
of the Board of the Authority, all of whom are residents of the
appointing municipality, are as follows: (Here followed the names,
addresses and terms of office of the first Authority Board members.)
7. The terms of office of the first members of the Authority shall
commence on the day of appointment and shall be computed from
January 1, 1981.
8. The ordinances authorizing the incorporation of said Authority,
certified from the records of each municipality, together with proofs of
advertisement of the notice of filing of these Articles of Incorporation,
are submitted with these articles.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Township of Buffalo and the Borough of
Lewisburg, County of Union, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, have caused
these Articles of Incorporation to be duly executed on behalf of the
Authority by their proper officers duly authorized and under their
municipal seals this 15th day of April, 1980. (There followed the seals and
signatures of the various municipal officials from each of the incorporating
municipalities.)
§ 11-7. Representatives.
The individuals to be designated in the Articles of Incorporation (Exhibit
A) as representatives of the Borough are specifically appointed members of
the Board of the Authority for the terms of office as set out following their
respective names.
A. The terms of office shall commence on the date of appointment and
shall be computed from January 1, 1981.
§ 11-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 11-8
1:12
§ 11-8. Purposes of Authority.
The purpose of the Authority shall be to acquire, hold, construct, improve,
maintain, operate, own, and lease (either in the capacity of lessor or lessee)
projects of the following kind and character:
§ 11-9. Procedures for incorporation.
A. Buildings to be devoted wholly or partially for public use.
B. Parks.
C. Recreation grounds and facilities.
D. Swimming pools.
E. Playgrounds.
F. Other area community projects and activities.
A. The Mayor and the President of Borough Council are hereby authorized
and directed to execute the Articles of Incorporation of the Authority on
behalf of the Borough.
B. The Borough Secretary is hereby authorized and directed:
(1) To affix to the Articles of Incorporation the seal of the Borough;
(2) To attest to the signatures of the Mayor and the President of
Borough Council;
(3) To cause notice of intention to file the Articles of Incorporation to
be published as required by law;
(4) To file the Articles of Incorporation, together with a certified copy
of this article and required proof of publication, with the Secretary
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and
(5) To perform any and all acts necessary to effect and establish the
Lewisburg Area Recreation Authority.5
5. Editor’s Note: Resolution No. 13-01, adopted 2-19-2013, changed the name of the
Authority from the "Lewisburg Area Recreation Authority" to the "Buffalo Valley
Recreation Authority."
§ 11-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-9
1:13
Chapter 32
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire insurance proceeds — See Ch. 174.
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 40.
Open burning — See Ch. 125.
Pensions — See Ch. 72.
Police Department — See Ch. 80.
§ 32-1. Designation of fire company.
The William Cameron Engine Company of Lewisburg, Pennsylvania, a
nonprofit corporation organized and existing under and by virtue of the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, with principal facilities located at 11
Buffalo Road, Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania, is hereby designated
as the officially recognized fire company for the Borough.
§ 32-2. Duties of fire company.
The aforesaid fire company is hereby authorized to perform the following
activities:
§ 32-3. Additional authorized activities.
In addition to actually participating in the activities of the fire company
as authorized in § 32-2 of this chapter, or in going to or returning from
A. To provide such services to the Borough as may be necessary for the
protection of property and persons situate therein, which include, by
way of example and not of limitation, the extinguishment and
prevention of loss of life and property from fire, automobile accidents,
medical emergencies, hazardous materials incidents and other
dangerous situations.
B. To provide nonemergency and public service functions, such as, again
by way of example and not of limitation, removing water from property
after storms, and assisting in the removal, abatement and prevention of
damage or injury to persons or property, whether through natural
causes or man-made situations.
C. To conduct and participate in such training activities and drills, either
within or outside of the Borough, as may be deemed necessary by the
officers of the said fire company to maintain proficiency in providing
service.
D. To respond to calls and provide services to municipalities outside of the
Borough.
§ 11-9 LEWISBURG CODE § 32-3
32:14
any activity, the members of the aforesaid fire company are also hereby
authorized to perform the following activities:
Chapter 40
FIREMAN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 32.
Fire insurance proceeds — See Ch. 174.
Open burning — See Ch. 125.
Police Department — See Ch. 80.
§ 40-1. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Association.
§ 40-2. Certification to Auditor General.
The Borough Council shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the
Commonwealth, the name(s) of the active associations and the percentage
of service they contribute to the protection of the Borough. Such
certification shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
A. To engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice, test or
parade when duly called for or authorized by an officer or officers of the
said fire company.
B. To engage in fund-raising activities for the said fire company when
authorized by an officer or officers of such fire company.
C. To engage in the performance of any other duty or activity authorized
by any officer of the said fire company.
A. The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged in
providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the Borough of
Lewisburg.
(1) William Cameron Engine Co. Volunteer Firemen's Relief
Association
(2) The above named association has been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
B. The above named Association(s) of the Borough is designated the
proper association to receive such funds as are due and payable to the
Borough Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania from
the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 32-3 FIREMAN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION § 40-3
40:15
§ 40-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the Borough Treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Borough Treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of 1984 Act of
December 18, No. 205, § 701 et seq. as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania. Such
monies received by the Borough Treasurer from the State Treasurer shall
be distributed to the duly recognized association(s) within 60 days of
receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the percentage of
service established in the certification to the Auditor General and with other
provisions of the Act.
Chapter 54
LIBRARIES
§ 40-3 LEWISBURG CODE § 40-3
54:16
ARTICLE I
Himmelreich Library
[Adopted 9-29-1971 by Ord. No. 623]
§ 54-1. Library to be Borough agent.
A. The library shall act as the agent of the Borough of Lewisburg
government to provide public library service to the residents and
taxpayers of the Borough of Lewisburg for and on behalf of the Borough
of Lewisburg government.
B. The Board of Directors shall prepare and present to the Borough
Council by November 1 of each year a budget for the following year and
such reports as are required by §§ 413 and 414 of the Library Code and
shall give free library service to the residents and taxpayers as provided
in § 415 of the Library Code.
§ 54-1 LIBRARIES § 54-1
54:17
Chapter 65
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 32.
Pensions — See Ch. 72.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 76.
Police Department — See Ch. 80.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 86.
Taxation — See Ch. 324.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 54-1 LEWISBURG CODE § 54-1
54:18
ARTICLE I
Independent Auditor
[Adopted 10-10-1966 by Ord. No. 543]
§ 65-1. Independent Auditor.
A. This section is adopted pursuant to the Borough Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act No. 581 of February 1, 1966, its
supplements and amendments thereto.
B. The office of independent auditor is hereby created for the Borough of
Lewisburg and commencing with the fiscal year 1966, such
independent auditor shall make an examination of the accounting
records of the Borough of Lewisburg and perform the other duties and
exercise the powers as conferred upon him by Subdivision K of Article
XI of the Borough Code Act No. 581 of February 1, 1966, its
supplements and amendments.
C. A certified public accountant, registered in Pennsylvania, a firm of
certified public accountants so registered, or a competent public
accountant, or a competent firm of public accountants, shall be
appointed, annually, by resolution before the close of the fiscal year
1966 and before the close of each succeeding fiscal year to perform the
duties of independence auditor, as prescribed herein.
§ 65-1 LIBRARIES § 65-1
54:19

ARTICLE II
Multiple Offices Held By One Person
[Adopted 2-20-1974 by Ord. No. 74-1; amended in its entirety
10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
§ 65-2. Manager and Treasurer may be same person.
The offices of Manager and Treasurer of the Borough of Lewisburg may be
held by the same person.
§ 65-2 LIBRARIES § 65-2
54:21

ARTICLE III
Borough Manager
[Adopted 4-18-2000 by Ord. No. 921]
§ 65-3. Office created.
The Office of Borough Manager be and the same is hereby created for the
Borough of Lewisburg.
§ 65-4. Eligibility.
Any person who is a citizen of the United States, is at least 21 years of
age and has the qualifications and experience necessary to perform the
prescribed duties of the Borough Manager, shall be eligible to hold the
Office of Borough Manager; provided, however, that neither the Mayor nor
any member of the Borough Council shall be eligible to hold such office.
§ 65-5. Appointment.
Borough Council shall, at its reorganization meeting, appoint or reappoint,
by a majority vote of all its members, one person to fill the Office of Borough
Manager.
§ 65-6. Term. [Amended 12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 924]
Unless removed from office as hereinafter provided or as otherwise
provided in a written employment agreement with the person appointed as
Borough Manager, the Borough Manager shall hold office, subject to such
terms and conditions of employment as shall be established, from time to
time, by Borough Council or as otherwise provided in a written employment
with the person appointed as Borough Manager, until the first Monday
of January of the even-numbered year following appointment and until a
successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 65-7. Vacancy.
In the event of a vacancy in the Office of Borough Manager, Borough
Council shall appoint, by a majority of all its member, one person to fill said
office for the remainder of the then current term.
§ 65-8. Removal. [Amended 12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 924]
The Borough Manager shall be subject to removal from office by Borough
Council at any time, with or without cause, by a vote of a majority of all of
its members.
§ 65-9. Bond.
After initial appointment and before proceeding with the duties of the office,
the Borough Manager shall give a bond to the Borough, in at least the sum
of the Borough's Highway Aid allocation of $60,000 whichever is less, with
§ 65-3 LIBRARIES § 65-9
54:23
a bonding company as surety to be approved by Borough Council, said bond
to be conditioned on the faithful performance of duties. The premium on the
said bond shall be paid by the Borough.
§ 65-10. General powers and duties.
Under the direction of Borough Council, the Borough Manager shall carry
on the business of the Borough and powers and duties shall relate to
the general management of all Borough business not expressly imposed
or conferred, by statute or otherwise, upon any other Borough Officer.
With approval of Borough Council, the Mayor may delegate to the Borough
Manager, subject to recall by written notification at any time, any of his nonlegislative
and non-judicial powers and duties.
§ 65-11. Specific powers and duties.
The Borough Manager shall have the following specific powers and duties,
which shall be subject to change at any time by ordinance enacted by
Borough Council:
A. Supervision over departments. The Borough Manager shall have direct
supervision over and shall be responsible to Borough Council for the
administration and operation of the following Borough departments and
their employees:
(1) Administrative Department.
(2) Public Works Department.
(3) Solid Waste Department.
(4) Planning Department.
(5) Code Enforcement Department.
B. Representative, administrative and advisory duties. The Borough
Manager shall:
(1) Represent the Borough in all matters concerning those
departments of the Borough over which the Borough Manager has
supervision, except as otherwise provided in § 65-10 of this article.
(2) Ensure the orderly administration and operation of the Borough
and the aforesaid departments.
(3) Supervise and direct, as required, the work and performance of the
aforesaid departments and all employees thereof.
(4) Effect coordination and cooperation among all departments of the
Borough, including those not specifically set forth hereinabove.
(5) Arrange and attend conferences with any member of Borough
Council and proper departmental supervisors in order to resolve
§ 65-9 LEWISBURG CODE § 65-11
54:24
complaints, consider suggestions or discuss measures advanced by
Borough Council.
(6) Attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law and supervise
the performance and faithful execution of such contracts, except
insofar as such duties are expressly imposed or conferred by
statute or otherwise, upon any other Borough officer.
(7) Report to Borough Council on all matters of significance, making
recommendations when appropriate.
(8) Report promptly to Borough Council on any matter beyond the
authority of the Borough Manager or the scope of the office for
consideration and action by Borough Council.
(9) Make such reports to Borough Council upon the affairs and
financial condition of the Borough as Council may, from time to
time, direct.
(10) Supervise the preparation of the agenda for all regular and special
meetings of Borough Council.
(11) Prepare and submit to Borough Council a tentative budget for the
next fiscal year and when Council shall direct.
(12) Present annually to Borough, on or before February 1 of each year,
a report of the work performed by the departments which the
Borough Manager supervises, with a detailed statement of all
monies received and expended, during the preceding fiscal year.
C. Attendance at meetings. The Borough Manager shall attend all
meetings of Borough Council and make such reports and
recommendations to Council as are required in this article and as the
Borough Manager shall deem expedient.
D. Purchases and expenditures. The Borough Manager shall act as
purchasing agent for the Borough.
(1) The Borough Manager shall have full power to approve all
purchase orders in amounts of less than $10,500 for those
departments of the Borough over which the Borough Manager has
supervision. [Amended 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 1034]
(2) The Borough Manager shall have full power to pay any and all
authorized expenses incurred by the Borough without prior
authorization of Borough Council to do so; provided, however, that
all such expenditures shall be subsequently ratified by Borough
Council at its next regularly scheduled Council meeting.
E. Fiscal management. The Borough Manager shall assist and cooperate
with the Borough Treasurer in the investment of excess operating funds
of the Borough in certificates of deposit or like funds of banking
institutions so as to achieve the maximum income to the Borough
§ 65-11 LIBRARIES § 65-11
54:25
§ 65-12. Compensation.
Borough Council shall establish a reasonable compensation for the Borough
Manager.
consistent with sound and prudent investment practices and in the
prompt reporting of each such investment, in writing, to the Chairman
of the Finance Committee of the Borough.
F. Cooperation with Council. The Borough Manager shall cooperate with
Borough Council at all times and in all matters in order that the best
interests of the Borough and the general public may be served.
G. Other duties. The Borough Manager shall perform such other duties as
Borough Council, from time to time, by ordinance, delegate to the
Borough Manager.
§ 65-11 LEWISBURG CODE § 65-12
54:26
ARTICLE IV
Tax Collector
[Adopted 3-18-2003 by Ord. No. 948]
§ 65-13. Commission rate.
Pursuant to § 35 of the Local Tax Collection Law of Pennsylvania, the
Lewisburg Borough Tax Collector, hereinafter referred to as the "Tax
Collector," shall receive a commission rate fixed at 2% of all Borough taxes
collected.
§ 65-14. Service charge for copy of tax bill.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to impose and collect a service
charge of $5 for each copy of a tax bill, other than the original tax bill, that
the Tax Collector is required to provide. The said charge shall be payable
in advance at the time the copy is requested. The purpose of this service
charge is to pay for the costs and expenses incurred and the time required
to provide the said copy.
§ 65-15. Service charge on returned checks. [Amended 12-20-2016
by Ord. No. 1043]
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to collect any fees levied by banks
or other financial institutions and to impose and collect a service charge
of $25 for each check or draft delivered to the Tax Collector in payment of
taxes that is returned to the Tax Collector for any reason. The purpose of
this service charge is to pay for the costs and expenses incurred and the
time required in processing the said returned check or draft.
§ 65-16. Service charge on tax certification. [Amended 12-20-2016
by Ord. No. 1043]
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to impose and collect a service
charge of $25 for a tax certification, certifying as to the status of taxes
collected by the Tax Collector. The purpose of this service charge is to pay
for costs and expenses incurred and the time required to provide the said
certification.
§ 65-13 LIBRARIES § 65-16
54:27
Chapter 72
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 32.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 65.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 86.
§ 65-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 65-16
54:28
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)6
§ 72-1. (Reserved)
6. Editor’s Note: Former Article I, Police Pension Plan, adopted 7-21-1998 by Ord. No. 908,
as amended, was deleted pursuant to Ord. No. 1021, adopted 4-16-2013, which ordinance
terminated said pension plan.
§ 72-1 LIBRARIES § 72-1
54:29

ARTICLE II
Nonuniformed Employees
[Adopted 3-19-2002 by Res. No. 02-02]
§ 72-2. Amending and restating.
The Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan ordinance is hereby amended
by continuing and restating a Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan and
providing for administration, eligibility for benefits, source and allocation of
funds and other matters associated with its continuation and establishment
in accordance with the terms and conditions of the attached amendment
and restatement of the Borough of Lewisburg Nonuniformed Employees
Pension Plan.7
7. Editor's Note: The Borough of Lewisburg Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan is on file
in the Borough office.
§ 72-2 LIBRARIES § 72-2
54:31
Chapter 76
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
315.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 152.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 76-1. Creation.
The Borough of Lewisburg hereby creates a Planning Commission and
a Planning Department under the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of July 31, 1968, as amended.
§ 76-2. Composition. [Amended 3-21-1989 by Ord. No. 846]
The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall
be residents of the Borough of Lewisburg and five of whom shall not be
officers or employees of the Borough. The Borough Council shall appoint
the members of the Planning Commission. All members of the Planning
Commission shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for
necessary and reasonable expenses. The term of office of the members shall
be for four years, or until a successor is appointed and qualified, except
that the terms of the members first appointed shall be so fixed that no
more than three shall be reappointed or replaced during any calendar year.
Any member may be removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance, or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of Borough
Council taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the
intent to take such a vote and after a hearing if the member shall request
such a hearing in writing. In the event of vacancies, Borough Council shall
appoint a member to fill the unexpired term.
§ 76-3. Director of Department.
Borough Council shall appoint a Director of the Planning Department;
provided, however, that neither the Mayor nor any member of Borough
Council shall be eligible to hold such office. The Director shall serve under
contract for the period thereof or, if not under contract, shall hold office
until the first Monday of January of the even-numbered year following his
appointment, or until his successor is appointed and qualified. The Director
may be removed from office for malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance
in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of Borough Council taken
after the Director has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take
such a vote and after a hearing if the Director shall request such a hearing
in writing, unless the Director is under contract, in which case the terms
of the contract shall provide for such removal. In the event of a vacancy,
Borough Council shall appoint a temporary Director to fill the unexpired
§ 72-2 LEWISBURG CODE § 76-3
76:32
term. The Director shall receive such compensation as Borough Council
shall deem appropriate.
§ 76-4. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. The Planning Commission shall at the request of Borough Council have
the power and shall be required to:
(1) Prepare a comprehensive plan for the development of the Borough
as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, and
present it for the consideration of Borough Council; and
(a) Maintain and keep on file records of its actions, provided that
all records and files of the Planning Commission shall be in the
possession of Borough Council.
B. The Planning Commission at the request of Borough Council may:
(1) Make recommendations to Borough Council concerning the
adoption or amendment of an official map;
(2) Prepare and present to Borough Council a zoning ordinance, and
make recommendations to Borough Council on proposed
amendments to it as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code;
(3) Prepare, recommend, and administer subdivision and land
development, and planned residential development regulations, as
set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code and the ordinances of
the Borough;
(4) Prepare and present to Borough Council a building code and a
housing code and make recommendations concerning proposed
amendments thereto;
(5) Do such other act or make such studies as may be necessary to
fulfill the duties and obligations imposed by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, this chapter, or any other ordinance
of the Borough;
(6) Prepare and present to Borough Council an environmental study;
(7) Submit to Borough Council a recommended capital improvements
program;
(8) Promote public interest in, and an understanding of, the
comprehensive plan and planning;
(9) Make recommendations to governmental, civic, and private
agencies and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of
such agencies and individuals;
§ 76-3 PLANNING COMMISSION § 76-4
76:33
§ 76-5. Director's duties.
The Director of the Planning Department shall have the following powers
and duties:
(10) Hold public hearings and meetings;
(11) Require from other departments and agencies of the Borough such
available information as relates to the work of the Planning
Commission; and
(12) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and land surveys with the consent of the owner.
C. The Planning Commission shall prepare a monthly report of its
activities and actions and submit such report to the Director of the
Planning Department.
D. The Planning Commission shall comply with all provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
A. The powers and duties formerly associated with the Administrative
Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, Zoning Officer, and Building Permit
Officer;
B. Administer the Planning Department;
C. Administer and enforce all Borough Codes and the provisions of the
zoning, subdivision, and building ordinances of the Borough;
D. Investigate all reported violations of Borough Codes and the provisions
of the zoning, subdivision, and building ordinances of the Borough,
whether reported by the Planning Commission, residents of the
Borough, Borough Council, or any other individual;
E. Receive and review applications for zoning and building permits and
issue such permits and certificates of occupancy in accordance with the
zoning and building ordinances of the Borough;
F. Assist the Planning Commission in the preparation and presentation to
Borough Council of a zoning ordinance;
G. Assist the Planning Commission in the preparation, recommendation,
and administration of subdivision and land development, and planned
residential development regulations, as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and in the ordinances of the Borough;
H. Assist the Planning Commission in the preparation and presentation to
Borough Council of a building code and a housing code;
I. Attend all meetings of Borough Council;
J. Report to Borough Council each month on the activities and actions of
the Planning Department and the Planning Commission;
§ 76-4 LEWISBURG CODE § 76-5
76:34
§ 76-6. Funding.
The Planning Commission and the Planning Department may, with the
consent of Borough Council, accept and utilize any funds, personnel, or
other assistance made available by Union County, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or the Federal Government, or any of their agencies, or from
private sources. Borough Council may enter into agreements or contracts
regarding the acceptance or utilization of the funds or assistance in
accordance with the governmental procedures of the Borough.
Chapter 80
(RESERVED)
Chapter 86
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 65. Pensions — See Ch. 72.
K. Schedule all hearings for the Zoning Hearing Board and notify the
Planning Commission of all such hearings;
L. Acquire from other departments and agencies of the Borough such
available information as relates to the work of the Planning
Department; and
M. In the performance of his functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and inspections with the consent of the owner.
§ 76-5 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 76-6
86:35

ARTICLE I
Mayor
[Adopted 3-15-1978 by Ord. No. 78-6; amended in its entirety
10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
§ 86-1. Compensation of Mayor.
The Mayor of the Borough of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania, shall
receive compensation in the amount of $1,800 per year, payable monthly.
§ 86-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 86-1
86:37

ARTICLE II
Borough Council
[Adopted 3-15-1978 by Ord. No. 78-7; amended in its entirety
10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
§ 86-2. Compensation of Council.
The members of the Borough Council of the Borough of Lewisburg, Union
County, Pennsylvania, shall receive compensation in the amount of $100 per
month, payable monthly.
§ 86-2 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 86-2
86:39
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 100
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conduct — See Ch. 142.
Loitering — See Ch. 208.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
§ 86-2 LEWISBURG CODE § 86-2
86:40
ARTICLE I
Consumption and Possession in Public
[Adopted 7-16-1985 by Ord. No. 805]
§ 100-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words or terms shall have the meanings
and shall be construed according to the definitions indicated hereinbelow,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context of this article:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 1/2% of alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage
purposes.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can or other vessel in which alcoholic beverages
are contained.
§ 100-2. Consumption.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any quantity upon any
public street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare, parking lot, or other
public property within the Borough of Lewisburg, whether such person is
on foot or is in or on a motor vehicle and whether such vehicle is moving or
is stationary, nor shall any person consume any alcoholic beverage within
five feet of any public street, alley, way or thoroughfare while on a private
stairway, doorway or other private property open to public view without
the express or implied permission of the owner, his agent or other party in
lawful possession thereof.
§ 100-3. Possession.
No person shall possess any container of alcoholic beverage, whether
wrapped or unwrapped, which is subject to public view and which has been
opened or on which the seal has been broken in any manner, on any public
street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, thoroughfare, parking lot, or other public
property within the Borough of Lewisburg, whether such person is on foot
or is in or on a motor vehicle and whether such vehicle is moving or is
stationary, nor shall any person possess any container of alcoholic beverage
within five feet of any public street, alley, way or thoroughfare while on
a private stairway, doorway or other private property open to public view
without the express or implied permission of the owner, his agent or other
person in lawful possession thereof.
§ 100-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of §§ 100-2 and 100-3 of this article, shall not apply to
interior portions of any private dwelling, habitat or building; to the
consumption or possession by persons in the areas herein designated of any
duly prescribed and dispensed medication having alcoholic content as set
forth in § 100-1 hereof; or to premises duly licensed by the Pennsylvania
§ 100-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 100-4
86:41
Liquor Control Board and to persons then and there patrons of said
licensee.
§ 100-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, plus costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period
not to exceed 90 days.
§ 100-4 LEWISBURG CODE § 100-5
86:42
ARTICLE II
Permits for Social Gatherings
[Adopted 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1027]
§ 100-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
BUILDING — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a
permanent location on the land or that is attached to something having a
temporary or permanent location on the land. Tents, covered patios, open
porches and decks shall be treated as buildings under this article.
DEPARTMENT — The Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department or any
other police department serving the Borough of Lewisburg.
EXCLUDED PARTY — Any federal, state or local government or any agency
or authority thereof or created thereby, any licensed commercial
establishment, or any school district, college or university.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.[Added 7-21-2015 by Ord.
No. 1036]
GATHERING — A party or event involving a group of persons who have
assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or activity on private
property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, corporation,
fraternal organization, or other entity or association consisting of one or
more individuals.
POLICE COST — The cost to the Department for services rendered in
responding to a call at a regulated social gathering or otherwise
maintaining order and public peace and safety and stopping public
disturbances at a regulated social gathering, including, but not limited
to, the salaries and other compensation of police officers, appropriate
administrative cost allocable thereto, prorated costs of equipment, the cost
of repairing damaged Department equipment and property, and the cost of
any medical treatment of injured police officers. This cost shall either be
fixed from time to time for a typical police response or be determined on a
case-by-case basis by the Chief of Police of the Department.
PREMISES — Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium,
hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room,
park or any other place of assembly, located on private property, whether
occupied on a temporary or permanent basis as a dwelling or specifically for
a party or other social function and whether owned, leased, rented or used
with or without permission or compensation.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land, building or other structure, including,
but not limited to, single and multifamily dwellings and commercial and
§ 100-6 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 100-6
86:43
industrial buildings, not owned or otherwise regulated and controlled by an
excluded party.
REGULATED SOCIAL GATHERING — A gathering of persons for the
purpose of social interaction where alcoholic beverages are served or
consumed and which is attended at any one time by more than 75 persons,
regardless of age.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust and other similar
materials.[Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 1036]
§ 100-7. Permit required; application.
A. Unless the regulated social gathering is approved and authorized by an
excluded party, no regulated social gathering shall be held without a
permit therefor issued by the Chief of Police of the Department.
B. In order to obtain a permit for a regulated social gathering, the
person(s) organizing, sponsoring or hosting a regulated social
gathering shall file with the Department an application for the said
permit on an application form provided by the Borough of Lewisburg.
C. A fee, as set by resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Lewisburg from time to time, shall accompany a permit application.8
The fee shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of the cost of
reviewing and investigating the permit application, the inspection of
the premises prior to the regulated social gathering, and monitoring
during the regulated social gathering.
D. An application for a permit for a regulated social gathering shall be filed
no less than five business days prior to the date of the regulated social
gathering. Failure to file a timely application for a permit may result in
a denial of a permit.
E. The application for a permit for a regulated social gathering shall
include the following:
(1) The name, local and permanent address, telephone number,
including cell phone number, and age of all persons organizing,
sponsoring, or hosting the regulated social gathering;
(2) The name, local and permanent address, telephone number,
including cell phone number, of all persons directly responsible for
the regulated social gathering, hereinafter referred to as the
"responsible persons";
(3) The specific address and location of the regulated social gathering;
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. A370, Fees.
§ 100-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 100-7
86:44
§ 100-8. Grounds for denial of permit.
A permit for a regulated social gathering may be denied for any of the
following reasons:
(4) The square footage of any and all buildings and open space on the
premises that will be occupied by persons attending the regulated
social gathering;
(5) The maximum number of persons who will attend the regulated
social gathering;
(6) The time that the regulated social gathering will start and the time
it will end;
(7) A description of the entertainment, if any, that will be present at the
regulated social gathering;
(8) The identity of the vendor source of alcoholic beverages for the
regulated social gathering;
(9) The manner in which the alcoholic beverages will be served;
(10) The manner in which the furnishing of alcoholic beverages or the
consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors will be prevented;
(11) The method in which the number of persons attending the
regulated social gathering will be regulated and/or controlled;
(12) Whether or not security will be provided and, if provided, the
manner in which such security will be provided;
(13) Whether the regulated social gathering will be utilizing interior
and/or exterior spaces; and [Amended 7-21-2015 by Ord. No.
1036]
(14) A notice indicating that by signing the application the applicant(s)
acknowledge the accountability and conditions set forth therein,
including, but not limited to, that any police cost associated with
enforcement actions required for violations associated with the
regulated social gathering will be invoiced to the applicant(s).
F. A permit for a regulated social gathering will be granted or denied
within two business days of the receipt of the application for such
permit by the Department. If a permit is denied, such denial shall be in
writing and delivered to the permit applicant.
G. If a permit is granted, the person(s) organizing, sponsoring or hosting
the regulated social gathering shall have a copy of the permit readily
available on the premises and produce it upon request of the
Department or other proper authority.
A. A violation, within 30 days prior to the submission of the permit
application, of this article or Lewisburg Borough's Disorderly Gathering
§ 100-7 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 100-8
86:45
§ 100-9. Rules for conduct of regulated social gatherings.
§ 100-10. Appeals.
The denial of a permit for a regulated social gathering may be appealed to
the Borough Council of the Borough of Lewisburg pursuant to the provisions
of the Local Agency Act. Such appeal shall be filed within two business days
from the date of the denial of the permit.
§ 100-11. Unlawful acts.
The following shall be unlawful and constitute a violation of this article:
Ordinance No. 9309 by any person organizing, sponsoring or hosting a
regulated social gathering.
B. A violation, within 90 days prior to the submission of the permit
application, of the Pennsylvania Liquor Code for serving alcoholic
beverages to a minor or a prior conviction of any crime under the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code constituting a misdemeanor or felony by any
person organizing, sponsoring or hosting a regulated social gathering
on any premises where a regulated social gathering was held.
C. Failure to provide a complete permit application, including
accompanying documentation.
D. Failure to file a timely permit application or pay the required
application fee.
E. An open or unresolved Property Maintenance Code violation related to
the address where the regulated social gathering is to occur. [Added
7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 1036]
A. All regulated social gatherings shall be scheduled after 10:00 a.m. and
end by 1:00 a.m.
B. No beverages shall be consumed from glass bottles or glass containers
at any regulated social gathering.
C. One portable toilet shall be provided for every 100 persons attending a
regulated social gathering.
D. The Department may monitor and assess the premises from time to
time during the regulated social gathering to verify compliance with the
regulated social gathering permit.
A. For any person to organize, sponsor, host, attend, or participate in a
regulated social gathering in the absence of a permit therefor issued by
the Chief of Police of the Department;
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 142, Art. III, Disorderly Gatherings.
§ 100-8 LEWISBURG CODE § 100-11
86:46
§ 100-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 to the
Borough of Lewisburg, together with costs of prosecution, or to be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 10 days, or both. Any fines, costs
or other penalties imposed under this article for violation thereof may be
collected by the Borough of Lewisburg pursuant to any civil or municipal
claim remedy for the collection of debts and obligations due it or as
otherwise provided or permitted by law.
§ 100-13. Enforcement.
B. For the owner of the premises or any person occupying or in control of
the premises to allow a regulated social gathering to take place on the
premises in the absence of a permit therefor issued by the Chief of
Police of the Department;
C. For the owner of the premises or any person occupying or in control of
the premises to allow a regulated social gathering to take place or
continue on the premises in violation of any special conditions imposed
upon the regulated social gathering by the permit;
D. To furnish false information on the permit application for a regulated
social gathering;
E. For any person who organizes, sponsors or hosts a regulated social
gathering not to be identified as such organizer, sponsor or host on the
permit application for the regulated social gathering;
F. Failure to comply with the representations set forth in the permit
application for a regulated social gathering regarding the maximum
number of persons attending the regulated social gathering or to
comply with any special conditions imposed upon the regulated social
gathering by the permit;
G. Serving minors alcoholic beverages or allowing the consumption of
such beverages by minors at a regulated social gathering or continuing
a regulated social gathering after the time limit set forth in the
application;
H. Failure to have a copy of the regulated social gathering permit readily
available on the premises and/or to produce such permit on request by
the Department or other proper authority; and
I. Failure to disperse as provided in § 100-13A of this article.
J. Failure to clean up the exterior premises of garbage and rubbish by
9:00 a.m. the morning following the designated start time of a regulated
social gathering. [Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 1036]
§ 100-11 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 100-13
86:47
A. The Department shall have the authority to disperse persons, upon
notice, who attend a regulated social gathering for which no permit has
been issued.
B. In addition to any fines, costs and penalties imposed under this article
for violation thereof, responsible persons may also be assessed police
cost, as well as being assessed by the Department for separate police
cost associated with control and dispersal issues under this article.
C. Nothing in this article shall limit the Borough of Lewisburg from filing
an action in equity to enjoin a regulated social gathering held in
violation of this article, nor limit the Department from making arrests
for any violation of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
the ordinances of the Borough of Lewisburg.
§ 100-13 LEWISBURG CODE § 100-13
86:48
Chapter 106
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 134. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
§ 100-13 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 100-13
86:49

ARTICLE I
Keeping and Burial
[Adopted 8-5-1957 by Ord. No. 430]
§ 106-1. Keeping of certain animals restricted.
No person, firm or corporation shall keep any hogs, cattle, goats, sheep,
hive of bees, horses, chickens or other fowls within the Borough of
Lewisburg, except with special permission of the Borough Council.
§ 106-2. Regulations for keeping.
Special permission shall be granted by the Borough Council only upon the
following conditions:
§ 106-3. Burial of animals.
No person shall bury any horse, cattle, sheep or swine at any place within
the limits of the Borough. Any person burying any other dead animal within
the limits of the Borough shall be required to bury the same not less than
three feet below the surface of the ground.
§ 106-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
A. That such animals shall be kept in good condition, healthy, clean, and
free from disease.
B. That no pens, stables or coops, or other housing therefor, shall be
located within 100 feet of any dwelling house or within 50 feet of any
street.
C. That such animals shall not be kept in any cellar or in other part of any
dwelling, nor shall they be permitted to run at large.
D. That plans and specifications for pens, stables, coops, or other housing
facilities for such animals shall be submitted to Borough Council at the
time of request for special permission and shall provide adequate
provisions for lighting and ventilation.
E. That adequate provisions shall be made for the removal of refuse, food,
and excrement to prevent odors from developing therefrom.
F. That any permission granted by the Borough of Lewisburg may
stipulate the maximum number of animals or fowls which may be kept
on any premises and such permission may be revoked at any time when
any of the conditions or terms of the special permission are not
complied with.
§ 106-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 106-4
86:51

ARTICLE II
Abandonment of Animals
[Adopted 2-8-1960 by Ord. No. 463]
§ 106-5. Abandonment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any domestic animal in the
Borough of Lewisburg.
§ 106-6. Definitions.
As used in the article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDON — A temporary abandonment as well as a permanent
abandonment of such animal.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — A dog, cat, or any animal regularly raised, kept or
maintained on a farm, such as, but not limited to, a goat, cow, horse, pig,
sheep, and chicken.
§ 106-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 106-5 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 106-7
86:53

ARTICLE III
Running at Large
[Adopted 10-21-1997 by Ord. No. 906]
§ 106-8. Definitions.
The words and phrases when used in this article including, but not limited
to, "attack, cat, dog, domestic animal, humanely killed, humane society or
association for the prevention of cruelty to animals, kennel, licensed doctor
of veterinary, medicine, owner, permanent identification or permanently
identified, persons and vivisection," shall have, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in § 102 of the Dog Law of
December 7, 1982 (P.L. 784, No. 225), as amended (3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.),
except as follows:
ANIMAL — Any dog, cat, household pet or other domestic animal.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The person appointed, employed or
contractually retained by the Borough of Lewisburg whose duties shall
consist of enforcing the provisions of this article.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Borough of Lewisburg.
PLACE OF DETENTION — Any approved and licensed kennel appointed,
employed or contractually retained by the Borough of Lewisburg whose
duties shall consist of remaining so approved and licensed, maintaining
such establishment, keeping, boarding, feeding and maintaining dogs, cats,
household pets or other domestic animals detained as hereinafter provided
and enforcing the provisions of §§ 106-10 through 106-13 of this article.
POLICE CHIEF OF THE BUFFALO VALLEY REGIONAL POLICE
DEPARTMENT — The Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police
Department or, in his absence or unavailability, the acting Chief, head of
the department or ranking patrolman.[Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1014]
POLICE OFFICER — Any person employed by the Buffalo Valley Regional
Police Department as a patrolman whose duty it is to preserve peace, make
arrests and enforce the law.[Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
§ 106-9. Unlawful to allow animals to be on playing fields or to run
at large. [Amended 6-18-2002 by Ord. No. 940]
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to cause or permit such
animal to be within any enclosed or fenced-in playing field within the
Borough or to run at large, either upon the public streets, sidewalks,
highways, alleys or thoroughfares of the Borough or upon the property of
other than the owner of such animal, and unaccompanied by the owner.
Any such animal shall not be considered to be running at large if it is on a
leash not longer than six feet in length and under the control of a person
physically able to control it.
§ 106-8 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 106-10
86:55
§ 106-10. Seizure of animals. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1014]
Any animal found running at large as provided in § 106-9 of this article shall
be seized and detained by the Animal Control Officer or, in such officer's
absence or unavailability, the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional
Police Department or any police officer; provided, however, that the said
officer may humanely kill any animal found running at large as provided
in § 106-8 of this article who is deemed after due consideration by such
officer to constitute a threat to the public health and welfare or may kill any
animal such officer personally observes or catches in the act or pursuing,
wounding or killing any domestic animal, wounding or killing any dog, cat
or household pet, or pursuing, wounding or attacking any person, whether
or not such animal is licensed.
§ 106-11. Owners to be notified. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1014]
If the animal seized and detained as provided in § 106-10 of this article
bears a proper license tag or permanent identification or is otherwise
known to be properly licensed, the Animal Control Officer, Police Chief of
the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department or police officer detaining
such animal shall cause immediate notice to be sent, by registered or
certified mail with return receipt requested, to the person in whose name
the license was procured, or such person's agent, or who is otherwise
identified or known as the owner of such animal, advising such person of the
detention of the said animal, of the location of the place of detention, and
to claim such animal within five days after receipt thereof. Nothing herein
shall prevent or prohibit the said officer from also serving the aforesaid
notice personally and/or returning the seized animal to the owner thereof at
any time, whether before or after the aforesaid five day period.
§ 106-12. Maintenance of animal in kennel. [Amended 4-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 1014]
No animal detained as provided in § 106-10 of this article shall be sold for
the purpose of vivisection, or research, or be conveyed in any manner for
these purposes, but shall be properly kept, boarded, fed and maintained
in the place of detention, unless otherwise already returned to the owner
thereof,
A. If licensed, for a period of not less than five days after obtaining the
postal return receipt as provided in § 106-11 of this article, after which
time any such animal that has not then been claimed shall be dispensed
by the Animal Control Officer, or Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department, or his agent, either by sale, the proceeds
derived from which, after deducting the expenses of the animal's
detention and sale, shall be paid through the Pennsylvania Department
of Agriculture to the State Treasurer for credit to the State Dog law
§ 106-10 LEWISBURG CODE § 106-12
86:56
§ 106-13. Reclaiming of animal. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1014]
The owner of an animal seized and detained as provided in § 106-10 of
this article shall pay a penalty in the amount of $15 to the Borough and
also all reasonable expenses incurred by reason of such animal's detention
in the place of detention before it is returned to the owner or claimant
thereof; provided, however, that if the said animal does not bear a license
when detained and would otherwise require a license under and pursuant
to the aforesaid Dog Law, or any other applicable law or statute of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania then in effect, proof of proper licensure
must be demonstrated to the Animal Control Officer, Police Chief of the
Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department, police officer or place of
detention, as the case may be, prior to returning such animal to the owner
or claimant thereof. If proof of proper licensure cannot be demonstrated
by such owner or claimant, then the said animal cannot be returned to the
owner or claimant thereof until such time as a proper license has been
procured.
§ 106-14. Noise regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor or keep in custody
any animal within the Borough which, by frequent and habitual barking,
howling or yelping, creates unreasonably loud and disturbing noises of such
character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace, quiet and good
order of any neighborhood in the Borough. Any person who shall allow any
animal to habitually remain, be lodged or fed within any dwelling, building,
yard or enclosure which such person occupies or owns shall be considered
as harboring such animal.
Restricted Account, or by giving it to a humane society or association
for the prevention of cruelty to animals.
B. If unlicensed, for a period of not less than 48 hours, except for any
animal seriously ill, injured or forfeited with the owner's permission,
during which time any person may view such detained animal during
normal business hours and after which time such animal that has not
then been claimed shall be disposed by the Animal Control Officer or
Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department, or his
agent, either by humanely killing it or by giving it to a humane society
or association for the prevention of cruelty to animals.
A. Any person may request the Animal Control Officer or, in such officer's
absence or unavailability, the Mayor, Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department or any police officer to warn any person
who shall own, harbor or keep in custody any animal which, by frequent
and habitual barking, howling or yelping, creates unreasonably loud or
disturbing noises of such character, intensity and duration as to disturb
the peace, quiet and good order of any neighborhood in the Borough.
[Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
§ 106-12 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 106-14
86:57
§ 106-15. Unlawful acts. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to permit such animal to
injure any person by biting, jumping on, knocking down or attacking such
person. The Animal Control Officer, the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department or any police officer who has knowledge of an
animal which has attacked a person within the Borough shall file a written
report summarizing the circumstances of such attack with the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department and also with the police department having
jurisdiction in the municipality where the owner of the animal resides in the
event such owner resides outside of the Borough.
§ 106-16. Offensive odors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor or keep in custody
any animal in the Borough so as to create offensive odors or unsanitary
conditions which are a nuisance, menace or hazard to the health, welfare,
comfort or safety of the public.
§ 106-17. Defection.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to cause or permit such
animal to soil, defile, defecate, urinate or commit any nuisance on any lawn,
yard, common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park
or any other place where people congregate or walk, whether public or
private property, other than the property of the owner of such animal or of
another who consents prior thereto.
§ 106-18. Owner liable for property damage.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any animal to cause or permit such
animal to destroy any lawn, tree, shrub, plant, building or other property,
B. The aforesaid request shall be in writing, shall specifically identify the
name, if known, and the address or residence of such owner, harborer
or keeper, shall indicate the name of the person making the request and
such person's address, and shall be signed by such person.
C. Any warning given pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall include
a copy of this section and shall be delivered, either personally or by
certified mail, to such owner, harborer or keeper or to the residence
within the Borough of such owner, harborer or keeper.
D. A violation of this section shall be deemed to have occurred if the
hereinabove described disturbance continues after the date of delivery
of a second warning to such owner, harborer or keeper.
A. This section shall not apply to that portion of the street lying between
the curblines, which may be used to curb such animal.
B. The person who so curbs such animal shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by such animal by any sanitary method.
§ 106-14 LEWISBURG CODE § 106-18
86:58
whether public or private, other than the property of this owner of such
animal or of another who consents prior thereto, by scratching, digging or
by any other means. The owner of any animal which damages or destroys
public or private property shall be held liable for the full value of the
property damaged or destroyed, in addition to any other penalty imposed
for a violation of this article.
§ 106-19. Rabies. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
Whenever it is established that any animal has bitten any person, or shows
signs of being infected with rabies, such animal, upon order of the Animal
Control Officer, Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police
Department or any police officer, shall either be seized and detained in the
place of detention or detained at the property of the owner thereof at the
discretion of such officer for a minimum period of 10 days, during which
time it shall be confined and isolated. Any costs incurred in the detaining
and isolation of such animal shall be paid by the owner thereof.
§ 106-20. Mayor to appoint officers.
The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to appoint, employ or
contractually retain on behalf of the Borough the Animal Control Officer and
the place of detention in order to carry out the provisions of this article,
upon such terms, conditions and compensations as may be approved by the
Borough Council of the Borough.
§ 106-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating, failing or refusing to comply with any of the provisions
of this article, whether or not the animal belonging to such person has
been seized and/or detained, shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon
A. At the end of the aforesaid detention period, the owner of such animal
shall have the animal examined by a licensed doctor of veterinary
medicine for signs of rabies. If such animal is found to be rabid, a report
thereof shall be immediately made to the Animal Control Officer of the
Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department, who shall
then make whatever arrangements they believe necessary pursuant to
law.
B. If such animal is detained at the property of the owner thereof, the said
animal shall not be allowed off such property during the aforesaid
detention period except on a leash and in the custody of an adult
physically able to control it.
C. In the event that the owner of such animal fails to comply with any
order issued pursuant to this section within six hours after such order
has been issued and served upon such owner, the Animal Control
Officer, Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department or
any police officer may seize and detain such animal in the place of
detention at the expense of the owner thereof.
§ 106-18 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 106-21
86:59
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution
and any penalty as provided in § 106-13 of this article, costs of detention
as provided in § 106-13 of this article and restitution for any damage as
provided in § 106-18 of this article, and, in default of payment of such fine,
penalty and/or restitution, to be imprisoned for a period of not in excess of
30 days.
§ 106-22. Penalties for obstruction. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1014]
Any person who shall obstruct, hinder or prevent the Animal Control Officer,
Mayor, Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department, any
police officer or any owner, employee, agent or servant of the place of
detention in carrying out the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to be imprisoned for a period not in excess of 30 days.
§ 106-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 106-22
86:60
Chapter 112
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 208.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
Skateboards and in-line skates — See Ch. 264.
§ 112-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BICYCLE — A vehicle consisting of a tubular metal frame mounted on two
or more large, wire-spoked wheels, equipped with handle bars and a saddlelike
seat, and propelled by foot pedals.
§ 112-2. Registration. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833;
4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
It shall be unlawful for any resident of the Borough to ride, operate, use,
or permit to be ridden, operated, or used, or rent for use, any bicycle
which he or she owns upon any of the public streets, alleys, parks, avenues,
highways, and public places of the Borough without first registering the
bicycle with the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department by application
and obtaining therefor from the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional
Police Department or his authorized representative a registration card and
license plate or sticker.
A. The application shall contain the name, address, and date of birth of the
applicant and, if the applicant is under 18 years of age, the name of the
applicant's parent or guardian, the make, serial number, and color of
the bicycle, and the name and address of the person from whom the
same was purchased.
B. The registration card and license plate or sticker shall be issued to the
applicant upon:
(1) Certification by the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional
Police Department or his authorized representative that the bicycle
is in good mechanical condition, is in compliance with the
applicable provisions of the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and contains a manufacturer's serial number
stamped or attached to the bicycle frame. If it shall be found that
the bicycle does not contain a manufacturer's serial number
stamped or attached to the bicycle frame, a serial number or
identification mark shall be stamped on the frame of such bicycle.
(2) The payment of the fee as hereinafter provided.
§ 106-22 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 112-2
86:61
§ 112-3. Tampering with serial numbers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate, or alter the manufacturer's serial number or identification
mark stamped or attached to any bicycle frame.
§ 112-4. Tampering with registration plate.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate, or alter any registration card or license plate or sticker
issued hereunder.
§ 112-5. Transfer of registration. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1014]
Every person who sells or transfers the ownership of any bicycle registered
hereunder shall within seven days of the date of such sale or transfer report
such transaction to the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police
Department or his authorized representative by returning the registration
card issued to such person, together with the name and address of the
person to whom said bicycle was sold or transferred. In accordance with
C. The registration cards shall be numbered consecutively and shall
contain the name and address of the applicant and, if the applicant is
under 18 years of age, the name of the applicant's parent or guardian.
D. The license plate or sticker shall have the corresponding number to the
registration card and the word "Lewisburg" thereon, and shall be
attached to the bicycle by the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional
Police Department or his authorized representative and shall not be
removed except by the same or upon their authorization.
E. The fee to be paid for registration of each bicycle shall be $1. The fee
shall be paid in advance at the time of the issuance of the registration
card and license plate or sticker. In the event that the original bicycle
license plate or sticker is mutilated, damaged, lost, or stolen, a new
plate or sticker shall be issued by the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department or his authorized representative upon
payment of a fee of $0.50.
F. In accordance with § 112-5 of this chapter, registration cards issued
pursuant to this § 112-2 may be transferred when ownership of a
bicycle is sold or transferred to a new owner upon payment of a fee of
$0.50 by the new owner.
G. The Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department shall
keep a permanent record of all applications and registration cards
issued pursuant thereto for each bicycle registered with the Buffalo
Valley Regional Police Department and shall transmit copies of the
same together with the fees collected therefor to the Borough
Treasurer.
§ 112-2 LEWISBURG CODE § 112-5
86:62
§ 112-2 of this chapter, the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle shall
within seven days of the sale or transfer apply for a transfer of the
registration thereof.
§ 112-6. Destruction of bicycle. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1014]
Every person who dismantles and takes out of operation any bicycle
registered hereunder shall within seven days report such information to
the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department or his
authorized representative.
§ 112-7. Bicycle rental.
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of renting or
hiring out bicycles in the Borough to rent or hire out a bicycle to anyone
without the rented or hired bicycle having attached thereto a license plate
or sticker issued hereunder.
§ 112-8. Dealing in bicycles. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling, exchanging, or
trading in used or secondhand bicycles, and every person engaged in the
business of buying or selling new bicycles, shall make a weekly report
to the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department or
his authorized representative of all used and secondhand bicycles bought,
sold, exchanged, or traded-in during the week. Each such report shall
specify a full and complete description of such used or secondhand bicycles,
including, whenever available, the make, the manufacturer's serial number
stamped or attached to the bicycle frame, the frame number, any
identification mark or markings, the color, the wheel type and size, the
name of the brake, the date of purchase, sale, exchange, or trade, and the
name of the person buying, selling, exchanging, or trading in such bicycle.
§ 112-9. Light required for night riding. [Amended 10-20-1987 by
Ord. No. 833]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to ride, operate, use, or permit to be ridden,
operated, or used, or rent for use, any bicycle upon any of the public
streets, alleys, parks, avenues, highways, and public places of the Borough
during the period from one-hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise
and at such other times when there is not sufficient light to render clearly
discernible persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 500 feet
ahead, unless a white lamp or light on the front of the bicycle is in use and
operation in accordance with the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 112-10. Rights and duties of bicyclists.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights
and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the ordinances of the
§ 112-5 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 112-10
86:63
Borough of Lewisburg, except as to special provisions therein and except as
to those provisions thereof which by their nature can have no application.
§ 112-11. Obedience to signs. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1014]
Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official trafficcontrol
signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles,
unless otherwise directed by a Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department
police officer. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no
right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall
disobey the direction of any such signs.
§ 112-12. Occupancy of bicycle.
A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to
carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed
and equipped except that an adult rider may carry a child securely attached
to the rider in a back pack or sling.
§ 112-13. Safety regulations. [Amended 8-18-1998 by Ord. No. 910]
A. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care
when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same
direction. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more
than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles. Whenever a usable, safe, and reasonable lane
or path for bicycles has been provided as part of a highway or adjacent
to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such lane or path and shall not use
any other part of the highway. Before turning or changing the direction
of any bicycle upon any of the public streets, alleys, parks, avenues,
highways, and public places of the Borough, it shall be the duty of the
bicycle rider to give a signal by the extension of the hand to indicate the
direction it is intended to proceed.
B. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.
C. The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building,
shall upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending
across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians
approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said
roadway.
D. No person riding upon a bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any
vehicle upon a roadway.
§ 112-10 LEWISBURG CODE § 112-13
86:64
§ 112-14. Failure to register or own certificate. [Amended
10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833; 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
Any resident who violates § 112-2 of this chapter by failing to register by
application any bicycle which he or she owns and obtaining therefor a
registration card and license plate or sticker shall:
E. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon
the handlebars.
F. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway at any location
where parking is allowed, upon the sidewalk other than in a rack to
support the bicycle, or against a building or at the curb other than in
such manner as not to impede the normal and reasonable movement of
pedestrian or other traffic or to obstruct the movement of a legally
parked motor vehicle.
G. No person shall ride a bicycle upon any public sidewalk located in the
Borough between the southern right-of-way line of Cherry Alley on the
north, the northern right-of-way line of Pine Alley on the south, the
western right-of-way line of Front Street on the east, and the eastern
right-of-way line of Seventh Street on the west. No person over the age
of 10 years shall ride a bicycle upon any other public sidewalk located
in the Borough, except upon the sidewalk located on the north side of
Market Street between the eastern right-of-way line of U.S. Route 15
and the eastern right-of-way line of Eighth Street. Any person legally
riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or bicycle lane or path used by
pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give
an audible signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian.
[Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No. 1016]
A. For the first offense, be warned that he or she is in violation of the
applicable section of this chapter and that he or she must comply
therewith by securing, where applicable, a bicycle riding certificate,
registration card, or license plate or sticker. In addition, the Police
Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department or his authorized
representative shall also notify the parent or guardian of the minor in
writing of the violation and warning, stating the nature of the violation,
requesting that the parent or guardian should not knowingly permit
such minor to violate § 112-2 of this chapter, warning the parent or
guardian that certain penalties could be imposed upon them, and
advising the parent or guardian that a second offense may result in the
impoundment of the bicycle.
B. For the second offense, be notified that he or she is in violation of the
applicable section of this chapter and that his or her bicycle shall be
subject to immediate impoundment until such time as he or she
complies therewith by securing, where applicable, a bicycle riding
certificate, registration card, or license plate or sticker. In addition, the
§ 112-13 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 112-14
86:65
§ 112-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord.
No. 833]
Except as provided hereinabove, any person under 18 years of age who
violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall:
Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department or his
authorized representative shall also notify the parent or guardian of the
minor in writing of the violation and impoundment, stating the nature
of the violation and how to obtain the release of the impounded bicycle.
All impounded bicycles shall be held by the Police Chief of the Buffalo
Valley Regional Police Department or his authorized representative in a
protected area and shall be subject to the collection of a storage charge
therefor in the amount of $1 per week unless the bicycle is released to
the owner thereof within 10 days by his or her compliance with the said
violated section.
A. For the first offense, be warned that he or she is in violation of the
applicable section of this chapter and that his or her registration card
and license plate or sticker may be suspended or revoked for any
subsequent violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. In addition,
the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department or his
authorized representative shall also notify the parent or guardian of the
minor in writing of the violation and warning, stating the nature of the
violation, requesting that the parent or guardian should not knowingly
permit such minor to violate any of the provisions of this chapter,
warning the parent or guardian that certain penalties could be imposed
upon them, and advising the parent or guardian that any subsequent
violation may result in the suspension or revocation of the minor's
bicycle registration card and license plate or sticker. [Amended
4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
B. For the second offense, be summoned in writing by the Police Chief of
the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department or his authorized
representative to appear at the Buffalo Valley Regional Police
Department at a specified time with his or her bicycle and accompanied
by his or her parent or guardian. After a hearing on the violation of the
applicable section of this chapter, if in the discretion of the Police Chief
of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department or his authorized
representative, it is decided to punish the violator, the registration card
and license plate or sticker issued pursuant to § 112-2 of this chapter
may be suspended and removed, respectively, for a period not in excess
of 10 days. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
C. For the third and subsequent offenses, be summoned in writing by the
Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department or his
authorized representative to appear at the Buffalo Valley Regional
Police Department at a specified time with his or her parent or
guardian. After a hearing on the violation of the applicable section of
this chapter, one of the following penalties shall be imposed:
[Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
§ 112-14 LEWISBURG CODE § 112-15
86:66
§ 112-16. Penalty for non-minors. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833; 8-18-1998 by Ord. No. 910; 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
Any person 18 years of age or older or any business who violates any
provision of this chapter, or any parent or guardian of any minor child who
normally permits such child to violate any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a district justice,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution,
and/or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days. In default of
payment of such fine, the bicycle involved in the violation of this chapter
shall be impounded by the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police
Department or his authorized representative in a protected area until such
time as such fine is paid in full. In addition, the Police Chief of the Buffalo
Valley Regional Police Department or his authorized representative may
suspend or revoke the registration card and remove the license plate or
sticker of any bicycle issued pursuant to § 112-2 of this chapter for such
time and in such manner as set forth in § 112-15 of this chapter.
§ 112-17. Suspension of certificate or registration. [Amended
4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
Upon any suspension or revocation of a bicycle registration card and
removal of a license plate or sticker pursuant to §§ 112-15 and 112-16 of this
chapter, the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department
or his authorized representative shall immediately notify the Borough
Secretary of such suspension, revocation, and/or removal.
Chapter 120
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 32.
(1) The registration card and license plate or sticker issued pursuant
to § 112-2 of this chapter may be suspended and removed,
respectively, for a period not in excess of 30 days; or
(2) The registration card and license plate or sticker issued pursuant
to § 112-2 of this chapter may be revoked. In order to secure a new
registration card and license plate or sticker, the violator must
again proceed in accordance with § 112-2 of this chapter.
D. A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by any person under
18 years of age shall not be considered a criminal offense or be made a
matter of court record.
§ 112-15 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 120-1
120:67
§ 120-1. Display of numbers required.
It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every house, building, or
other structure, commercial and residential, in the Borough of Lewisburg to
have placed thereon, in a conspicuous place visible from the street, figures
showing the street number of the house, building, or other structure.
§ 120-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 125
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 32. Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
182.
§ 125-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
used in the plural include the singular, and words used in the singular
include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory. Specific terms are as follows:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
PERSON — Person, individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
society, association, or any officer, agent, or employee thereof, and the penal
provisions may apply to any one or all of the parties designated.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes such as
garbage, ashes, petroleum products, including gasoline, kerosene, oil,
grease, and the like, whether new or used, street cleanings, dead animals,
and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — All nonputrescible solid wastes, such as barrels, bedding, cans,
cardboard, paper, leaves, car bodies, crockery, drums, glass, grass cuttings,
metal, rags, rubber, sawdust, trees, tree stumps, weeds, wire, wood scraps,
and similar material.
§ 120-1 LEWISBURG CODE § 125-2
120:68
§ 125-2. Specific acts prohibited.
§ 125-3. Exceptions and exemptions. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1014]
This chapter shall not apply to open fires, barbecues or other domestic
open combustion areas used solely for the cooking of consumable foods,
nor to any training activities of the Lewisburg Fire Companies or Buffalo
Valley Regional Police Department, or to other organizations dedicated to
the public good, where open fires or incineration shall be an integral part of
their training or effective purposes.
§ 125-4. Registration of devices and equipment.
It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, alter, or replace any
article, machine, device, equipment or other contrivance or facility capable
of incineration or permitting the emission of air contaminants into the
atmosphere until a Certificate of Registration has been obtained from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Resources,
and such certifications shall be registered with the Office of the Borough
Secretary prior to the effective date of operation thereof.
§ 125-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 134
CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conduct — See Ch. 142.
Loitering — See Ch. 208.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
Sidewalk merchandise displays — See Ch.
300, Art. IV.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, suffer, or allow the openfire
burning of any refuse, rubbish, or garbage, from which the products
of combustion are discharged into the open air.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, suffer, or allow the burning
or incineration of any refuse, rubbish or garbage using a backyard type
burner; specifically the use of cans, drums, wire containers, or
incinerators is prohibited.
§ 125-2 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 125-5
134:69
§ 134-1. Definitions. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
§ 134-2. Permit fees. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AMUSEMENT RIDE —
BOROUGH — The Borough of Lewisburg.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.
Any device of the nature commonly a part of an amusement park
or carnival, including but not limited to merry-go-rounds, ferris
wheels, roller coasters, which may be permanently or temporarily
installed or used in the Borough; or
(1)
Any coin actuated device, installed or located for amusement
purposes in or upon which one or more individuals may ride or be
moved.
(2)
B. In this chapter the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or conduct any circus or
carnival, at any location within the Borough, or to operate any
amusement ride therein, without first having obtained a permit therefor
from the Borough Manager, for which a fee as established by resolution
of Borough Council, shall be paid for the use of the Borough.
B. No separate permit shall be required for any amusement ride that shall
be a part of any carnival that shall be authorized under this chapter.
C. The Borough Manager may, at his discretion, refuse to grant a permit in
any case or may suspend or revoke a permit already granted, where he,
in his judgment, has reason to believe that the holding of such circus or
carnival, or the operation of any amusement ride, as the case may be,
could endanger the public health, morals, welfare or safety.
D. At the discretion of the Borough Council the permit fee may be remitted
in the case of a circus or carnival the proceeds of which are applied to
purely charitable uses or in the case the application for such permit
shall have been made by and on behalf of any organization connected
with the municipal government or with any public school district.
E. If any permit shall be refused, suspended or revoked an appeal from
such refusal, suspension or revocation may be made by the applicant or
by the person to whom such permit had been issued, as the case may
be, to the Borough Council, but no portion of a permit fee shall be
§ 125-5 LEWISBURG CODE § 134-2
134:70
§ 134-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 134-4. Insurance. [Added 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
§ 134-5. Indemnity; general liability. [Added 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833]
Company shall indemnify and save harmless the Borough from all claims,
demands, suits, actions, costs and expenses including counsel fees arising
out of or caused by the installation, erection, operation, existence or
maintenance of grantee's facilities permitted under this chapter. Grantee
agrees that in the event a final judgment arising out of such claims,
demands, suits or actions set out above, subject to no further appeal,
is entered against the Borough, grantee will immediately provide to the
Borough, for transmittal to plaintiff, a sum of money equal to the amount of
the said judgment including any applicable intent and costs entered against
the Borough.
Chapter 142
refunded in case of suspension or revocation. Such appeal must be
made in writing within 30 days of the decision.
A. The grantee shall submit to the Borough a certificate, the form of which
shall be approved by the Borough, attesting that grantee's employees
are covered by adequate Workmen's Compensation insurance pursuant
to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The grantee shall, on a form approved by the Borough Solicitor, provide
the Borough with a certificate of insurance evidencing the following
insurance coverage:
(1) Five hundred thousand dollars for personal injury
(2) One million dollars per occurrence
C. The grantee shall submit to the Borough, for approval, executed
certificates and copies of insurance policies covering all insurance
required by this chapter. Each certificate and insurance policy shall
contain therein, or have contained in a rider attached thereto and made
a part thereof, a clause to the effect that the insurer will notify the
insured and the Borough in writing 30 days prior to cancellation of the
policy.
§ 134-2 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 134-5
134:71
CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverage — See Ch. 100.
Bicycles — See Ch. 112.
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 170.
Loitering — See Ch. 208.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 235.
Skateboards and in-line skates — See Ch. 264.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
§ 134-5 LEWISBURG CODE § 134-5
134:72
ARTICLE I
Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 2-8-1960 by Ord. No. 462A]
§ 142-1. Offense defined.
Whoever makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unseemly
noise or disturbance at, in, nearby or near to any public highway, road,
street, lane, alley, park, square, common or any place of public
accommodation, convenience and resort or near any dwelling place, of such
a nature as would be an annoyance to peaceable citizens near by or whereby
the public peace is broken or disturbed, or the traveling public annoyed, or
any peaceable resident within the vicinity is annoyed, is guilty of the offense
of disorderly conduct.
§ 142-2. Disorderly conduct.
Loud, boisterous and unseemly noise or any disturbance shall include
amongst other things drunkenness, vagrancy, begging, the use of profane or
indecent language, fighting, gambling, the destruction of Borough property,
loitering without visible means of subsistence, obstructing the public roads,
streets, highways and sidewalks or looking in windows or premises
occupied by other persons while standing at points or places not commonly
used by the general public or the party charged.
§ 142-3. Public places.
Places of public accommodation, convenience and resort shall be deemed
to include amongst others all stores or shops, professional offices, motion
picture theatres, churches, schools, athletic fields or any other places of
business or community activities open to the general public.
§ 142-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 142-1 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 142-4
134:73

ARTICLE II
Driving on Private Property
[Adopted 3-18-1986 by Ord. No. 813; amended in its entirety
10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
§ 142-5. Driving on private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or tractor
on private property within the Borough without the consent of the owner or
other person in control or possession thereof.
§ 142-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 142-5 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 142-6
134:75

ARTICLE III
Disorderly Gatherings
[Adopted 5-15-2001 by Ord. No. 930]
§ 142-7. Purpose and intent.
The Borough Council finds and determines as follows:
§ 142-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
A. That certain private properties require a disproportionate amount of
police service with many calls requiring response to maintain order and
public peace and safety and to stop public disturbances at parties or
other social events so that there is less police personnel and resources
available for other locations, emergencies and duties within the
Borough, thereby placing a disproportionate and unfair burden upon
the residents of the Borough.
B. That the host of a disorderly party or other social event and those
persons attending such party or event should be held criminally
responsible for any public disturbances or other acts of disorderly
conduct thereat.
C. That the owners of private properties derive a benefit from the
aforesaid police service.
D. That owners of private properties have a responsibility to manage their
properties to minimize required police service to maintain order and
public peace and safety and to stop public disturbances, to minimize the
burden upon the residents of the Borough and to promote the health,
safety and welfare of the public in general.
E. That owners of private properties can minimize required police service
to maintain order and public peace and safety and to stop public
disturbances by diligent and strict management and regulation of their
properties.
F. That assessment of police service costs as provided in this article is
reasonable and will have a deterrent effect and encourage more
responsible management of private properties.
G. That it is not the intent of this article to discourage or suppress calls or
requests for police service, but rather to encourage and stimulate
diligent and strict management and regulation of private properties by
the owners thereof and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Borough.
§ 142-7 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 142-8
134:77
DISORDERLY GATHERING — A gathering at which any public disturbance
occurs.
GATHERING — Except for those that may otherwise be permitted or
authorized by the Borough Council, ordinance or statute, a party or event
involving a group of persons who have assembled or are assembling for a
social occasion or activity on private property.
HOST — The person who owns, leases or is otherwise in possession and
control of the private property where the gatherings takes place and who
organized, sponsored, conducted, hosted or permitted such gathering or
was otherwise in charge of such gathering.
OWNER(S) — The person, persons, corporation or other entity who holds
record title to the private property.
POLICE SERVICE COSTS — The cost to the Borough for police services
rendered in responding to a call at a disorderly gathering or otherwise
maintaining order and public peace and safety and stopping public
disturbances at a disorderly gathering including, but not limited to, the
salaries and other compensation of police officers, appropriate
administrative costs allocable thereto, prorated costs of equipment, the cost
of repairing damaged Borough equipment and property and the cost of any
medical treatment of injured police officers. This cost shall either be fixed,
from time to time, by Borough Council based upon an average cost for a
typical police response or be determined on a case-by-case basis by the
Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department.[Amended
4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land, building or other structure, including
single and multifamily dwellings and commercial and industrial buildings,
not owned by a public entity.
PUBLIC DISTURBANCE(S) — Any act by a host or those persons attending
a gathering involving public drunkenness, consumption of an alcoholic
beverage in public, public urination or defecation, the unlawful deposit of
trash or litter on public or private property, damage to or destruction of
public or private property, the obstruction of public roads, streets, highways
or sidewalks, interference with emergency or police services, unreasonable
noise, use of profane or obscene language or gestures, indecent exposure,
fighting or quarreling or any other act defined as "disorderly conduct"
as defined in Article I, or which otherwise disturbs, annoys, injures or
endangers the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the Borough
residing in the neighborhood or vicinity of the gathering.
PUBLIC ENTITY — Any federal, state or local government, school district or
agency or authority created or organized thereby.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any land, building or other structure owned by a
public entity.
§ 142-8 LEWISBURG CODE § 142-9
134:78
§ 142-9. Violations.
No host or person attending a gathering shall commit any act of public
disturbance. No host shall hold, conduct or have a gathering where any act
of public disturbance occurs or continue a gathering where any act of public
disturbance has occurred or is occurring.
§ 142-10. Arrest of violators. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1014]
In addition to the right to file a citation against violators under and pursuant
to the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, Buffalo Valley Regional
Police Department police officers may also arrest a host or person attending
a gathering who violates § 142-9 of this article; provided, that the police
officer views the public disturbance and in the case of a host, the host is in
attendance at the gathering at the time of such public disturbance, although
nothing herein shall prevent a host from being cited for violation of § 142-9,
whether or not any person attending the gathering is arrest or cited for a
violation.
§ 142-11. Violations and penalties.
Any host or person who violated § 142-9 of this article shall be guilty of the
offense of disorderly gathering and upon conviction thereon in a summary
proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days.
§ 142-12. Owners required to pay police service costs.
An owner is required to pay police service costs to maintain order and
public peace and safety and to stop public disturbances for each response
by the police to a disorderly gathering in excess of one response during any
thirty-day period of time.
§ 142-13. Notice to owners of police service costs. [Amended
4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
Whenever the police are called to respond to a disorderly gathering for
the purpose of maintaining order and public peace and safety and stopping
public disturbances, the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police
Department or his duly authorized designee shall notify the owner of the
private property where the disorderly gathering took place and also the
operator of such property if the owner has designated an "operator" in
accordance with the Borough Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 152),
by regular mail at the last known address of such owner and operator, that
the police were called to respond to a disorderly gathering at the owner's
property for the purpose of maintaining order and public peace and safety
and stopping public disturbances and that if the police are again called to
respond to a disorderly gathering at such property within 30 days after their
initial response, such owner shall be required to pay police service costs to
the Borough for such responses.
§ 142-9 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 142-14
134:79
§ 142-14. Collection of police service costs. [Amended 4-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 1014]
After the second response to a disorderly gathering within 30 days as
provided in § 142-13 of this article, the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department or his duly authorized designee shall notify the
Borough Treasurer, in writing, of the name and address of the owner of the
private property where the disorderly gathering took place, the dates of the
initial and subsequent response(s) and the total amount of police service
costs incurred for or during such responses. The Borough Treasurer or his/
her authorized designee shall then bill the owner for the said amount, which
amount shall be due and payable to the Borough within 30 days of such
billing.
§ 142-15. Failure to pay police service costs.
Any police service costs which have not been paid within 30 days of the
billing therefor may be collected, together with a penalty of 10% thereof
and interest at the rate of 10% per annum added thereto, by civil action
against the owner and/or may be imposed or assessed against the owner's
private property as a municipal claim as provided by law.
§ 142-14 LEWISBURG CODE § 142-15
134:80
Chapter 152
CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 158.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 179.
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
182.
Historic District — See Ch. 186.
Open burning — See Ch. 125.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 76.
Sewers — See Ch. 255.
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 272.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 290.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
315.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 142-15 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 142-15
134:81

ARTICLE I
Electrical Code
[Adopted 5-19-1981 by Ord. No. 81-7; amended in its entirety
5-21-1991 by Ord. No. 872]
§ 152-1. Adoption of electrical code.
The National Electrical Code, 1987, or such newer edition of the said
Code then in existence, recommended by the National Fire Protection
Association, is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the Borough of
Lewisburg and hereafter designated as such, for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations for the installation of electrical equipment, electrical
appliances, and the installation of electrical wiring and other similar and
related work within the Borough.
§ 152-2. Incorporation by reference.
Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the said
National Electrical Code, 1987, or such newer edition of the said Code then
in existence, recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, as
established in a standard form, are hereby incorporated herein by reference
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article.
§ 152-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the regulations, provisions, conditions, or terms
of the said National Electrical Code, 1987, or such newer edition of the
said Code then in existence, or failing to comply therewith or with any of
the requirements thereof, or of the premises where anything in violation of
the said Code shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, engineer,
builder, contractor, electrician, agent, person, or corporation employed in
connection therewith and assisting in the commission of such violation
or violations shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and/or be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 152-4. Copies available for inspection.
Three copies of the said National Electrical Code, 1987, or such newer
edition of the said Code then in existence, are on file in the offices of the
Borough Secretary and/or the Building Official of the Borough of Lewisburg,
and are available for public inspection in the said offices.
§ 152-1 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-4
134:83

ARTICLE II
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 5-19-1981 by Ord. No. 81-9]
§ 152-5. Adoption of fire prevention code. [Amended 5-19-1987 by
Ord. No. 829; 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833; 5-21-1991 by Ord. No.
872]
The BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code, Seventh Edition 1987, or such
newer edition of the said Code then in existence, recommended by Building
Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby adopted
as the Fire Code of the Borough of Lewisburg and hereafter designated
as such, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion.
§ 152-6. Incorporation by reference. [Amended 5-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 829; 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833; 5-21-1991 by Ord. No. 872]
Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the said
BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code, Seventh Edition 1987, or such newer
edition of the said Code then in existence, recommended by the Building
Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., as established in a
standard form, are hereby incorporated herein by reference and made a
part hereof if fully set out in this article, except as hereinafter modified.
§ 152-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-19-1987 by Ord. No.
829; 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833; 5-21-1991 by Ord. No. 872]
A. Any person violating any of the regulations, provisions, conditions, or
terms of the said BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code, Seventh Edition
1987, or such newer edition of the said Code then in existence, or
failing to comply therewith or any of the requirements thereof, or
violating or failing to comply with any order made thereunder, or
building in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or failing to
comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by Borough Council
or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein,
shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, and/or be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days.
B. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue. All persons, violating the said code
shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or violations or
defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified,
each 10 days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute
a separate offense. In the event that a violation or noncompliance shall
be permitted to continue beyond a period of 10 days, then in that event
§ 152-5 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-7
134:85
§ 152-8. Enforcement. [Amended 5-19-1987 by Ord. No. 829;
10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833; 5-21-1991 by Ord. No. 872]
The said BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code, Seventh Edition 1987, or such
newer edition of said Code then in existence, shall be enforced by the
Building Official of the Borough of Lewisburg.
§ 152-9. Power to amend and revise code. [Amended 5-19-1987 by
Ord. No. 829; 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833; 5-21-1991 by Ord. No.
872]
The Building Official of the Borough of Lewisburg shall have the power
to modify any of the provisions of the said BOCA Basic Fire Prevention
Code, Seventh Edition 1987, or such newer edition of the said Code then
in existence, upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his
duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the said Code, provided that the spirit of the
said Code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice
done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the
decision of the Building Official of the Borough of Lewisburg thereon shall
be entered upon the records of the Department and a signed copy thereof
shall be furnished to the applicant.
§ 152-10. Appeals from permit disapproval. [Amended 5-19-1987 by
Ord. No. 829; 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
Whenever the Building Official of the Borough of Lewisburg shall
disapprove an application or refuse to grant a license or permit applied
for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the said Code have been
misconstructed or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Building Official of the Borough of Lewisburg to the Borough
Council within 30 days from the date of the said decision.
§ 152-11. Copies available for inspection. [Amended 5-19-1987 by
Ord. No. 829; 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833; 5-21-1991 by Ord. No.
872]
Three copies of the said BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code, Seventh Edition
1987, or such newer edition of the said Code then in existence, are on file
in the offices of the Borough Secretary and/or the Building Official of the
Borough of Lewisburg, and are available for public inspection in the said
offices.
the hazard created by such violation or noncompliance shall constitute
a public nuisance detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety,
and the affected property, building, or otherwise may be removed in the
abatement of such nuisance by the Borough. The costs and expenses of
the abatement of the nuisance shall be assessed against the offender
and shall be in addition to any fine and costs imposed hereunder, and
may be collected the same as other municipal charges.
§ 152-7 LEWISBURG CODE § 152-11
134:86
ARTICLE III
Plumbing Code
[Adopted 5-19-1981 by Ord. No. 81-10; amended in its entirety
5-21-1991 by Ord. No. 872]
§ 152-12. Adoption of plumbing code.
The BOCA Basic Plumbing Code, Seventh Edition 1987, or such newer
edition of the said Code then in existence, recommended by Building
Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., is hereby adopted as
the Plumbing Code of the Borough of Lewisburg and hereafter designated
as such, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the
installation, alteration, and repair of plumbing fixtures, equipment and
systems, and other similar and related work within the Borough.
§ 152-13. Incorporation by reference.
Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the said
BOCA Basic Plumbing Code, Seventh Edition 1987, or such newer edition
of the said Code then in existence, recommended by Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc., as established in a standard form,
are hereby incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this article.
§ 152-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the regulations, provisions, conditions, or terms
of the said BOCA Basic Plumbing Code, or failing to comply therewith or
with any of the requirements thereof, and also any owner of a building or
structure, or portion thereof, or of the premises where anything in violation
of the said Code shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, engineer,
builder, contractor, plumber, agent, person, or corporation employed in
connection therewith and assisting in the commission of such violation or
violations, shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before
a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution, and/or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90
days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 152-15. Copies available for inspection.
Three copies of the said BOCA Basic Plumbing Code, Seventh Edition 1987,
or such newer edition of the said Code then in existence, are on file in the
offices of the Borough Secretary and/or the Building Official of the Borough
of Lewisburg, and are available for public inspection in said offices.
§ 152-12 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-15
134:87

ARTICLE IV
Building Code
[Adopted 1-20-1987 by Ord. No. 825]
§ 152-16. Adoption of building code. [Amended 5-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 832; 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833; 5-21-1991 by Ord. No. 872]
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary, being marked and known as the "BOCA Basic Building Code,
10th Edition 1987," or such newer edition of the said Code then in
existence, published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., with changes noted herein for regulating the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition,
conversion, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures in
the Borough of Lewisburg, providing for the issuance of permits therefor,
prescribing penalties for violations of the code, and declaring and
establishing Fire Zones, is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the
Borough of Lewisburg and hereafter designated as such; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the said
BOCA Basic Building Code, its supplements and amendments, are hereby
incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this article, except as hereinafter modified in § 152-17 of this article.
§ 152-17. Additions, insertions and changes. [Amended 10-20-1987
by Ord. No. 833; 5-17-1988 by Ord. No. 836; 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
839; 6-19-1990 by Ord. No. 859; 5-21-1991 by Ord. No. 872;
9-21-1993 by Ord. No. 887; 4-19-1994 by Ord. No. 892]
A. Deletions. The following article(s), section(s) and subsection(s) of the
BOCA Basic Building Code adopted herein are hereby deleted in their
entirety:
(1) Section 114.5 Refunds.
B. Revisions. The following sections and subsections of the Basic Building
Code adopted herein are hereby revised to read in their entirety as
follows:
(1) Section 101.4 Continuation of unlawful use. The continuation of
occupancy or use of a building or structure, or a part thereof,
contrary to the provisions of this code, shall be deemed a violation
of this code and shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in this
article.
(2) Section 109.2 Appointment. The Building Official shall be
appointed by the Lewisburg Borough Council; and the Building
Official shall not be removed from office except for cause and after
full opportunity to be heard on specific and relevant charges by and
before the Lewisburg Borough Council.
§ 152-16 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-17
134:89
(3) Section 109.7 Official records. All official records shall be kept of
all business and activities of the Office of the Building Official and
all such records shall be open to the public for inspection from 9:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m., except that no individual, owner, operator,
occupant, or other person shall be subject to the unwarranted
invasion of privacy and all evidence of information obtained in the
course of any inspection shall be considered privileged information
and shall be confidential. Such evidence or information shall not be
disclosed except as may without the consent of the owner,
occupant, operator or other person in charge of the unit, structure
or premises inspected, except as otherwise required by law.
(4) Section 111.1 When permit is required. It shall be unlawful to
construct, enlarge, alter or demolish a structure; or change the
occupancy of a building or structure requiring greater strength,
exit or sanitary provisions; or to change to another use; or to install
or alter any equipment for which provision is made or the
installation of which is regulated by this code; or to place or install
siding on a building or structure; or to sandblast or point a building
or structure, without first filing an application with the Building
Official in writing and obtaining the required Permit therefor;
except that repairs, as defined in Section 104.0 of this code and
which do not involve any violation of this code, shall be exempted
from this provision.
(5) Section 111.3 By whom application is made. Application for a
permit shall be made by the licensed engineer or architect,
contractor or the person responsible for construction, alteration,
demolishing or enlargement of the structure employed in
connection with the proposed work. The application shall be
accompanied by a duly verified affidavit of the owner or lessee
authorizing the proposed work. The full names and addresses of
owner, lessee, applicant, and of the responsible officers, if the
owner or lessee is a corporate body, shall be stated in the
application.
(6) Section 112.3 Previous approvals. Nothing in this code shall
require changes in the plans, construction or designated use of a
building for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or
otherwise lawfully authorized and the construction of which shall
have been actively prosecuted within 90 days after the effective
date of this article and the entire building shall be completed, as
authorized, within two years after the date of approval of the
application, except as herein provided: In the case of a building,
which because of its size or complexity of construction requires a
longer period for completion, no changes in the plans, construction
or designated use of the building, shall be required for the
construction period designated in fully executed construction
contract documents if prepared by a registered architect and/or
engineer.
§ 152-17 LEWISBURG CODE § 152-17
134:90
(7) Section 112.5 Approved plans. The Building Official shall stamp or
endorse in writing two sets of corrected plans marked "Approved";
one set of such approved plans shall be retained by him/her and the
other set shall be kept at the building site, open to inspection of the
Building Official or his/her authorized representative at all
reasonable times. Where required, approval of local boards,
commissions, agencies and/or bodies, including but not limited to
the Zoning Hearing Board, Historical Architectural Review Board,
Planning Commission and Borough Council of the Borough of
Lewisburg, shall be secured prior to the issuance of a permit.
Approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
shall also be secured, where applicable, prior to the issuance of a
permit.
(8) Section 114.3.1 Fee schedule. A fee for each plan examination,
building permit and inspection shall be paid in accordance with the
Fee Schedule of the Borough, and as such fee schedule may from
time to time be amended or modified by resolution of the
Lewisburg Borough Council.
(9) Section 117.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements, regulations, conditions or terms thereof or who shall
erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan or directive of the Building Official or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, and
also any owner of a building or structure, or portion thereof, or of
the premises where anything in violation of this code shall be
placed or shall exist, and any architect, engineer, builder,
contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection
therewith and assisting in the commission of such violation or
violations, shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs of prosecution, and/or be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed 90 days, except imprisonment shall not be imposed as a
penalty for violation of Subsection (M) of Subsection (3) of this
section other than for failure to pay a fine and/or costs of
prosecution. Each day that a violation of this code continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(10) Section 118.2 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall
continue any work in or about the structure after having been
served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall
constitute a violation of this code and shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed in this § 102.
(11) Section 120.3 Notice of unsafe structure.
§ 152-17 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-17
134:91
(a) All buildings or structures regulated by this code which are
structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or
which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to
human life are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe. Any use
of buildings or structures constituting a hazard to safety,
health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence, fire hazard, disaster, damage or
abandonment are, for the purpose of this section, unsafe uses.
Parapet walls, cornices, spires, towers, tanks, statuary and
other appendages or structural members which are supported
by, attached to, or a part of a building and which are in
deteriorated condition or otherwise unable to sustain the
design loads which are specified in this code are hereby
designated as unsafe building appendages.
(b) All such unsafe buildings, structures or appendages are hereby
declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this code or such alternate procedures
as may have been or may be adopted by the Lewisburg
Borough Council. As an alternative, the Building Official, or
official of the Borough of Lewisburg as designated by the
Lewisburg Borough Council, may institute any other
appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the
violation.
(12) Section 124.2 Membership of board. The board of appeals shall
consist of seven members appointed by the Borough of Lewisburg
as follows: two for five years, one for four years, one for three
years, two for two years and one for one year. Each initial member
shall serve until the 1st day of January next following the expiration
of the term of their appointment or until a successor has been
appointed. Thereafter, each new member shall serve for five years
or until a successor has been appointed.
(13) Section 124.2.1 Qualifications. Each member shall be a licensed
professional engineer or architect; or a builder or superintendent
of building construction with at least 10 years experience, five of
which shall have been in responsible charge of work.
(14) Section 124.6 Board decision. The board shall reverse, affirm, or
modify, in whole or in part, the decision of the code official
appealed from by a concurring vote of a majority of those members
present and voting, and shall make such order or determination as
in its opinion ought to be made. Failure to secure such concurring
votes shall be deemed a confirmation of the decision of the code
official.
C. Insertions. The following sections and subsections, or parts thereof, are
hereby inserted in the BOCA Basic Building Code adopted herein as if
they were established by the said BOCA Basic Building Code:
§ 152-17 LEWISBURG CODE § 152-17
134:92
(1) Section 100.1 Title. Insert for "name of jurisdiction" in this section,
"the Borough of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania."
(2) Section 105.0 Demolition of structures. The following new
subsections shall be added to this section to read in their entirety
as follows:
(a) Section 105.4 Other permits required. At the time of filing an
application for a permit, the applicant shall exhibit evidence
that he/she has obtained all necessary permits, licenses,
approvals and/or variances as may be required by the laws of
the Borough of Lewisburg and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Individuals, agencies, boards, commissions, and
bodies issuing the aforesaid permits, licenses, approvals, and/
or variances shall include but not be limited to the Zoning
Officer, the Zoning Hearing Board, the Historical Architectural
Review Board, the Lewisburg Borough Council, the Board of
Appeals, the Sewage Enforcement Officer, the Fire Chief, the
State Police Fire Marshal, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Resources, the Pennsylvania Department of
Community Affairs, the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry, and applicable federal agencies.
(b) Section 105.5 Determination by building official. In the event
that the owner or agent is unable to obtain the releases
required in Section 105.1 of this code, the Building Official
shall inspect the premises for which application has been made
to determine that utility service connections and appurtenant
equipment have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe
manner.
(c) Section 105.6 Technical specifications. All demolition shall
conform to the following requirements. Where under these
requirements responsibilities are imposed upon a "contractor"
that term shall also mean any person performing the
demolition work, including contractors and the owner or
agents of the owner. Final responsibility for compliance with all
requirements shall be that of the permit holder of the structure
being demolished.
(d) Section 105.6.1. The work to be performed shall include the
demolition of all structures, vaults, steps, walls, and the
disposal of all excess material, junk and rubbish.
(e) Section 105.6.2. The Contractor shall not commence work, nor
shall be remove from the site of demolition anything or any
materials, until the Contractor has received a building permit
from the Building Official.
(f) Section 105.6.3. If the structure to be demolished is more than
two stories or 25 feet high, measured from sidewalk or street
level, and the horizontal distance from the inside of the
§ 152-17 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-17
134:93
sidewalk to the structure is 15 feet or less, a substantial
sidewalk shed shall be constructed over the entire length of
the sidewalk, adjacent to the structure, of sufficient width to
accommodate pedestrian traffic without causing congestion.
The sidewalk shed shall be lighted either by natural or artificial
means sufficient to insure safety at all times.
(g) Section 105.6.4. When the horizontal distance inside of the
sidewalk to a structure is more than 15 feet and less than 25
feet a sidewalk shed may be constructed over the sidewalk as
described above, or in place of such a shed, a substantial fence
shall be constructed along the inside edge of the sidewalk, or if
permission has been granted close the sidewalk, a substantial
fence eight feet high may be constructed at the curbline and a
safe place to walk in the cartway of the street shall be
provided. When demolition work using machinery methods are
employed, the building(s) may be demolished in a step-like
fashion as long as adequate lateral support of the structure
exists. No wall, chimney or other construction shall be allowed
to fall in a mass on an upper floor. Bulky material, such as
beams and columns, shall be lowered and not allowed to fall.
(h) Section 105.6.5. Suitable barriers subject to the approval of
the Building Official, shall be erected and maintained by the
Contractor around all openings in the ground as long as such
openings shall, in the opinion of the Building Official,
constitute a hazard or a dangerous condition.
(i) Section 105.6.6. The Contractor shall furnish, erect, and
maintain approved danger, warning, and "Keepout" signs at
places and locations where the placing of such signs are
warranted, especially in working area, or as directed by the
Building Official.
(j) Section 105.6.7. During the demolition of buildings and
structures, the work shall be kept thoroughly wetted down to
prevent the spread of dust. The Contractor shall provide
necessary water and connections therefor.
(k) Section 105.6.8. All sewer laterals must be capped at the curb
by the Contractor before any demolition starts. A permit must
be obtained from the Lewisburg Area Joint Sewer Authority.
(l) Section 105.6.9. All combustible material from the demolition
activity shall be removed from the site and any basements or
pits exposed by such demolition activity shall be backfilled to
at least the adjacent grade levels.
(m) Section 105.6.10. Window and door frames shall not be
removed until the demolition work shall have progressed to
their elevations in the walls.
§ 152-17 LEWISBURG CODE § 152-17
134:94
(n) Section 105.6.11. No portions of walls above the elevations of
the first floor and located immediately adjacent and parallel to
any street shall be "thrown" but shall be barred loose and
demolished piecemeal.
(o) Section 105.6.12. All floor construction except basement floor
shall be removed regardless of elevation or location. All
basement partitions, furnaces, heating apparatus, piping,
gasoline or oil tanks, miscellaneous fixtures and stairways shall
be removed from the area of demolition.
(p) Section 105.6.13. The Contractor shall leave continuous
buildings in a safe condition, and shall not deface, mar, hurt or
jeopardize any adjacent buildings and any damage done to
such adjacent or nearby building(s) shall be repaired or
restored by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Building
Official. Extreme care must be exercised in the demolition of
buildings adjacent to other structures which are to remain. The
Contractor shall be responsible for damages to adjacent
buildings and all repairs shall be made by the Contractor at no
expense to the adjacent building owner. Any walls of
continuous buildings left exposed by this demolition shall be
preserved and treated in the manner specified in Section
1805.3.1 of this code so as to seal the surface of such walls and
provide adequate weather protection. All work required by this
subsection shall be completed within 30 days from the date any
demolition work results in exposure to the elements of
continuous building walls or parapets, which time may be
extended by the Building Official for good cause.
(q) Section 105.6.14. The Contractor shall furnish, at his/her
expense, all additional materials required for filling subsurface
areas to the grade of the surface of the adjoining ground. Said
material required shall be of a quality acceptable to the
Building Official and a sufficient quantity shall be on hand to
insure uninterrupted progress in completing the backfilling.
On completion of the demolition, the cellars shall be filled to a
level not higher than the existing sidewalk and yard. All
backfilling shall be done in 12 inch layers and each layer
compacted by a ten-ton roller or its equivalent. Compacting the
backfill with any loader is not acceptable. Eighteen inches of
soil free from stones, clods and debris shall be evenly spread
over all demolished structures. The entire area shall be
cleaned and graded so a rotary mower can be used in cutting
the grass or weeds.
(r) Section 105.6.15. No burning shall be permitted on the site.
Combustible material shall be disposed of by the Contractor.
(s) Section 105.6.16. The Contractor shall remove all debris and
equipment and dispose of all material from the site of the work,
§ 152-17 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-17
134:95
and leave the ground clear of all materials, rubbish and debris,
and in a clean, neat condition, as demolition of each structure
is completed.
(3) Section 114.3.1 Fee schedule. A fee for each plan examination,
building permit, and inspection shall be paid in accordance with
the schedule of fees attached hereto, made a part hereof and
marked Exhibit A, and as such fee schedule may from time to time
be amended or modified by resolution of the Lewisburg Borough
Council.
(4) Section 120.1 Right of condemnation. The following new paragraph
and subsections shall be added to this section to read in their
entirety as follows:
To further clarify the intent of this section, the conditions or
defects hereinafter described, where such conditions or defects
exist to the extent that life, health, property or safety of the public
or its occupants are endangered, shall be deemed to fall within the
meaning of this code.
(1) Section 120.1.1. Whenever any door, aisle, passageway,
stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or
size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate
means of exit in case of fire or panic.
(2) Section 120.1.2. Whenever any portion of a building or
structure has been damaged by fire, wind, explosion, flood,
subsidence or by any other cause so that the structural
strength or stability is less than the minimum requirements
of this code and is likely to fail or become disloaded or to
collapse and thereby injure persons or property.
(3) Section 120.1.3. Whenever any building or structure has
become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an
attractive nuisance to children, or a harbor for vagrants
or criminals as enable persons to resort thereto for the
purpose of committing unlawful acts.
(4) Section 120.1.4. Whenever any building or structure,
because of deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of
sufficient fire restrictive construction, faulty electric wiring,
gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause is
determined by the Fire Chief or the Building Official to be a
fire hazard.
(5) Section 120.1.5. Whenever any portion of a building or
structure remains on a site after demolition or destruction
so as to cause an attractive nuisance or hazard to the
public.
(5) Section 120.6 Disregard of unsafe notice. The following new
subsections shall be added to this section to read in their entirety
as follows:
§ 152-17 LEWISBURG CODE § 152-17
134:96
(a) Section 120.6.1 General. After any order of the Building
Official or Board of Survey made pursuant to this article shall
have become final, no person to whom any such order is
directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any such order.
Any such person who fails to comply with any such order shall
be in violation of this code and shall be subject to the penalties
prescribed in this article.
(b) Section 120.6.2 Failure to obey order. If after any order of the
Building Official or Board of Survey made pursuant to this
article has become final, the person to whom such order is
directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey such order, the
Building Official may (a) cause such person to be prosecuted or
(b) institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a
public nuisance.
(c) Section 120.6.3 Failure to commence work. Whenever the
required repair or demolition is not commenced within the
stipulated time or 30 days after any final notice and/or order
issued under this article becomes effective:
[1] The Building Official shall cause the building described in
such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each
entrance thereto a notice reading: "Unsafe Building. Do
Not Occupy. It is summary offense to occupy this building
or to remove or deface this notice. Building Official,
"Borough of Lewisburg."
[2] No person shall occupy any building which has been
posted as specified in this subsection. No person shall
remove or deface any such notice so posted until the
repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the Building
Official have been completed and a certificate of
occupancy permit issued pursuant to the provisions of
Section 119.1 of this code.
[3] The Building Official may, in addition to any other remedy
herein provided, cause the building to be repaired to the
extent necessary to correct the order or if the notice and
order required demolition, to cause the building to be
demolished and the materials, rubble, and debris
therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. The cost of such
repairs, improvements, or vacating and closing, removal
or demolition shall be placed as a municipal lien against
the real property upon which the cost was incurred. If the
structure is removed or demolished by the order of the
Building Official, he shall sell the materials from such
structure for the best price attainable and shall credit the
proceeds of such sale against the cost of removal or
demolition. Any surplus realized from the demolition of
any such building over and above the cost of demolition
§ 152-17 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-17
134:97
and cleaning shall be paid over to the person(s) lawfully
entitled thereto.
[4] Extension of time to perform work. Upon receipt of an
application from the person required to conform to the
order and an agreement by such person that he will
comply with the order if allowed additional time, the
Building Official may, at his/her discretion, grant an
extension of time, not to exceed an additional 60 days,
within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation or
demolition, if the Building Official determines such an
extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation
imminently dangerous to life or property. An additional 60
days may be granted at the discretion of the Building Code
— Board of Appeals.
(d) Section 120.6.4 Abatement of unsafe buildings. All buildings or
portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the
Building Official to be unsafe as defined in this article are
hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by
repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance
with the following standards or as otherwise provided in this
article:
[1] If the unsafe building, whether or not vacant, can
reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in
violation of the provisions of this article, it shall be ordered
to be repaired in accordance with the current building
code.
[2] If the cost of such repair, alteration or improvement to any
unsafe building shall exceed 50% of the value of the
structure, as repaired, altered or improved, or if it cannot
be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the
provisions of this article, it may be ordered to be
demolished by the Building Official.
(6) Section 123.3 Compensation of board of survey. The third member
of the Board of Survey shall receive for his/her services a fee in the
amount of $100 per day to be paid by the applicant, or as such fee
shall be fixed from time to time by regulation or resolution.
(7) Section 201.0 General definitions. The following new definition
shall be added to this section to read in its entirety as follows:
Solid fuel heating appliance. A device or apparatus including any
attachments or apparatus designed to be attached, manufactured
and designed to use solid fuel as a fuel for heating.
(8) Section 501.2. Fire limits. The fire limits of the Borough are hereby
established as that portion of the Borough of Lewisburg, Union
County, Pennsylvania, bounded on the East by Front Street, on the
§ 152-17 LEWISBURG CODE § 152-17
134:98
North by Cherry Alley, on the West by Seventh Street, and on the
South by Pine Alley.
(9) Section 2700.3 Electric installation standards. A new subsection
shall be added to this section to read in its entirety as follows:
Section 2700.3.1 Temporary electrical service for building. The
switch box for a temporary electric service shall be attached to a
wooden pole four inches by four inches by 16 feet or larger, which
pole shall be set no less than two feet into solid ground and shall
be braced with four braces to be two inches by four inches stock.
The switch box shall be of any approved metal type, cover to
box shall be locked and the energizing switch locked in the "off"
position when not in use. The approved metal switch box may be
enclosed in a wooden box and this box locked, installation to be
weatherproof construction.
If receptacles are used on the pole or anywhere in the temporary
circuit, the circuits shall be polarized and grounded for 120-240
volts and placed five feet above the ground level.
(10) Section 2903.1 Notice of unsafe signs. A new paragraph shall be
added to this section to read in its entirety as follows:
All signs shall be removed by property owners where
circumstances leading to their erection no longer apply.
(11) Section 2906.1 Filing. The following dollar amounts shall be
inserted in this section:
(a) In the fourth line thereof, the amount of $300,000;
(b) In the fifth line thereof, the amount of $300,000; and
(c) In the sixth line thereof, the amount of $50,000.
(12) Section 3023.0 Drainage nuisances. The following new section
shall be added to Article 30 to read in its entirety as follows:
3023.1 General. Any surface or roof drainage, which creates a
structural or health hazard, or any other nuisance to the owners
or occupants of adjacent premises, or to the public by reason of
discharge into or across any adjacent buildings, premises or public
thoroughfare, shall be abated by the owner of the improperly
drained area; and the Building Official shall require the drainage
to be disposed in accordance with the provisions of the Plumbing
Code of the Borough of Lewisburg.
(13) Section 801.2 Number of occupants. The following sentence shall
be added to the end of this section to read in its entirety as follows:
§ 152-17 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-17
134:99
§ 152-18. Severability; repealer.
However, in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough
of Lewisburg and in order to conform thereto, no more than three
unrelated persons shall live together as a household unit.
A. Savings clause. Nothing in this article or in the BOCA Basic Building
Code herein adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceedings now pending in any court, or any rights acquired or
liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action accrued or existing
under any act of ordinance repealed hereby. No right or remedy of any
character shall be lost, impaired, or affected by this article.
B. Validity. The invalidity of any section or provision of this article or of the
reference codes hereby adopted shall not invalidate any other sections
or provisions thereof.
C. Repeal/conflict of ordinances. Ordinance No. 81-8, enacted May 19,
1981, and any amendments thereto; Section 5 of Ordinance No. 80-8,
enacted August 19, 1980, and the Resolution adopted April 15, 1986,
insofar as they conflict with the provisions hereof; and all other
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith, be and the
same are hereby repealed; provided, however, that none of the
provisions of Ordinance No. 82-2, enacted July 20, 1982, which required
the installation of smoke detectors, and Ordinance No. 804, enacted
June 26, 1985, which created an historic district, shall be impaired or
affected by this article.
§ 152-17 LEWISBURG CODE § 152-18
134:100
ARTICLE V
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 5-19-1987 by Ord. No. 828]
§ 152-19. Adoption of property maintenance code. [Amended
10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833; 5-21-1991 by Ord. No. 872; 9-21-1993
by Ord. No. 887]
A certain document, copies of which are on file in the office of the Secretary
of the Borough of Lewisburg, being marked and known as the "BOCA
National Property Maintenance Code, 1990," or such newer edition of the
said Code then in existence, as published by the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc., with the changes noted herein for
inspections, permits, certain procedures and penalties, is hereby adopted as
the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Lewisburg and hereafter
designated as such; for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the said BOCA National Property Maintenance
Code, its supplements and amendments, are hereby incorporated herein by
reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, except as
hereinafter modified in § 152-20 of this article.
§ 152-20. Additions, insertions and changes. [Amended 10-20-1987
by Ord. No. 833; 5-17-1988 by Ord. No. 836; 11-15-1988 by Ord. No.
839; 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 841; 6-19-1990 by Ord. No. 859;
9-21-1993 by Ord. No. 887; 11-21-2000 by Ord. No. 922; 12-28-2000
by Ord. No. 927; 5-15-2001 by Ord. No. 929]
The following sections and subsections are hereby added to and inserted
in the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough as if they were established by the said
Code or existing provision of the said Code are amended and revised in the
following respects:
A. Section PM-105.3. Right of entry. The following subsections shall be
added to this section to read in their entirety as follows:
(1) The Building Official of the Borough shall have the right to make
inspections of any structure or premises either annually or less or
more often than annually in his/her sole discretion.
(2) In addition to any inspection that may otherwise be required for the
issuance, suspension or revocation of a public housing permit, the
Building Official shall inspect a structure or premises whenever:
(a) The use of such structure or premises changes.
(b) An alteration of such structure or premises results in an
increase or decrease in the habitable occupancy of such
structure or premises.
§ 152-19 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-20
134:101
(c) The occupants of such structure or premises vacate such
structure or premises.
(3) The Building Official shall charge an inspection fee for each
inspection made in accordance with the fee schedule of the
Borough and as such fee schedule may, from time to time, be
amended or modified by resolution of the Lewisburg Borough
Council.
B. Section PM1-106.2 Penalty. This section shall be revised to read in its
entirety as follows:
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
code shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before
a district justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000,
together with the costs of prosecution or be imprisoned for a period
not to exceed 30 days, or both. Each day that a violation continues
after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and
provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Section PM-111.2 Membership of the board. This section shall be
revised to read in its entirety as follows:
In order to protect and maintain the existing structures in the Borough
by vigorous enforcement of the provisions of this code, there shall be
and is hereby created a Code Appeals Board, hereafter referred to as
the Board, consisting of seven members who shall be appointed by the
Borough as follows:
(a) Two for five years.
(b) One for four years.
(c) One for three years.
(d) One for two years.
(e) One for one year.
Each initial member shall serve until the first day of January next
following the expiration of the term of their appointment or until a
successor has bee appointed. Thereafter, each new member shall serve
for five years or until a successor has been appointed.
D. Section PM-111.2.1 Qualifications. This section shall be revised to read
in its entirety as follows:
Each member of the Board shall be a licensed professional engineer or
architect or a builder or superintendent of building construction with
at least 10 years experience, five years of which shall have been in
responsible charge of work.
E. Section PM-111.6 Board decision. This section shall be revised to read
in its entirety as follows:
§ 152-20 LEWISBURG CODE § 152-20
134:102
The Board shall hear all appeals relative to the enforcement of this
code and by a concurring vote of a majority of its members present and
voting shall reverse, affirm or modify, in whole or in part, the decision
appealed from and shall make such order or determination as in its
opinion out to be made. Failure to secure such concurring votes shall
be deemed a confirmation of the decision of the Building Official. The
Building Official shall take immediate action in accordance with the
decision of the Board.
F. Section PM-112.0 Public housing permits. This section and the
following subsections shall be added to and inserted in said Code to
read in their entirety as follows:
(1) Permits. No person shall operate or rent to another for occupancy
any of the structures governed by the Property Maintenance Code
until such person has been issued a public housing permit by the
Building Official of the Borough. Such permit shall be separate
from any building or other permit required by any other ordinance
of the Borough.
(2) Application for permits. Application for said permits shall be made
to the Building Official on forms furnished by it and shall include
the following:
(a) The name and address of the owner and if the owner resides
more than 30 miles from the Borough for 30 or more days at
any time, also the name and address of the operator, who must
be a person residing within 30 miles of the Borough, to be
designated by the owner as the owner's agent for the purpose
of receipt of service of notices and other legal documents as
provided in this article.
(b) The location of the structure by street and number.
(c) The number of rooming and/or dwelling units available for
occupancy and the number of persons who may be
accommodated in accordance with the provisions of this code.
(d) Unless the use of the structure changes or an alteration
thereof results in a change in the number of units or the
habitable occupancy of such structure, in which event a new
permit must be applied for, a permit shall be renewed annually
on the anniversary date of its issuance upon payment of the
applicable renewal fee, subject to the right of the Building
Official to reinspect the structure at his/her discretion.
(3) Issuance of permits.
(a) The Building Official shall issue a permit to the applicant upon
inspection of the structure as set forth in § PM-105.3 of the
Property Maintenance Code concerning "right of entry," as
amended by this article, provided that this limitation shall only
§ 152-20 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-20
134:103
apply to the issuance of an initial or new permit to the
applicant, although nothing herein shall affect the Building
Official's right to inspect the structure at his/her sole
discretion in accordance with the said section and also upon
reasonable proof that:
[1] The structure complies with provision of this code and any
other applicable codes and ordinances of the Borough.
[2] The structure is in compliance with Chapter 360, Zoning,
of the Code of the Borough.
[3] The structure substantially, materially or reasonably
complies with the provisions of the Borough Building
Code, Plumbing Code, Electrical Code, Fire Prevention
Code10 and any other applicable codes and ordinance of
the Borough.
(b) If an applicant is denied a permit because the structure does
not comply with any of the provisions of the foregoing
paragraph of this subsection, than the Building Official shall
promptly notify the applicant of such denial and the reason or
reasons therefor and allow the applicant to bring the structure
into compliance within the time period specified by the
Building Official, the application for such permit will be
deemed void and the applicant must thereafter apply for a new
permit and pay the fees applicable to such new permit.
(c) A permit shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
its issuance, unless otherwise suspended or revoked as
hereinafter provided.
(d) Unless the use of the structure changes or an alteration
thereof results in a change in the number of units or the
habitable occupancy of such structure, in which event a new
permit must be applied for, a permit shall be renewed annually
on the anniversary date of its issuance upon payment of the
applicable renewal fee and submission in writing of the dates
during the prior year when monthly inspections were made of
the structure pursuant to Subsection (G) of this section,
subject to the right of the Building Official to reinspect the
structure at his/her discretion.
(4) Permit fees.
(a) The fee payable upon application for a permit shall be $50 per
structure, plus $10 for each additional dwelling and/or
rooming unit of such structure.
10.Editor's Note: See Articles I through IV of this chapter.
§ 152-20 LEWISBURG CODE § 152-20
134:104
(b) The renewal fee shall be $50 per structure, plus $10 for each
additional dwelling and/or rooming unit of such structure,
payable annually on the anniversary date of the issuance of the
permit.
(c) Inspection fees shall be charged at the hourly rate then in
effect with a minimum charge of one hour.
(d) Failure to pay any fee when due shall result in the revocation of
a permit or the nonrenewal thereof as the case may be.
(5) Display and use of permit.
(a) A permit shall be issued for the structure, which shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in the public hallway or inside
the front door of a rooming house or other multiunit structure
and in the front hallway or inside the front door of all other
structures covered by this code and also for each dwelling and/
or rooming unit of such structure, which shall be posted in a
conspicuous place inside the front door of each unit.
(b) An issued permit shall not be transferable.
(c) New owners or operators shall notify the Building Official
within 10 days of any transfer of ownership of any structure or
a change in the operator.
(d) The owner or operator shall keep, or cause to be kept, a
complete and accurate list of all occupants of the structure at
all times. Such list shall be made available by the owner or
operator to the Building Official for inspection and copying
upon request.
(6) Violations; suspension and revocation of permits.
(a) The Building Official may suspend or revoke a public housing
permit issued to an owner as hereinafter provided whenever
the owner or operator has violated any provision of this code or
any other applicable code or ordinance of the Borough, the
application for the public housing permit is found to contain
false information, or upon inspection of a structure, the
Building Official finds that conditions or practices exist which
are in violation of the provisions of this code or any other
applicable code or ordinances of the Borough.
(b) Upon violation as aforesaid, the Building Official shall serve, or
cause to be served, upon the owner or operator a notice of such
violation. Such notice shall be in writing and given by personal
service upon the addressee or by United State Mail, postage
prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his/her last
known address. Service of such notice shall be effective upon
the completion of personal service or upon the placing of the
§ 152-20 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-20
134:105
same in the custody of the United States Postal Service. Such
notice shall state that unless the violation(s) cited is/are
corrected within a period of three days from the date of such
notice, the public housing permit will be revoked and the
owner will be prosecuted as provided in this code.
(c) Before any suspended or revoked housing permit is again
issued, the Building Official shall reinspect the subject
structure and if it is then determined that the conditions of the
violation have not been corrected, the owner will be further
prosecuted as provided in this code.
(d) The Building Official shall maintain a record of all violations,
complaints and warning notices issued by the Building Official
and the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department. Owners
shall be notified of all violations of this code and other laws or
ordinances of the Borough committed upon or in their
structure or by any occupants thereof. [Amended 4-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1014]
(e) The owner or operator shall not evict an occupant or cause the
occupant to suffer any financial loss because such occupant
has complained about a possible violation of this code. This
shall not, however, prohibit the owner or operator from
evicting such occupant for reasons unrelated to the aforesaid
complaint.
G. Section PM-301.4 Inspection. This section shall be added to and
inserted in the said Code to read in its entirety as follows:
The owner of the premises, or in his/her absence, an operator of such
premises, of whom the Building Official has prior written notice, shall
be responsible for regularly inspecting the said premises.
H. Section PM-302.1 General. The following term shall be added to the
words and terms defined in this section and shall, for the purposes of
this code, have the meaning herein indicated:
“Prohibited furniture." Interior type furniture which would be
adversely affected by the elements and/or susceptible to infestation by
insects, rats or other vermin including, but not limited to, upholstered
couches and chairs or other fabric covered articles not designed or
intended for exterior use.
I. Section PM-303.1 Sanitation. This section shall be revised to read in its
entirety as follows:
All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean,
safe and sanitary condition. No prohibited furniture shall be placed
outside of a structure. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior
property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and
sanitary condition and free from all prohibited furniture.
§ 152-20 LEWISBURG CODE § 152-20
134:106
§ 152-21. Saving clause. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833;
9-21-1993 by Ord. No. 887]
Nothing in this article or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted,
or in the Borough's former Existing Structures Code, shall be construed
to affect any suit or proceeding now pending in any court, or any rights
acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or
existing under Ord. 73-4, or any other ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
§ 5 of Ord. 828; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character
be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
J. Section PM-303.9 Removal of abandoned or prohibited furniture. This
section shall be added to and inserted in the said Code to read in its
entirety as follows:
Whenever the Building Official determines that abandoned or
prohibited furniture is located in an exterior property area, he/she
shall notify the owner or operator as provided in § PM-112.0 of this
code to remove such furniture within the time set forth in such notice.
If the abandoned or prohibited furniture is not removed in such time,
the Borough Official may request the Borough Manager to cause such
furniture to be removed and the owner assessed the cost thereof
in accordance with the provisions of this code or other applicable
ordinance of the Borough and if not thereafter paid within 15 days, to
cause a line to be imposed therefor in accordance with the provisions
of this code or other applicable ordinance of the Borough or as
otherwise provided by law.
§ 152-20 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-21
134:107

ARTICLE VI
Building Energy Conservation Standards
[Adopted 5-19-1987]
§ 152-22. Administration of standards; inspection fee.
A. The Borough of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania, hereby elects
to administer the provisions of the Act of December 15, 1980 (No. 222),
as amended, known as the "Building Energy Conservation Act," for Use
Group R-3 buildings as defined therein.
B. The said Act shall be administered by the Building Official of the
Borough of Lewisburg.
C. For the purpose of such administration, an inspection fee of $10 shall be
collected.
§ 152-22 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-22
134:109

ARTICLE VII
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 4-20-2004 by Ord. No. 954]
§ 152-23. Adoption of construction code.
A. The Borough hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
B. The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the
Borough.
C. Administration and enforcement of the Code within the Borough shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by Borough
Council from time to time by resolution:
(1) By the designation of an employee of the Borough to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the Borough;
(2) By the retention of one or more construction code officials or third
party agencies to act on behalf of the Borough;
(3) By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of the Code through an
intermunicipal agreement;
(4) By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the Code on behalf of the
Borough; or
(5) By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department
of Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement
of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and
utility and miscellaneous use structures.
D. A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of Borough
Council in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions
of the Code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set
forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
E. Enactment of this article shall affect existing Borough ordinances as
follows:
(1) All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Borough on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
§ 152-23 CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS § 152-23
134:111
or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed
the minimum requirements of the Code, as amended from time to
time.
(2) All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose
requirements are less than the minimum requirements of the Code
are hereby amended to conform with the comparable provisions of
the Code.
(3) All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough not
governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
F. Fees assessable by the Borough for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the Code shall be established by
Borough Council by resolution from time to time.
G. If any section, subsection, sentence or clause of this article is held, for
any reason, to be invalid, such decision or decisions shall not affect the
validity of the remaining provisions of this article.
§ 152-23 LEWISBURG CODE § 152-23
134:112
Chapter 158
DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
315.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 152.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 158-1. Permit required for construction.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to make, construct, or install
a private driveway intersecting any public street or private access to any
public street for the use of vehicles without first obtaining a permit to do so.
§ 158-2. Application; fee. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
Applications for permits shall be made through the Office of Borough
Secretary in written form, stating the name of the owner of the affected
property, the address and location of the affected property, accompanied by
a draft or print of the proposed driveway showing its exact location, the
width, length, and type construction to be used. Each application shall be
accompanied by an inspection fee as established by resolution of Borough
Council.
§ 158-3. Approval of application. [Amended 6-6-1966 by Ord. No.
540; 7-17-1990 by Ord. No. 861; 7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 899]
No application shall be approved unless the proposed private driveway shall
meet the following requirements:
A. There shall be a clearance from the driveway to the intersection of any
two Borough streets or a Borough street and alley of at least 50 feet. A
variance from such clearance may be granted by Borough Council but
only after a review by the Police, Planning and Public Works
Committees of the Borough which results in a finding that deviation
from the fifty-foot restriction will not create a significant safety hazard
or significantly increase an existing safety hazard.
B. The width of the driveway shall not be less than 12 feet and not more
than 22 feet at the point of intersection with the public street.
C. The driveway shall have a base of aggregate or concrete meeting
minimum requirements of the State Transportation Department, for
depth of not less than six inches and have a hard surface of macadam or
concrete for the full width of a type meeting minimum requirements of
the State Transportation Department.
§ 152-23 DRIVEWAYS § 158-3
158:113
§ 158-4. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-20-1988 by Ord. No.
841]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, together
with the costs of prosecution, or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed
30 days, or both. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Chapter 170
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conduct — See Ch. 142.
Loitering — See Ch. 208.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 170-1. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
Except in necessary defense of person and property and except as provided
in § 170-3 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, or
discharge any gun or other firearm within the Borough of Lewisburg.
§ 170-2. Use of air rifles, bow and arrows, or similar devices
restricted. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol,
spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun, bow and arrow, or similar device, or
any implement that is not a firearm but which impels a pellet of any kind
with a force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm, at any
place within the Borough, except as provided in § 170-3 of this chapter, and
except on a target range which is properly constructed to trap or stop the
projectile as ascertained by the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional
Police Department.
§ 170-3. Exceptions.
this chapter shall not apply to any law enforcement officers when used in
the discharge of their official duties.
D. There shall be minimum visibility, unobstructed, within 10 feet
measured perpendicular from public street, of at least 100 feet in each
direction, along the public street.
§ 158-3 LEWISBURG CODE § 170-4
158:114
§ 170-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, and/or
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 174
FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 32.
§ 174-1. Designated officer.
The Borough Manager, or such authorized designee as approved by
Borough Council, is hereby appointed as the designated officer who is
authorized to carry out all responsibilities stated in this chapter.
§ 174-2. Municipal certificate required.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter referred to as
the "insuring agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located
within the Borough where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to
the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500, unless the insuring agent
is furnished by the Borough's Tax Collector with a municipal certificate
pursuant to § 508(b) of Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and unless there is
compliance with §§ 508(c) and 508(d) of Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 174-3. Loss report.
The Borough's Tax Collector shall, upon the written request of the named
insured specifying the tax description of the property, the name and address
of the insuring agent and the date agreed upon by the insuring agent and
the named insured as the date of the receipt of a loss report of the claim,
furnish the insuring agent either of the following within 14 working days of
the said request:
A. A certificate or, at the discretion of the Borough, a verbal notification
which shall be confirmed in writing by the insuring agent to the effect
that, as of the date specified in the said request, there are no delinquent
taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against the property and
that, as of the date of the certificate or verbal notification, the Borough
has not certified any amount as total costs incurred by the Borough for
the removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the
property; or,
§ 170-4 FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS § 174-3
174:115
§ 174-4. Payment of bill.
Upon the receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to § 174-3B of this
chapter, the insuring agent shall return the bill to the Borough's Tax
Collector and transfer to the Borough's Tax Collector an amount from the
insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes, assessments, penalties,
charges and costs as shown on the bill. The Borough shall receive the
amount and apply or credit it to payment of the items shown in the bill.
§ 174-5. Payment of claim.
Upon the receipt of a certificate pursuant to § 174-3A of this chapter, the
insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured in accordance with
the policy terms; provided, however, that if the loss agreed to between
the named insured and the insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the
aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building or other
structure, the following procedures shall be followed:
B. A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties and user charges against the property as of the
date specified in the said request that have not been paid as of the date
of the certificate and also showing, as of the date of the certificate, the
amount of the total costs, if any, certified to the Borough's Tax Collector
that have been incurred by the Borough for removal, repair or securing
of a building or other structure on the property. For the purposes of this
subsection, the Borough shall certify to the Borough's Tax Collector the
total amount, if any, of such costs. A tax, assessment, penalty or user
charge becomes delinquent at the time and on the date a lien could
otherwise have been filed against the property by the Borough under
applicable law.
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
Borough Manager in the aggregate $2,000 for each $15,000 and for
each fraction of that amount of a claim (this subsection to be applied
such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the amount transferred to the
Borough shall be $2,000, or, if at the time of a loss report the named
insured has submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other structure in an
amount less than the amount calculated under the foregoing transfer
formula, the insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds
to the Borough Manager the amount specified in the estimate.
B. The transfer of the proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or other
structure.
C. After the aforesaid transfer, the named insured may submit a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, in which event the Borough
Manager shall return the amount of the funds transferred to the
Borough in excess of the estimate to the named insured if the Borough
§ 174-3 LEWISBURG CODE § 174-5
174:116
§ 174-6. Adoption of procedures and regulations.
Borough Council may from time to time by resolution adopt procedures and
regulations to implement Act 98 of 1992, as amended, and this chapter
has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other
structure.
D. Upon receipt of the proceeds under this section, the Borough shall do
the following:
(1) The Borough Manager shall place the proceeds in a separate fund
to be used solely as security against the total costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure which are
incurred by the Borough. Such costs shall include, without
limitation, any engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred
by the Borough in connection with such removal, repair or securing
of the building or other structure or any proceedings related
thereto;
(2) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the Borough with the name and address of the
named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name
and address of the named insured, the Borough Manager shall
contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been
received by the Borough and notify the named insured that the
procedures under this subsection shall be followed;
(3) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the Borough and the required proof of
such completion received by the Borough Manager, the fund shall
be returned to the name insured if the Borough has not incurred
any costs for repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure, the costs shall be paid from the fund to the Borough and
if excess funds then remain, the Borough shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured; and
(4) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
Borough pursuant to this section and not returned to the named
insured, such interest shall belong to the Borough, but to the extent
that proceeds are returned to the named insured, interest earned
on such proceeds shall be distributed to the named insured at the
time that the proceeds are returned.
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Borough to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit the Borough and the named insured from
entering into an agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the
named insured if some other reasonable disposition of the damaged
property has been negotiated.
§ 174-5 FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS § 174-6
174:117
and may from time to time by resolution fix reasonable fees to be charged
for municipal activities or services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992,
as amended, and this chapter, including but not limited to issuance of
certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening separate fund
accounts.
§ 174-7. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, named insured or insuring agent who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, plus the costs of
prosecution, for each violation, and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 179
(RESERVED)
Chapter 182
GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 280.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
Trees — See Ch. 332.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 182-1. Vegetative growth a nuisance under certain conditions.
[Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
No person, firm or corporation, owning or occupying any property within
the Borough shall permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation whatsoever,
not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or
remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height of 10 inches, or to
throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor, or to conceal any filthy deposit, or
to create or produce pollen. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing
upon any premises in the Borough in violation of any of the provisions of this
section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health,
safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the Borough.
§ 182-2. Responsibility for removing, cutting or trimming.
[Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
The owner of any premises, or the occupant of premises occupied by
other than the owner, shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or other
vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of the
provisions of § 182-1.
§ 174-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 182-3
182:118
§ 182-3. Notice to remove, trim or cut; removal by Borough; costs.
[Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
The Borough Council is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal
service or by United States mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case
may be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation is
growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of § 182-1 of this chapter,
directing and requiring such occupant to remove, trim or cut such grass,
weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the requirements of this chapter,
within 10 days after issuance of such notice. Whenever, in the judgment
of the Borough Council, it shall appear to be impracticable to give notice
as above provided, either because the owner or occupant cannot readily
be found or because a search for the owner or occupant would entail
unreasonable delay, the Borough Council or any officer or employee of the
Borough designated thereby for that purpose may give notice by posting
conspicuously on the property where such nuisance exists, a notice or order
directing and requiring that such nuisance be abated within 10 days. In
case any person, firm or corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply
with such notice within the period of time stated therein, the Borough
Council, or any officer or employee of the Borough designated thereby for
this purpose, may order the removal, trimming or cutting of such grass,
weeds or vegetation, and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of
the cost thereof, shall be collected by the Borough from such person, firm
or corporation, in the manner provided by law.
§ 182-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more
than $300, and/or to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues after notice shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 186
HISTORIC DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 152. Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 186-1. Intent.
In accordance with Sections 603(a)(2) and 605(2)(vi) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, July 31, P.L. 805, No. 247, Art.
VI, as amended [53 P.S. §§ 10603(a)(2) and 10605(2)(vi)], there is hereby
created in the Borough of Lewisburg a historic district, which shall be a
separate historic overlay zone serving as a supplement to the underlying
§ 182-3 GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION § 186-1
182:119
zoning provisions of Chapter 360, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of
Lewisburg, to be known as "Historic Lewisburg," and to be located within
the geographic limits of the Borough, for the purpose of protecting the
portions of the Borough which recall the rich architectural and cultural
heritage of the Borough and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, awakening
in the people of the Borough an interest in the historic past and promoting
the general welfare, education and culture of the Borough, and for the
further specific purposes of regulating the use and appearance of private
property in order to protect the distinctive historical, architectural or
aesthetic character of the historic district and regulating the erection,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition and razing of buildings
and structures within the historic district for the cultural and aesthetic
benefit of the Borough. However, it is not the intent of this chapter to
limit new construction to any one period or architectural style, but to
preserve the integrity of historic buildings and structures and to ensure the
compatibility of new work constructed in Historic Lewisburg.
§ 186-2. District boundaries. [Amended 8-19-2014 by Ord. No.
1029]
The boundary limits of Historic Lewisburg, although irregular, reflect the
expanded boundaries of the Borough during the period of its building boom
through the 1880's, and are described as follows:
A. Beginning at a point at the southeastern corner of the intersection of
North Derr Drive (U.S. Route 15) and Green Alley, formerly the right-ofway
of the Penn-Central Railroad and then Conrail;
(1) Thence in a northerly direction along the eastern right-of-way line
of North Derr Drive to a point at the southeastern corner of the
intersection of North Derr Drive and North Eighth Street;
(2) Thence in southeasterly direction along the western right-of-way
line of North Eighth Street to a point at the northwestern corner of
the intersection of North Eighth Street and Green Alley;
(3) Thence in a northeasterly direction along the northern right-of-way
line of Green Alley to the southwestern corner of lands identified as
Union County Tax Parcel No. 008-018-198;
(4) Thence in a northwesterly direction along the western line of the
said lands identified as Parcel No. 008-018-198 to a point in the
southern right-of-way line of St. Mary Street;
(5) Thence in a northeasterly direction along the said southern rightof-
way line of St. Mary Street to a point at the northeastern corner
of the intersection of St. Mary Street and North Fifth Street;
(6) Thence in a northwesterly direction along the eastern right-of-way
line of North Fifth Street to a point at the northwestern corner of
the intersection of North Fifth Street and St. Anthony Street;
§ 186-1 LEWISBURG CODE § 186-2
182:120
(7) Thence in a northeasterly direction along the northern right-of-way
line of St. Anthony Street to the southwestern corner of lands
identified as Union County Tax Parcel No. 008-016-001;
(8) Thence along the western line of the said lands identified as Parcel
No. 008-016-001 and across Buffalo Road to a point in the northern
right-of-way line of Buffalo Road;
(9) Thence in a northwesterly direction along the said northern rightof-
way line of Buffalo Road to a point at the northeastern corner of
the intersection of Buffalo Road and Raspberry Alley;
(10) Thence in a northwesterly direction along the eastern right-of-way
line of Raspberry Alley to a point at the northeastern corner of the
intersection of Raspberry Alley and Bison Alley;
(11) Thence in a southwesterly direction along the northern right-ofway
line of Bison Alley to a point at the northeastern corner of the
intersection of Bison Alley and North Fifth Street;
(12) Thence in a northwesterly direction along the eastern right-of-way
line of North Fifth Street to a point at the intersection of the
eastern line of the right-of-way of the North Shore Railroad and the
western line of lands identified as Union County Tax Parcel No.
008-016-071;
(13) Thence in a northwesterly direction along the western lines of the
said lands identified as Parcel No. 008-016-071 and those lands
identified as Union County Tax Parcel Nos. 008-016-072 and
008-016-073 to a point at the intersection of the northwestern
corner of the said lands identified as Parcel No. 008-016-073 and
the eastern line of the said North Shore Railroad right-of-way;
(14) Thence in a northeasterly direction along the northern line of the
said lands identified as Parcel No. 008-016-073 to a point in the
western right-of-way line of North Fourth Street;
(15) Thence in a southeasterly direction along the said western right-ofway
line of North Fourth Street to a point at the southwestern
corner of the intersection of North Fourth Street and Beck Street;
(16) Thence in a northeasterly direction across North Fourth Street and
along the southern right-of-way line of Beck Street to a point at the
southeastern corner of the intersection of Beck Street and Hazel
Tree Alley;
(17) Thence in a southeasterly direction along the eastern right-of-way
line of Hazel Tree Alley to a point at the northwestern corner of
lands identified as Union County Tax Parcel No. 008-016-003;
(18) Thence in a northeasterly direction along the northern lines of the
said lands identified as Parcel No. 008-016-003 and those lands
identified as Union County Tax Parcel Nos. 008-016-004,
§ 186-2 GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION § 186-2
182:121
008-016-005, 008-016-006, 008-016-007, 008-016-008,
008-016-009 and 008-016-010 to the northeastern corner of the
said lands identified as Parcel No. 008-016-010;
(19) Thence in a southeasterly direction along the eastern line of the
said lands identified as Parcel No. 008-016-010 and across St.
Anthony Street to a point in the southern right-of-way line of St.
Anthony Street;
(20) Thence in a northeasterly direction along the said southern rightof-
way line of St. Anthony Street to a point at the southeastern
corner of the intersection of St. Anthony Street and North Water
Street;
(21) Thence in a southeasterly direction along the eastern right-of-way
line of North Water Street to a point at the northwestern corner of
lands identified as Union County Tax Parcel No. 008-014-003;
(22) Thence in a northeasterly direction along the northern line of the
said lands identified as Parcel No. 008-014-003 to a point on the
eastern corporate boundary line of the Borough of Lewisburg at the
west bank of the Susquehanna River;
(23) Thence in a southeasterly direction along the said west bank of the
Susquehanna River and the eastern corporate boundary line of the
Borough of Lewisburg to a point in the southern right-of-way line of
St. Louis Street;
(24) Thence in a southwesterly direction along the said southern rightof-
way line of St. Louis Street to a point at the southwestern corner
of the intersection of St. Louis Street and Walnut Alley;
(25) Thence in a southeasterly direction along the western right-of-way
line of Walnut Alley to the northwestern corner of the intersection
of Walnut Alley and St. Catherine Street;
(26) Thence in a southwesterly direction along the northern line of St.
Catherine Street to a point at the northeastern corner of the
intersection of St. Catherine Street and South Front Street;
(27) Thence in a southeasterly direction along the eastern right-of-way
line of South Front Street to a point at the southeastern corner of
the intersection of South Front Street and St. George Street;
(28) Thence in a southwesterly direction along the southern right-ofway
line of St. George Street to a point at the southwestern corner
of the intersection of St. George Street and Pear Tree Alley;
(29) Thence in a southerly direction along the western right-of-way line
of Pear Tree Alley to a point in the southern right-of-way line of Mill
Street;
§ 186-2 LEWISBURG CODE § 186-2
182:122
(30) Thence in a westerly direction along the said southern right-of-way
line of Mill Street to a point at the northeastern corner of lands
identified as Union County Tax Parcel No. 008-011-007;
(31) Thence in a southerly direction along the eastern line of the said
lands identified as Parcel No. 008-011-007 to a point at the
southeastern corner of such lands;
(32) Thence in a westerly direction along the southern lines of the said
lands identified as Parcel No. 008-011-007 and those lands
identified as Union County Tax Parcel Nos. 008-011-007.1 and
008-011-030 to the northeastern corner of lands identified as Union
County Tax Parcel No. 008-011-029;
(33) Thence in a southeasterly direction along the eastern lines of the
said lands identified as Parcel No. 008-011-029 and those lands
identified as Union County Tax Parcel Nos. 008-011-028,
008-011-027, 008-011-026.1 and 008-011-026 to a point at the
southwestern corner of the intersection of Malcom Street and Ball
Alley;
(34) Thence continuing in a southeasterly direction along the western
right-of-way line of Ball Alley, across Linn Street and Donachy Alley,
and through Union County Tax Parcel Nos. 008-011-003 and
008-011-002 to a point at the intersection of the southern corporate
boundary line of the Borough of Lewisburg and the centerline of
the said North Shore Railroad right-of-way;
(35) Thence in a southwesterly direction across the said North Shore
Railroad right-of-way and Legislative Route 59037, and then in a
northwesterly direction along the corporate boundary line between
the Borough of Lewisburg and the Township of East Buffalo
through Bucknell University to a point at the southeastern corner
of the intersection of Walker Street, Moore Avenue and South
Seventh Street;
(36) Thence continuing in a northwesterly direction across Walker
Street and along the eastern right-of-way line of South Seventh
Street to a point at the northeastern corner of the intersection of
South Seventh Street and Roto Drive;
(37) Thence in a southwesterly direction along the northern right-ofway
lines of Roto Drive and Davis Gym Lane and the southern line
of lands identified as Union County Tax Parcel No. 008-017-057 to a
point in the eastern right-of-way line of South Derr Drive (U.S.
Route 15);
(38) Thence in a northwesterly direction along the eastern right-of-way
line of South Derr Drive to the northwestern corner of lands
identified as Union County Tax Parcel No. 008-017-060;
§ 186-2 GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION § 186-2
182:123
§ 186-3. Historical Architectural Review Board. [Amended
4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 847]
There is hereby created an Historical Architectural Review Board to be
composed of seven members, appointed by the Borough Council, one of
whom shall be a registered architect, one a licensed real estate broker,
one a person having expertise, experience or a background in preservation,
historical or planning areas, and four additional persons with a knowledge
of and interest in the preservation of the historic district. The Borough
Council in appointing the four additional persons shall consider, but shall
not be required to appoint, those persons recommended by the local
historical society. At least five members of the Board shall own property
and reside within Historic Lewisburg. The initial terms of the first seven
members of the Board shall be as follows: two shall serve until the
reorganization meeting of the Borough Council in 1986, three until the
(39) Thence in a northeasterly direction along the northern line of the
said lands identified as Parcel No. 008-017-060 and the southern
right-of-way line of St. Catherine Street to a point at the
southeastern corner of the intersection of St. Catherine Street and
Hawn Alley;
(40) Thence in a northwesterly direction along the eastern right-of-way
line of Hawn Alley to a point at the northeastern corner of the
intersection of Hawn Alley and White Pine Alley;
(41) Thence in a southwesterly direction along the northern right-ofway
line of White Pine Alley to a point at the northwestern corner of
the intersection of White Pine Alley and South Eighth Street;
(42) Thence in a northwesterly direction along the western right-of-way
line of South Eighth Street to a point at the northwestern corner of
the intersection of South Eighth Street and Market Street;
(43) Thence in a southwesterly direction along the northern right-ofway
line of Market Street to a point in the eastern right-of-way line
of North Derr Drive;
(44) Thence in a northerly direction along the said eastern right-of-way
line of North Derr Drive to a point at the southeastern corner of the
intersection of North Derr Drive and Cherry Alley;
(45) Thence in a northeasterly direction along the southern right-of-way
line of Cherry Alley to a point at the southeastern corner of the
intersection of Cherry Alley and Currant Alley;
(46) Thence in a northwesterly direction along the eastern right-of-way
line of Currant Alley to a point at the southeastern corner of the
intersection of Currant Alley and Green Alley;
(47) Thence in a southwesterly direction along the southern right-ofway
line of Green Alley to the point or place of beginning.
§ 186-2 LEWISBURG CODE § 186-3
182:124
reorganization meeting in 1988, and two until the reorganization meeting
in 1990. Their successors shall thereafter serve for a term of three years.
The position of any member of the Board residing within the historic district
at the time of appointment who thereafter moves his residence from the
historic district or of any member of the Board appointed in his capacity as
a registered architect or a licensed real estate broker who thereafter ceases
to be so engaged shall be automatically considered vacant. An appointment
to fill a vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
§ 186-4. Function of Board.
The function of the Historical Architectural Review Board shall be to give
counsel to the Borough Council regarding the advisability of issuing any
certificates or permits within Historic Lewisburg which are required to
be issued pursuant to Chapter 360, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough
of Lewisburg, Chapter 152, Uniform Construction Codes, of the Code of
the Borough of Lewisburg, this chapter, and any other ordinance of the
Borough of Lewisburg or law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. For
this purpose, the Board may make and alter rules and regulations for
their own organization and procedure, which shall be consistent with this
chapter, any other applicable ordinance of the Borough of Lewisburg and
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; provided, however, that
the Board shall meet publicly on a regular monthly basis at a designated
place. A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum and action taken
at any meeting of the Board shall require the affirmative vote of a majority
of the quorum of the Board. The members of the Board shall serve without
compensation, and shall make an annual report of their transactions to
the Borough Council. The Board may, pursuant to appropriations made by
the Borough Council, employ secretarial assistance, pay their salaries and
wages and incur other necessary expenses.
§ 186-5. Permit requirements, exemptions.
The Zoning Officer of the Borough of Lewisburg shall not issue a permit for
any erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition, or razing of
a building, structure or part thereof in Historic Lewisburg until the Borough
Council has issued a Certificate of Appropriateness. However, nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or
repair of any exterior elements of any building, structure or part thereof
in Historic Lewisburg, including any work, for which a building permit
is not required by law, where the purpose and effect of such work is to
correct any deterioration or decay of or damage to a building, structure or
any part thereof and to restore the same, as nearly as may be practical,
to its condition prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay or
damage. Further, none of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed
as to prevent any measures of reconstruction, alteration, restoration or
demolition necessary to correct or abate the unsafe or dangerous condition
of any building, structure or part thereof, where such condition has been
declared unsafe or dangerous pursuant to the applicable ordinances of the
Borough or the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and where the
§ 186-3 GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION § 186-5
182:125
proposed measures have been declared necessary by the Borough Council,
or a properly authorized official, to correct the said condition; provided,
however, that only such work as is reasonably necessary to correct the
unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed pursuant to this section.
In the event any building, structure or part thereof shall be damaged by fire
or other calamity, or by act of God or by the public enemy, to such an extent
that it cannot reasonably be repaired and restored, it may be removed in
conformity with the applicable ordinances of the Borough and the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 186-6. Special processing procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a permit for work to be done in Historic
Lewisburg, the Zoning Officer of the Borough of Lewisburg shall act in
accordance with the procedure then being followed in that office pursuant
to Chapter 360, Zoning, and Chapter 152, Uniform Construction Codes,
of the Code of the Borough of Lewisburg, except as those procedures are
necessarily modified by the following requirements:
§ 186-7. Review of application by Board.
Upon receipt by the Historical Architectural Review Board of a notice from
the Zoning Officer of the Borough of Lewisburg that an application for a
permit for the erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition
or razing of a building, structure or any part thereof in Historic Lewisburg
has been filed in the Office of the Zoning Officer, the Board shall within 30
days of the receipt of such notice schedule and hold a public meeting to
consider the counsel which the Board will give to the Borough Council. The
person applying for the permit shall be advised of the time and place of the
said meeting and be invited to appear, together with any person or persons
as he may desire, to explain his reasons therefor. The Board may also invite
such other person or persons as it desires to attend its meeting.
§ 186-8. Issuance of Certificate of Appropriateness.
In determining the counsel to be presented to the Borough Council
concerning the issuing of a Certificate of Appropriateness and authorizing
a permit for the erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition
A. He shall within 20 days of the receipt of such application forward to the
Office of the Historical Architectural Review Board a copy of the
application for the permit, together with a copy of the plot plan and the
building plans and specifications filed by the applicant;
B. He shall maintain in his office a record of all such applications and of his
handling and final disposition of the same, which in addition shall be
appropriately cross-referenced to his other records; and
C. He shall require applicants to submit a sufficient number of additional
copies of material required to be attached to an application for a permit
to allow compliance with the foregoing requirements.
§ 186-5 LEWISBURG CODE § 186-8
182:126
or razing of all or a part of any building or structure within Historic
Lewisburg, the Historical Architectural Review Board shall consider the
following factors:
§ 186-9. Authority of Board.
If the Historical Architectural Review Board, on the basis of the information
received at the meeting provided for in § 186-7 of this chapter and from its
general background and knowledge, decides to counsel against the granting
of a Certificate of Appropriateness, it shall indicate to the applicant for
the permit the changes in his plans and specifications, if any, which in the
opinion of the Board would protect the distinctive historical, architectural
and aesthetic character of Historic Lewisburg. The Board shall withhold
its report to the Borough Council for a period of up to 15 days following
its decision to allow the applicant to decide whether or not to make the
suggested changes in his plans and specifications. If the applicant
determines that he will make the suggested changes, he shall so advise the
Board which shall counsel the Borough Council accordingly.
§ 186-10. Written report to Borough Council.
The Historical Architectural Review Board, after the meeting and the
making of any changes in the plans and specifications as provided for in
§§ 186-7 and 186-9 of this chapter, respectively, shall within 30 days of its
meeting submit to the Borough Council, in writing, its report with respect
to its counsel concerning the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness
and authorizing a permit for the erection, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any building or structure
within Historic Lewisburg. The written report shall set out the following
matters:
A. The purposes of this chapter;
B. The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic,
architectural and aesthetic nature of the historic district;
C. The appropriateness of exterior architectural features which can be
seen from a public street or way, but not including an alley, only; and
D. The general design, arrangement, texture and material of the building
or structure in question and its appurtenant fixtures, including facade
and signs, and the relationship of such features to similar features of
other buildings or structures in the historic district.
A. The exact location of the area in which the work is to be done;
B. The exterior changes to be made or the exterior character of the
building or structure to be erected;
C. A list of the surrounding buildings or structures with their general
exterior characteristics;
§ 186-8 GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION § 186-10
182:127
§ 186-11. Review and decision by Borough Council.
Upon receipt of the written report of the Historical Architectural Review
Board as provided in § 186-10 of this chapter, the Borough Council shall
within 45 days of the receipt of such report consider at a regular or special
meeting the question of issuing to the Zoning Officer of the Borough of
Lewisburg a Certificate of Appropriateness authorizing a permit for the
work covered by the application. The applicant shall be advised by the
Borough Secretary of the time and place of the meeting at which his
application will be considered and shall have the right to attend, together
with any person or persons as he may desire, and be heard as to his
reasons for filing the same. In determining whether or not to certify as
to the appropriateness of the proposed erection, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any building or structure
within Historic Lewisburg, the Borough Council shall consider the written
report of the Historical Architectural Review Board and the same factors
as considered by the Board as set forth in § 186-8 of this chapter. If the
Borough Council approves the appropriateness, it shall issue a Certificate
of Appropriateness authorizing the Zoning Officer to issue a permit for the
work covered. If the Borough Council disapproves the appropriateness, it
shall do so in writing and copies thereof shall be given to the applicant
and the Zoning Officer. The written disapproval shall also indicate what
changes in the plans and specifications, if any, would meet the conditions for
protecting the distinctive historical, architectural and aesthetic character of
Historic Lewisburg.
§ 186-12. Application deemed approved upon failure of Board to
review.
In the event the Historical Architectural Review Board fails to hold its
required meeting within 30 days from the date it receives notice from the
Zoning Officer of the Borough of Lewisburg that an application for a permit
D. The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic,
architectural and aesthetic nature of the historic district;
E. The appropriateness of exterior architectural features which can be
seen from a public street or way, but not including an alley, only;
F. The general design, arrangement, texture and material of the building
or structure in question and its appurtenant fixtures, including facade
and signs, and the relationship of such features to similar features of
other buildings or structures in the historic district;
G. The opinion of the Board, including any dissent, as to the
appropriateness of the work proposed as it will preserve or destroy the
historic, architectural and aesthetic aspect and nature of the historic
district; and
H. The specific counsel of the Board as to the issuance or refusal to issue
by the Borough Council of a Certificate of Appropriateness.
§ 186-10 LEWISBURG CODE § 186-12
182:128
has been filed or thereafter fails to submit its written report to the Borough
Council within 30 days of its meeting or in the event the Borough Council
fails to hold its required meeting and to render its decision within 45 days
from the date it receives the written report of the Board, the decision
shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the
applicant had agreed in writing to an extension of time.
§ 186-13. Disapproval; appeal.
Upon receipt of the written disapproval of the Borough Council, the Zoning
Officer of the Borough of Lewisburg shall, within 10 days of the receipt of
such disapproval, disapprove the application for the permit and so advise
the applicant. The applicant may thereafter appeal from the disapproval
of the application as provided by Chapter 360, Zoning, of the Code of the
Borough of Lewisburg and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 186-14. Remedies for violations.
In case any building, structure or part thereof is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, restored, converted, demolished or razed
in violation of this chapter, Borough Council or, with its approval, the Zoning
Officer or other properly authorized official, in addition to and not in lieu of
any other remedies or any criminal prosecution and penalty, may institute
in the name of the Borough any appropriate action or proceedings at law
or in equity to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, restoration, conversion, demolition or razing, and to
restrain, correct or abate such violation.
§ 186-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord.
No. 833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 196
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 196-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 186-12 JUNKYARDS § 196-1
196:129
JUNKYARD — Any place or places, either on public or private property,
where worn out, discarded, second hand, rubbish, wood, building material,
or scrap material (such as iron, steel, or any metal, rags, paper, automobiles
or parts of automobiles) is stored or allowed to accumulate, collect or stand.
§ 196-2. Junkyards prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation, to
establish, maintain, conduct or allow any junkyard, either on public or
private property, within the limits of the Borough of Lewisburg,
Pennsylvania.
§ 196-3. Abatable nuisance.
The establishment, maintenance or conduct of any junkyard within the
limits of the Borough of Lewisburg is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and liable to be abated as provided by law.
§ 196-4. Existing junkyards.
Any junkyard heretofore established and now existing and maintained upon
any property, either private or public, within the limits of the Borough of
Lewisburg is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be removed by the
owner, lessee or proprietor of such premises.
§ 196-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-1-1946 by Ord. No.
225; 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Every week that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 208
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverage — See Ch. 100.
Bicycles — See Ch. 112.
Conduct — See Ch. 142.
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 170.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 235.
Skateboards and in-line skates — See Ch. 264.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
§ 196-1 LEWISBURG CODE § 208-1
196:130
§ 208-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words or terms shall have the
meanings and shall be construed according to the definitions indicated
hereinbelow, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context of
this chapter.
LOITERING — Remaining idle essentially in one location, lingering;
spending time idly; loafing or walking about aimlessly in one vicinity or
neighborhood; or "hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including but
not limited to any public street, alley, parking lot or sidewalk, the front of
and the area immediately adjacent to any school, and any store, restaurant,
tavern or other place of business.
§ 208-2. Certain types of loitering prohibited.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 208-3. Order to leave. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 208-2 of this chapter,
any Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department police officer may order that
person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being
ordered to do so by a Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department police
officer shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
§ 208-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, plus costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period
not to exceed 90 days.
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace;
B. Create or cause to be created any annoyance to any person or persons;
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in § 208-1 of this chapter, including but not limited to
the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or
insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person
to, or in whose hearing, they are made.
§ 208-1 JUNKYARDS § 208-4
196:131
Chapter 219
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 345.
§ 208-4 LEWISBURG CODE § 208-4
219:132
ARTICLE I
Engine Suppressors/Brake Retarders
[Adopted 4-19-2005 by Ord. No. 963]
§ 219-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Engine Suppression/Brake Retarder/
Engine Brake Ordinance of the Borough of Lewisburg."
§ 219-2. Legislative intent.
Borough Council finds as a fact that the operation of an engine brake, an
engine suppression device or a compression brake on a gasoline powered
or diesel powered motor vehicle not equipped with exhaust mufflers, or
equipped with defective or modified exhaust mufflers, so as to create
excessive noise through the use of said engine brake, engine suppression
device or compression brake, adversely affects the public health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Borough of Lewisburg and, therefore, is a
nuisance in fact.
§ 219-3. Engine brake prohibited.
No gasoline powered or diesel powered motor vehicles shall be operated
on the streets, roads, alleys or highways listed below within the Borough of
Lewisburg, utilizing, in said operation, an engine brake, engine suppression
device or compression brake without exhaust mufflers, or with defective or
modified exhaust mufflers, permitting excessive noise to be created by said
motor vehicle.
§ 219-4. Applicability.
The street subject to the prohibition set forth in § 219-3 of this article shall
be Market Street, State Route 45, East and West from Water Street to State
Route 15.
§ 219-5. Emergency situations.
This article shall not apply to emergency driving.
§ 219-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before
a District Justice having jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $50 or more than $300, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of the
payment thereof, shall be sentenced to undergo imprisonment in the Union
County Jail for a period not to exceed 10 days.
§ 219-1 NOISE § 219-6
219:133
Chapter 230
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 100.
Animals — See Ch. 106.
Bicycles — See Ch. 112.
Buffalo Valley Recreation Authority — See Ch.
11, Art. II.
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 134.
Conduct — See Ch. 142.
Firearms and weapons — See Ch. 170.
Loitering — See Ch. 208.
Open burning — See Ch. 125.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 235.
Skateboards and in-line skates — See Ch. 264.
Solid waste — See Ch. 280.
Trees — See Ch. 332.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 345.
§ 230-1. Hours of operation.
Parks, playground and recreation areas of the Borough of Lewisburg are to
be open between 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. for the general public and until
12:00 midnight for supervised activities.
§ 230-2. Prohibited acts. [Amended 4-20-1982 by Ord. No. 82-1;
3-18-1986 by Ord. No. 812]
The following acts, uses and conduct in the parks, playgrounds, recreation
areas and municipal parking lots of the Borough are prohibited:
A. Possession or use of alcoholic beverages, except the use, possession
and consumption of beer and/or wine may be permitted at the
discretion of the Lewisburg Borough Council upon application
submitted to the Borough of Lewisburg by a nonprofit corporation or
organization at least 30 days in advance of an event scheduled for the
purpose of fundraising and/or promoting such entity, subject to the
following regulations: [Amended 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 1039]
(1) Upon submission of the application, a permit fee of $250 or such
other fee as may be established from time to time by resolution of
the Lewisburg Borough Council shall be paid, unless otherwise
waived, to the Borough of Lewisburg.
(2) In considering an application and granting a permit for a scheduled
event, the Lewisburg Borough Council may establish conditions
and requirements in addition to those specifically set forth herein.
(3) Prior to the scheduled event, the applicant shall provide to the
Borough of Lewisburg a special occasion permit issued by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board for the said event and proof of
§ 219-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 230-2
219:134
its purchase of liability insurance for bodily injury and property
damage in the sum of at least $1,000,000 per single occurrence
and $2,000,000 aggregate, with the Borough of Lewisburg being
named as an additional insured.
(4) The application shall include the following:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and
the person representing the applicant;
(b) The requested public location for the scheduled event and its
purpose;
(c) The requested area or square footage of public open space for
the scheduled event;
(d) The maximum number of people who will attend the scheduled
event;
(e) The time when the scheduled event will start and the time it
will end;
(f) A description of the entertainment, if any, that will be present
at the scheduled event;
(g) The manner in which the beer and/or wine will be served and
consumed;
(h) The method by which the number of people attending the
scheduled event will be regulated and/or controlled;
(i) Whether or not security will be provided and, if provided, the
manner in which such security will be provided; and
(j) The applicant's intended use of any and all funds raised from
the scheduled event and how the event is intended to promote
the applicant.
(5) In addition to the applicant complying with any requirements or
regulations imposed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, the
applicant shall also comply with the following:
(a) No beer or wine shall be served to or consumed by any
individual under the age of 21 years;
(b) The designated area of the scheduled event shall be cordoned
off, and access thereto shall be restricted to only those
individuals 21 years of age or older;
(c) Ingress to and egress from the scheduled event shall be
monitored at all times, and no beer or wine shall be allowed
outside the designated area of the event;
§ 230-2 NOISE § 230-2
219:135
(d) One portable toilet shall be provided for every 100 individuals
attending the scheduled event;
(e) Refuse and recycling pickup shall be provided for the
scheduled event through the Borough of Lewisburg, which the
applicant shall be responsible for arranging and paying all
required fees therefor; and
(f) The applicant shall agree to indemnify, save harmless and
defend the Borough of Lewisburg, and its officers, employees,
agents and appointees, from any and all suits, actions and
claims of any character, nature or description brought for or on
account of any injuries, deaths or damages resulting to or
sustained by any person, entity, or property at, during, after or
as a result of the applicant's scheduled event, caused by an act,
omission, negligence, or other misfeasance or nonfeasance of
the applicant or any person, officer, agent, employee,
corporation, partnership or other business entity hired or
contracted by or associated with the applicant.
B. Boisterous, immoral or indecent conduct;
C. Discarding of trash, garbage or other litter, except into containers
provided for that purpose;
D. Damaging, defacing, destroying or removing any Borough owned
property, sign, structure, equipment or other material;
E. Distributing, selling, servicing or renting of any supplies, equipment,
material or commodity whatsoever without written authorization from
the Borough.
F. Operating, stopping or parking of any vehicle except on designated
roads or areas;
G. Possession or discharge of any type of firearms, bows and arrows, air
guns, slingshots or fireworks;
H. Ball playing, except on fields provided;
I. Letting pets run unleashed or on a leash longer than six feet or leaving
pets unattended at any time.
J. Use or operation of any skateboards, except in designated areas; and
[Amended 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 1018]
K. Operation of any bicycles, except in designated areas. [Amended
2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 1018]
§ 230-2 LEWISBURG CODE § 230-3
219:136
§ 230-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 235
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 134.
Conduct — See Ch. 142.
Loitering — See Ch. 208.
Sidewalk merchandise displays — See Ch.
300, Art. IV.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 230-3 NOISE § 230-3
219:137

ARTICLE I
Transient Retail Merchants
[Adopted 5-18-1977 by Ord. No. 77-9]
§ 235-1. Registration required. [Amended 8-15-1995 by Ord. No.
900]
§ 235-2. Fees. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
Except as set forth in § 235-4 of this article, each registrant shall pay to the
Secretary of the Borough a registration fee as established from time to time
by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 235-3. Certificate required. [Amended 8-15-1995 by Ord. No. 900]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person:
(1) To sell at retail, by sample or otherwise, or solicit orders for, sell or
deliver at retail, either on the street or by traveling from house to
house or from person to person within the limits of the Borough,
any books, paintings, foreign or domestic goods, wares, meats,
merchandise or fruits, without first having registered with the
Secretary of the Borough; or
(2) To engage in business as a canvasser or solicitor calling at
residences or businesses without the previous consent of the
occupant or owner thereof for the purpose of soliciting orders,
sales, subscriptions or business of any kind, or seeking information
or donations, without first having registered with the Secretary of
the Borough.
B. The registrant shall give his complete identification, both his
permanent and local addresses, a personal description, including age,
weight, height, color of eyes and hair, and previous criminal
convictions, if any, his signature, the name of his employer, the nature
of the products or services in which he is interested, the names of the
manufacturers of such products, or of the organization which he is
representing, the proposed method of operation in the Borough, a
description of any carts or vehicles to be used, and any other
information required or desired by the Mayor, the Police Chief of the
Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department, or by the Borough Council.
[Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
A. Each registrant who exhibits a business privilege tax license as
required by § 324-16 of Chapter 324, Taxation, and shows evidence of
good character and who is required to pay and does pay the fee
required by § 235-2 of this article, shall be furnished with a certificate
indicating that he or she has registered and showing the dates covered
by such registration.
§ 235-1 NOISE § 235-3
219:139
§ 235-4. Exceptions.
§ 235-5. Prohibited acts by holders of certificates. [Amended
3-18-1986 by Ord. No. 811; 7-17-1990 by Ord. No. 862]
No person engaged in business as a peddler, canvasser, or solicitor shall:
B. Individuals with previous convictions of a felony or misdemeanor may
be refused a certificate at the discretion of the Mayor. No certificate
issued under this article shall be transferable from one person to
another.
C. Each person shall at all times while peddling, canvassing, or soliciting
in the Borough carry upon his person the registration certificate, and
the same shall be exhibited by such registrant whenever he is required
to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited.
D. The Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department shall
keep a record of all certificates issued and registrations made under
this article and shall be responsible for supervising the activities of all
holders of such certificates. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to officers or employees of
the Borough, County, state, or federal government, or any subdivision
thereof, when on official business.
B. Section 235-2 of this article, and only § 235-2, shall not apply to:
(1) Fraternal, national service, or civic organizations;
(2) Nonprofit corporations incorporated under and by virtue of the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which have obtained
and are maintaining an exempt status with the Internal Revenue
Service from the payment of income tax to the federal government;
(3) Farmers selling their own produce;
(4) Any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products, or milk and milk products; or
(5) Persons selling goods, wares, and merchandise, the proceeds
whereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic
purpose.
A. Hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
public grounds of the Borough;
B. Use any loud speaker or horn or any other sound device whether it be
carried on the person or attached to a cart or vehicle for announcing his
presence by which the public is annoyed;
§ 235-3 LEWISBURG CODE § 235-5
219:140
§ 235-6. Revocation of certificates. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1014]
The Mayor or Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department
may revoke any registration certificate issued under this article when he
deems such revocation to be for the benefit of the public health, safety,
or morals of the Borough, or for the violation of any provisions of this
article or of any other ordinances of the Borough, or of any state or federal
law, or for giving false information or misrepresentation upon registration
hereunder, or making false or fraudulent statements in the operation of his
business, or for conviction of any crime other than minor traffic violations,
or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and
character required for registration hereunder. No part of a registration fee
shall be refunded to any person whose registration certificate shall have
been revoked.
§ 235-7. Right of appeal.
Any person who is refused a registration certificate or has his certificate
revoked may appeal such action to the Borough Council in writing within 10
days after such refusal or revocation. Such person shall be present at the
time designated by the Borough Council for review of his appeal.
§ 235-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. When selling from a cart or vehicle, stop or park the same upon any of
the streets or alleys of the Borough for longer than necessary in order
to sell therefrom to persons residing in the immediate vicinity;
D. Park any cart or vehicle on any of the streets or alleys of the Borough
for the purpose of sorting, rearranging, or cleaning any of his goods,
wares, or merchandise, or of disposing of any carton, wrapping
material, or rubbish that has accumulated on, in, or about such cart or
vehicle or of any stock or wares or of foodstuffs which have become
unsalable through handling, age, or otherwise; or
E. Engage in any business on any day of the week before 8:00 a.m. or after
9:00 p.m.
F. Engage in such business upon any street or alley of the Borough which
has been closed to vehicular traffic by the Borough Council for the
purpose of conducting a parade thereon, but shall during all such times
engage in such business on the sidewalks of the Borough adjoining the
closed street or alley.
§ 235-5 NOISE § 235-8
219:141
Chapter 255
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 179.
Lewisburg Area Sewer Authority — See Ch.
11, Art. I.
Solid waste — See Ch. 280.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 290.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
315.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 152.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 235-8 LEWISBURG CODE § 235-8
255:142
ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 12-17-1975 by Ord. No. 75-6]
§ 255-1. Connection to sewer system required. [Amended
10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
A. The owner of each improved property within the Borough limits not
already connected to the sewer system which is benefitted, improved or
accommodated by a sanitary sewer and which is or shall become
accessible to the sewer system of the Authority and upon which there is
generated sanitary sewage or industrial waste, shall, upon receipt of
written notice from the Borough connect such improved property to the
sewer system without delay in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Authority currently in effect. For the purpose of this
article, an improved property shall be deemed accessible to the sewer
system of the Authority if (a) such property shall abut upon or adjoin a
public street, alley, road or other public highway in which there is a
collection line of the sewer system owned, leased or operated by the
Borough or the Authority or (b) if a collection line of said sewer system
runs through such property.
B. If any owner of improved property required to be connected to said
sewer system, shall neglect or refuse to connect therewith after written
notice so to do, the Borough may give such owner written notice
making reference to this section and ordering such owner to make the
required connection within 60 days of the date of the said notice, and
upon failure of such owner to make the required connection within said
sixty-day period the Borough or its agents may, in accordance with the
provisions of the Borough Code, enter upon such property and
construct such connection and, upon completion of the work, send an
itemized bill of the cost of the construction of such connection to the
property owner which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect
or refusal by the owner of such property to pay said bill it shall be the
duty of the proper Borough officials and Borough Solicitor to file
municipal liens for said construction within six months of the date of the
completion of the construction of said connection.
C. If any owner of improved property within the Borough shall have failed
to connect his or her property with the sewer system as required by
Subsection A and the Borough shall have given such owner written
notice pursuant to Subsection B of this article, and if such owner shall
have failed within said sixty-day period to make the required
connection, such failure shall be and hereby is declared a violation of
this article, and such owner shall upon conviction thereof forfeit and
pay to the use of the Borough a sum not exceeding $100 for each 90
days or fraction thereof such violation shall persist, together with costs
of prosecution, such sum to be collected as prescribed by law. The sum
herein forfeited shall be considered a penalty.
§ 255-1 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 255-1
255:143
§ 255-2. Covenants of Borough.
In recognition of the necessity of requiring connections to the sewer system
in order to protect the public health, in order to comply with the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Resources of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and in order to enable the Authority to
finance the construction of the project, and to assure continuous operation
of the sewer system, the Borough hereby covenants and agrees with the
Authority and with the holders from time to time of the outstanding bonds
of the Authority that the Borough will not repeal or rescind § 255-1 of
this article so long as any of said bonds shall remain outstanding; that
the Borough will not amend said Part in such way as to render ineffectual
the intent and purpose thereof; that it will promptly give the notices
contemplated by § 255-1A, B and D hereof in such sequence and orderly
fashion, in the light of the practical time limits required for connections to
be made and the availability of skilled labor to perform the work, to the end
that all accessible properties may be expeditiously connected; and that it
will at all times vigorously enforce the requirements hereof and prosecute
violations.
§ 255-3. Authority rules and regulations.
D. It shall be unlawful, 60 days from the receipt of written notice pursuant
to Subsection A or B of this article in the case of new connections or
pursuant to this subsection in the case of other violations, for any
person, firm or corporation (a) to own, maintain, operate, or use within
the Borough a privy, cesspool, vault, septic tank or similar receptacle
for sanitary sewage upon any property now or hereafter improved,
which is accessible to the sewer system, (b) to connect any such privy,
cesspool, vault, septic tank or similar receptacle with any sewer line, (c)
to discharge sanitary sewage or industrial waste into any storm sewer
or other sewer or outlet other than the sewer system of the Authority, or
(d) to violate the rules and regulations of the Authority governing the
sewer system.
E. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Every 90 days that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
F. No owner of property shall be permitted to discharge into the sewer
system any waste or drainage other than sanitary sewage except as
may be expressly permitted by the rules and regulations of the
Authority currently in effect.
G. Notices to property owners under Subsections A and B of this article
may be given either by personal service or by registered mail sent to
the last known address of such owner.
§ 255-1 LEWISBURG CODE § 255-3
255:144
A. The Borough hereby approves the rules and regulations of the Authority
adopted on August 10, 1972, as amended, and agrees to cooperate with
the Authority in the enforcement thereof.
B. A copy of said rules and regulations of the Authority, and all
amendments thereof, shall be filed with the Borough Secretary for
inspection by any interested parties.
§ 255-3 SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL § 255-3
255:145
Chapter 264
SKATEBOARDS AND IN-LINE SKATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 112.
Conduct — See Ch. 142.
Loitering — See Ch. 208.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
§ 264-1. Prohibited areas.
No person shall use a skateboard or in-line skates on any public sidewalk
located in the Borough of Lewisburg between southern right-of-way line of
Cherry Alley on the north, the northern right-of-way line of Pine Alley on
the south, the western right-of-way line of Front Street on the east and the
eastern right-of-way line of Seventh Street on the west.
§ 264-2. Rules for skateboard and in-line skate use.
No person shall use a skateboard or in-line skates in a reckless manner
on any public sidewalk so as to endanger any person or property. No
person shall use a skateboard or in-line skates on a public sidewalk without
exercising due care for the safety of other persons using the sidewalk. Any
person using a skateboard or in-line skates on a public sidewalk shall yield
the right-of-way to such other persons using the sidewalk.
§ 264-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons who shall violate this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and/or be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 272
SMOKE DETECTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 32.
Open burning — See Ch. 125.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 152.
§ 272-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall be defined as follows:
§ 255-3 LEWISBURG CODE § 272-1
264:146
ADJACENT — Within 15 linear feet.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure, building, area, room, or combination of
rooms occupied by persons for sleeping or living.
GUEST ROOM/GUEST SUITE — A combination of rooms occupied as a
single unit.
NURSING HOME — A building or part thereof used for the lodging,
boarding and nursing care, on a twenty-four-hour basis, of persons who,
because of mental or physical incapacity, may be unable to provide for
their own needs and safety without the assistance of another person. This
includes nursing and convalescent homes, skilled nursing facilities,
intermediate care facilities, and infirmaries or homes for the aged.
OWNER — Any person who, alone, or jointly or severally with other persons,
has legal title to any premises. This includes any person who has charge,
care or control over any premises as (a) an agent, officer, fiduciary, or
employee of the owner; (b) the committed, conservator, or legal guardian of
an owner who is incompetent, a minor, or otherwise under a disability; (c) a
trustee, elected or appointed, or a person required by law to execute a trust,
other than a trustee under a deed of trust to secure the payment of money;
or (d) an executor, administrator, receiver, fiduciary, officer appointed by
any court, or other similar representative of the owner or his estate. This
does not include a lessee, a sublessee or other person who merely has the
right to occupy or possess a premises.
RESIDENTIAL-CUSTODIAL CARE FACILITY — A building, or part thereof,
used for the lodging or boarding of persons who are incapable of selfpreservation
because of age or physical or mental limitation, or who are
detained for correctional purposes. This includes homes for the aged,
nurseries (custodial care for children under six years of age), institutions
for the mentally retarded (care institutions) and halfway houses. This does
not include day care facilities that do not provide lodging or boarding for
institutional occupants.
SLEEPING AREA — A bedroom or room intended for sleeping or
combination of bedrooms or rooms intended for sleeping within a dwelling
unit, which are located on the same floor and are not separated by another
habitable room, such as a living room, dining room or kitchen but not
a bathroom, hallway or closet. A dwelling unit may have more than one
sleeping area. This does not include common usage areas and structures
with more than one dwelling unit, such as corridors, lobbies and basements.
SMOKE DETECTORS — A device which detects visible or invisible particles
of combustion, and be capable of providing a suitable audible alarm of at
least 85 decibels at 10 feet, either ionization or photo-electric type.
§ 272-2. Detectors required.
The owner of each new or existing multifamily residential structure or
dwelling unit, hotel, motel, nursing home, jail, and residential-custodial
§ 272-1 SMOKE DETECTORS § 272-2
272:147
care facility shall install smoke detectors in such structures as hereinafter
provided.
§ 272-3. Required installation locations.
Smoke detectors shall be installed in the following locations:
§ 272-4. Other fire detection systems.
As an alternative to self-contained smoke detectors, an approved fire
detection system may be installed. Each such system must be approved,
and a permit issued therefor, by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer in
conjunction with the Borough Fire Chief.
A. No certificate of occupancy may be issued for any such structure unless
smoke detectors have been installed as required by this chapter.
B. The owners of such structures shall install smoke detectors as required
by this chapter within one year of the effective date of this chapter.
A. The owner of each multifamily residential structure or dwelling unit
shall install at least one smoke detector to protect each sleeping area or
at least one detector at the top of each stairway leading to a sleeping
area or if no stairway leads to a sleeping area, the hallway leading to
the area. In an efficiency, the owner shall install the smoke detector in
the room used for sleeping. Smoke detectors installed in or near a
stairway or hallway leading to a sleeping area shall be installed in such
a manner as to assure that rising smoke is not obstructed in reaching
the detector.
B. The owner of each multifamily residential structure or dwelling unit
shall install at least one smoke detector adjacent to each kitchen area.
C. The owner of each hotel and motel shall install at least one smoke
detector to protect each guest room or guest suite. The owner of each
hotel and motel shall install smoke detectors in accordance with the
Building Code of the Borough of Lewisburg and this chapter and as
directed and approved by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer in
conjunction with the Borough Fire Chief.
D. The owner of each nursing home, jail, and residential-custodial care
facility shall install smoke detectors in each corridor that is adjacent to
a room used for sleeping but in no case may the detectors be placed
further apart than 30 feet or more than 15 feet from any wall, or in each
room used for sleeping. Locations shall be approved by the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer in conjunction with the Borough Fire Chief.
E. An owner subject to this chapter shall install each smoke detector on
the ceiling at a minimum of six inches from the wall or on a wall at a
minimum of six inches from the ceiling, but shall not install smoke
detectors in a dead air space, such as where the ceiling meets the wall.
§ 272-2 LEWISBURG CODE § 272-5
272:148
§ 272-5. Approval of any system required.
All devices, combination of devices, and equipment required by this chapter
are to be installed in accordance with the Building Code of the Borough
of Lewisburg and this chapter as directed and approved by the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer in conjunction with the Borough Fire Chief.
Such approval shall be permanent, unless the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer or the Borough Fire Chief subsequently finds the equipment to
be hazardous or unreliable, in which case the said Borough officials may
revoke their approval. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer or the
Borough Fire Chief may in any such case determine whether replacement
of existing installation shall be required.
§ 272-6. Power supply.
In existing multifamily residential structures or dwelling units, hotels,
motels, nursing homes, jails, and residential-custodial care facilities, smoke
detectors shall be powered by self-monitored batteries or wired directly to
the building's power supply, or shall be operated in a plug-in outlet which
is fitted with a plug restrainer device, provided the outlet is not controlled
by any switch other than the main power supply. In all such new structures,
smoke detectors shall be wired directly (hard wired) to the building's power
supply.
§ 272-7. Maintenance; inspections.
Any owner subject to this chapter shall maintain each smoke detector in a
reliable operating condition and shall make periodic inspections and tests
to insure that each smoke detector is in proper working condition.
§ 272-8. Detectors on building plans. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord.
No. 833]
All applications for building permits for new multifamily residential
structures or dwelling units to be constructed shall contain a drawing
showing the proposed locations of smoke detectors as required by this
chapter and the type of detector to be installed before a permit is issued.
No owner may permanently wire a smoke detector to the electrical system
of a structure without first obtaining an electrical permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 272-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 272-5 SMOKE DETECTORS § 272-10
272:149
§ 272-10. Conflict with other provisions. [Amended 12-20-1994 by
Ord. No. 895]
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and Chapter
152, Article III, Fire Prevention Code, the more stringent or restrictive
provision shall take precedence. Otherwise all other ordinances or parts of
ordinances inconsistent herewith be and the same are hereby repealed.
Chapter 280
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
182.
Junkyards — See Ch. 196.
Open burning — See Ch. 125.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
Sewers — See Ch. 255.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 272-10 LEWISBURG CODE § 272-10
272:150
ARTICLE I
Refuse Disposal
[Adopted 12-21-1982 by Ord. No. 82-8]
§ 280-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Refuse
Collection Service Ordinance of the Borough of Lewisburg."
§ 280-2. Definitions. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the following meanings. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER or MANAGER — The Borough Manager of the
Borough of Lewisburg.
COMMERCIAL ENTITY — All uses other than a dwelling unit, including,
but not limited to, hotels, restaurants, schools, churches, institutions,
commercial and industrial establishments, and fraternity and sorority
houses.[Added 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 972]
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion thereof providing one or more
rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as separate living
quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within
the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of the occupants maintaining a
household.[Amended 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 972]
FAMILY — Any individual, or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, legal adoption, foster placement, guardianship, other domestic
bond or a community living arrangement, or a group of not more than three
persons not related by blood, marriage, legal adoption, foster placement,
guardianship, other domestic bond or community living arrangement who
live together as a single household (see "household"). A family shall not be
deemed to include occupants of a boardinghouse, rooming or lodging house,
fraternity, sorority, or hotel.[Amended 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 972]
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, and cooking of food.
HOUSEHOLD — A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with
common access to and common use of all living and eating areas and
all areas for the preparation and serving of food within the dwelling
unit.[Added 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 972]
PERSONS — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 280-1 SMOKE DETECTORS § 280-2
272:151
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes except body
waste including garbage, rubbish, street cleanings and household furniture
and appliances.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings,
wood, ashes, glass, crockery, grass, tree trimmings, straw, rags, bottles,
shoes and other like refuse.
§ 280-3. Collection by Borough.
All refuse accumulated in the Borough shall be collected, conveyed and
disposed of by the Borough. No person shall collect, convey over any of the
streets or alleys of the Borough or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the
Borough, except as follows:
§ 280-4. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a regulation of, fee charged by, or decision made
by the Borough Manager shall have the right to appeal to the Lewisburg
Borough Council, which shall have the authority to confirm, modify or
revoke any such regulation or fee.
§ 280-5. Precollection practices; fees. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord.
No. 833; 12-29-1988 by Ord. No. 843; 9-15-1992 by Ord. No. 881;
1-19-1999 by Ord. No. 914]
A. Construction contractors or persons may contract with private
collectors of refuse to collect, convey and dispose or refuse, including
construction material, debris and rubbish, generated by a construction
project, provided that the amount of such refuse is determined by the
Borough Manager to be beyond the scope and capacity of the collection
and disposal facilities of the Borough and that such contractors and
collectors otherwise comply with the provisions of this article and with
any other governing law or ordinances; and
B. Collectors of refuse from outside the Borough may convey or haul such
refuse over the streets of the Borough, provided such collectors use a
watertight vehicle provided with a tight cover and such vehicle is to be
operated as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse
from being blown, dropped or spilled, and otherwise comply with the
provisions of this article.
C. Residents may utilize the services of a commercial entity to remove
certain major items, such as furniture, washer, dryer, dishwasher,
refrigerator, stove, bathtub, commode, sink, furnace, etc., provided that
the item to be removed is replaced by the said entity. If a major item is
being discarded as a result of failure or wear and tear and is not being
replaced, the Borough shall be contacted for proper removal at curb
side by special arrangement as provided in § 280-5B of this article.
[Added 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 972]
§ 280-2 LEWISBURG CODE § 280-5
272:152
A. Separation of refuse. Garbage and rubbish may be placed and
maintained in the same containers.
B. Preparation of refuse. [Amended 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 972]
(1) Garbage. All garbage shall be drained free of liquids before being
deposited in containers for collection.
(2) Rubbish. All rubbish shall be drained of liquid before being
deposited for collection.
(a) Cans and bottles. All cans and bottles which have contained
food shall be drained, thoroughly rinsed and recycled.
(b) Uncollectible items. The following items will not be collected
by the Borough:
[1] Tree stumps;
[2] Vehicle motors and parts;
[3] Explosives, flammable liquids, and other hazardous
materials;
[4] Bricks and concrete blocks;
[5] Dead animals, i.e., cats, dogs, etc.;
[6] Construction materials;
[7] Soil;
[8] Furnaces;
[9] Metal pipes; and
[10] Grass clippings.
(c) Special arrangements. The following items will be picked up at
the curb or in the alley as the Borough Manager shall direct
only upon application to the Borough Manager and the
advance payment of a service charge therefor, the amount of
which shall be established from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council: [Amended 11-15-2011 by Ord. No. 1005]
[1] Ranges, stoves, water heaters, washing machines, dryers
and dishwashers.
[2] Appliances with compression containing refrigerants,
including, but not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, airconditioners,
humidifiers and dehumidifiers, provided that
the Borough receives an executed certification form from a
licensed remover that all of the refrigerant has been
removed from the said appliance. If subsequent to the
pickup of such appliance it is determined or discovered
§ 280-5 SMOKE DETECTORS § 280-5
272:153
that all of the refrigerant has not been removed as so
certified, an additional service charge shall be assessed.
Appliances with compressors containing refrigerants from
which all of the refrigerant has not been removed and for
which the Borough does not receive any certification of
such removal prior to being picked up will be picked up for
an additional service charge.
[3] Bathtubs, radiators, couches, recliners/chairs, kitchen
chairs, wood and metal furniture, sofa beds, mattresses,
box springs, commodes, sinks and lavatories.
[4] Bicycles and large metal toys.
[5] Tree trimmings, hedge clippings and similar material,
which shall be cut to a length not to exceed four feet and
securely tied in bundles not more than two feet thick
before being deposited for collection.
[6] Rubber tires.
[7] Televisions, microwaves, computers and VCRs or similar
devices.
[8] Carpets, rugs and pads.
[9] Pickup truck loads (garbage only).
C. Refuse containers.
(1) Duty to provide and maintain in sanitary condition. Refuse
containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee, or
occupant of the premises. Refuse containers shall be maintained in
good condition. Any container that does not conform to the
provisions of this article and that may have ragged or sharp edges
or any other defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting
the contents thereof shall be promptly replaced upon notice. The
Borough Manager shall have the authority to refuse collection
services for failure to comply herewith.
(2) Garbage. Garbage containers shall be made of durable rustresistant
material or plastic, equipped with suitable handles and
tight-fitting covers, and shall be watertight. All bagged garbage
must be placed inside containers. Garbage bags must have a
minimum mill of three mills or greater in bag strength. [Amended
1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 972]
(a) Capacity. Garbage containers shall have a capacity of not more
than 33 gallons for dwelling units. The capacity of bulk
containers furnished by the Borough for commercial entities
shall be determined at the discretion of the Borough Manager.
In cases where the location of a commercial entity prohibits
the use of a bulk container, such entity shall be billed at the
§ 280-5 LEWISBURG CODE § 280-5
272:154
§ 280-6. Collection practices; fees.
appropriate bulk container rate (two thirty-three gallon cans
equate to a one cubic yard container).
(b) Sanitation. Garbage containers shall be of a type approved by
the Borough Manager and shall be kept in a clean, neat and
sanitary condition at all times.
(3) Rubbish. Rubbish containers shall be of a kind suitable for
collection purposes, shall have a capacity of not more than 33
gallons, and shall weigh, when filled, not more than 50 pounds.
[Amended 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 972]
D. Storing of refuse.
(1) Public places. No persons shall place any refuse in any street, alley
or other public place, or upon any private property whether owned
by such person or not, within the Borough unless it is deposited in
proper containers for collection or under express approval granted
by the Borough Manager. No person shall throw or deposit any
refuse in any stream or other body of water.
(2) Unauthorized accumulation. Any unauthorized accumulation of
refuse on any premises or the non-removal of refuse or rubbish
containers once collected is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is
prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of refuse
or the said container(s) within 48 hours of the receipt of notice
from the Borough Manager to remove such refuse or container(s)
shall be deemed to be a violation of this article. [Amended
1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 972]
(3) Scattering of refuse. No persons shall cast, place, sweep, or deposit
anywhere within the Borough any refuse in such a manner that it
may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any
occupied premises within the Borough.
(4) Street containers. No garbage shall be deposited in street
containers or receptacles which are placed for the convenience of
pedestrians.
E. Points of collection. Refuse containers shall be made readily accessible
and shall be placed for collection at ground level on the property as the
Borough Manager shall direct, but not within the right-of-way of a
street or alley, on the side of the street or alley from which collection
shall be made. Bulk containers must be placed on pads meeting the
Borough's specifications. If the property owner fails to provide said pad
within 30 days of receipt of written notification to do so, the Borough
will construct the pad and bill the property owner the charge therefor.
[Amended 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 972]
§ 280-5 SMOKE DETECTORS § 280-6
272:155
§ 280-7. Fees. [Amended 2-15-1983 by Ord. No. 83-1; 12-18-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-8; 12-16-1986 by Ord. No. 820; 12-29-1988 by Ord. No.
843; 3-21-1989 by Ord. No. 845; 12-18-1990 by Ord. No. 870;
1-19-1999 by Ord. No. 914; 11-19-2002 by Ord. No. 946]
A. Frequency of collection.
(1) Residential. Refuse accumulated by residences shall be collected at
least once each week.
(2) Commercial. Refuse accumulated by hotels, restaurants, schools,
churches, institutions, commercial and industrial establishments,
etc. shall be collected at least once each week. Such businesses and
institutions as deem it necessary may enter into an agreement with
the Borough for a greater frequency of collection. Where necessary
to protect the public health, the Borough Manager shall have the
authority to require that more frequent collections be made.
B. Limitation on quantity.
(1) Residential. There shall be no limitation on the collection of refuse
from each dwelling unit during a collection period for the fee
hereinafter set forth, except with respect to those items requiring
special arrangements as provided in § 280-5B(2)(c) of this article.
(2) Commercial. A commercial entity shall be required to have a bulk
container at the discretion of the Borough Manager. The size of the
bulk container and the frequency of the pickup thereof shall also be
at the discretion of the Borough Manager. The Borough Manager
shall have the authority to refuse to collect unreasonable amounts
of refuse or to make an additional charge therefor. In the event a
commercial entity disagrees with the determination of the Borough
Manager relative to bulk container size, the said entity may have a
different sized bulk container placed at a cost of $50 in addition to
the weekly or regular pickup fee. If the smaller bulk container
proves to be inadequate for the quantity generated, at the
discretion of the Borough Manager, a larger bulk container will be
relocated to the site at an additional cost of $50 to the commercial
entity. [Amended 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 972]
C. Special refuse problems.
(1) Contagious disease refuse. The removal of wearing apparel,
bedding, or other refuse from homes or other places where highly
infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed shall be performed
under the supervision and direction of the Borough Manager. Such
refuse shall not be placed in containers for regular collection.
(2) Inflammable or explosive refuse. Highly inflammable or explosive
materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection
but shall be disposed of as directed by the Borough Manager at the
expense of the owner or possessor thereof.
§ 280-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 280-7
272:156
§ 280-8. Rules and regulations. [Amended 7-17-1984 by Ord. No.
84-4; 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
A. Amount of fees. The fees for the collection and disposal of refuse placed
for collection at ground level shall be established from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.11
B. Payment of fees. All fees for the collection and disposal of refuse shall
be payable to the Borough Treasurer by the owner(s) of the premises
from which collection shall be made, notwithstanding the use of such
premises. The payment of such fees shall be mandatory. No occupiers or
lessees of such premises shall be directly responsible for the payment
of such fees. All fees and charges shall be billed to the owner(s) on a
quarterly basis. [Amended 6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1028]
C. Vacant dwelling units. Upon the filing by the owner of a dwelling unit or
his/her designated representative of an application with the Borough
Manager attesting to the vacancy of such dwelling unit, refuse
collection service for that dwelling unit shall be discontinued effective
the Monday of the next following week, at which time any applicable
fees then due will be billed to the owner. Refuse collection service will
thereafter be reinstated for the said dwelling unit upon receipt of
notification from the owner of the dwelling unit or his/her designated
representative that such dwelling unit is again occupied and upon
payment of a start-up fee of $50 for each dwelling unit. All applicable
fees for refuse collection service shall be prorated based upon the date
such service is reinstated. If during any period of time when refuse
collection service is discontinued for a dwelling unit the Borough
determines that such dwelling unit is not vacant, then refuse collection
service shall be immediately reinstated and the owner shall be billed for
the aforesaid start-up fee and all applicable service fees thereafter.
D. Delinquent accounts. Any quarterly payment not made within 30 days
after the expiration of the period for which collection has been made
shall be delinquent, and a penalty of 5% shall be imposed thereon.
E. Collection of delinquent accounts. In addition to any other remedy
provided by law or this article, the Borough shall have the right to
collect any delinquent fees or charges, including penalties, plus interest
at the rate of 10% per annum, by either a civil action in assumpsit or the
filing of a municipal claim or lien.
A. Districts of collection; notice as to time of collection. The Borough
Manager shall divide the Borough into collection districts. The
residents of each district shall be notified on which day of the week the
refuse in their district will be collected. The districts of collection and
the time for collection of refuse in each district may be changed at the
discretion of the Borough Manager.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. A370, Fees.
§ 280-7 SMOKE DETECTORS § 280-8
272:157
§ 280-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No.
833; 12-29-1988 by Ord. No. 843]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, together
with the costs of prosecution, or to be imprisoned for a period not to exceed
90 days or both. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. Hours of collection. All collections shall be made on Monday through
Friday between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and on Saturday
between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 11:30 a.m.
C. Interfering with, damaging or removing containers or receptacles. No
unauthorized person shall in any manner interfere with, damage,
remove, or destroy any refuse vessels, containers, or receptacles
referred to in this article, or the contents thereof.
D. Interference with collectors. No person shall obstruct, delay, or
interfere with the refuse collectors while in the performance of their
lawful duties.
E. Illegal depositing of refuse. No unauthorized person shall deposit any
refuse in containers paid for by another person or deposit any refuse on
public and/or private property
F. Report and prosecution of violations. All violations of this article shall
be reported to the Borough Manager, who shall investigate or cause to
be investigated all such complaints and prosecute all violators of this
article.
G. Delivery of copies of regulations to owners and occupants of premises.
The Borough Manager shall cause to be printed so much of the rules
and regulations contained in this article as shall sufficiently inform the
owners and occupiers of premises of their duties in reference to the
collection and disposal of refuse, and such printed rules and regulations
shall be delivered and served upon each of the owners and occupants of
the premises from which refuse is to be collected.
H. Designation of solid waste disposal facility. The Lycoming County
Landfill is hereby designated the official solid waste disposal facility of
the Borough. All refuse accumulated in the Borough shall henceforth be
disposed of by the Borough, or by private collectors under § 280-3A of
this article, by delivering such refuse to the said facility.
§ 280-8 LEWISBURG CODE § 280-9
272:158
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Amended 7-16-1991 by Ord. No. 875]
§ 280-10. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Municipal Waste Recycling and Waste
Reduction Ordinance of the Borough of Lewisburg," and the same may be
cited in that manner.
§ 280-11. Definitions. [Amended 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 877]
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases and words
shall have the following meanings. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory.
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
APPLICANT — A person desiring to be authorized as a collector of sourceseparated
recyclable materials.
BIMETAL CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of
steel and aluminum.
BRUSH — Vegetative material, including leaf waste, bushes and trees or
parts thereof, but excluding grass, weeds and tree trunks.[Added
4-18-2017 by Ord. No. 1045]
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes, excluding those multiple dwelling
residential buildings, containing three or more dwelling units.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Church, school, civic service group, municipal
functions, and all other such functions.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin-coated steel food or beverage
containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear glass or colored
glass. Excluded are plate glass, automotive glass, blue glass and porcelain
and ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and
in residences. It does not include envelopes. It must be staple free.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people such as hospitals, schools, day care centers and nursing
homes.
§ 280-10 SMOKE DETECTORS § 280-11
272:159
LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Include, but are not limited to, automotive, truck
and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Having three or more dwelling
units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by the
Borough of Lewisburg and other governmental and quasi-governmental
authorities.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING PROGRAM — A source separation and collection
program for recycling municipal waste or source-separated recyclable
materials, or a program for designated drop-off points or collection centers
for recycling municipal waste or source-separated recyclable materials,
that is operated by on behalf of a municipality. The term includes any
source separation and collection program for composting yard waste that is
operated by or on behalf of a municipality. The term shall not include any
program for recycling construction/demolition waste or sludge from sewage
treatment plants.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions,
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees and occupants of residences; commercial
or institutional establishments; corporations; partnerships; firms;
associations; or other entities.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers.
Due to the large variety of types of plastic, the recycling regulations may
stipulate specific types of plastic which may be regulated.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than a
fuel for the operation of energy.
RECYCLING COLLECTOR — A person or entity authorized to collect and
haul source separated recyclable materials from commercial, institutional
and municipal establishments and multifamily housing properties in the
Borough Lewisburg.]
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — Occupied single or multifamily dwelling
having up to and including two dwelling units per structure for which the
Borough provides municipal waste collection service.
§ 280-11 LEWISBURG CODE § 280-11
272:160
SOURC-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source separated recyclable materials or material
approved by the Borough for beneficial use.
§ 280-12. Establishment of program for residential dwellings.
There is hereby established a municipal recycling program for the
mandatory separation of recyclable materials from solid waste by persons
residing in single dwellings or two-family dwellings having up to and
including two dwelling units per structure. The Borough shall be
responsible for scheduling a day at least once a month for collection of
recyclable material. The authority to establish and modify this schedule and
the responsibility for communicating it to the residents of the Borough,
along with the authority to make rules and regulations to enforce, interpret,
explain and promote this article, provided that such rules and regulations
are approved by resolution of Borough Council, shall be with the Borough
Manager of the Borough.
§ 280-13. Separation of recyclables for residential dwellings.
§ 280-14. Separation of recyclables for commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments.
A. Recyclable materials from residential dwellings shall be placed at the
curb or other designated places separate from solid waste for collection
or taken to drop off sites at such times, dates and places and in such
manner as may be established by the Borough in its rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder. Materials to be recycled may
include clear glass, colored glass, aluminum cans and newspapers, as
well as other recyclable materials designated by the Borough under its
regulations.
B. The recyclable materials shall be placed in designated containers,
which may be provided by the Borough and, if so provided, remain with
the residence, regardless of owner or tenant. Any misuse or destruction
of said containers shall subject the person responsible to the penalties
as hereinafter set forth.
C. Should the containers become lost or unusable, they must be replaced
by notifying the Borough. The Borough is authorized to charge a
replacement fee in accordance with its rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder.
A. Commercial, municipal and institutional establishments shall separate
and store, until collection, high grade officer paper, corrugated paper,
aluminum and other source separated recyclable materials designated
§ 280-11 SMOKE DETECTORS § 280-14
272:161
§ 280-15. Separation of recyclables by multifamily housing
properties.
§ 280-16. Lead acid batteries.
No person may place a used lead acid battery in mixed municipal solid
waste, discard or otherwise dispose of a lead acid battery, except by delivery
to an automotive battery retailer or wholesaler, to a secondary lead smelter
permitted by the Environmental Protection Agency, or to a collection or
recycling facility authorized under the laws of the Commonwealth.
§ 280-17. Separation and disposal of leaves.
All persons who reside in residential dwellings and all persons who are
responsible for administration of multifamily housing properties and
commercial, municipal and institutional establishments who gather leaves
shall source separate all leaves from other waste and place them for
collection at the times and in the manner prescribed by the Borough.
by the Borough in its recycling regulations. These establishments must
arrange for the transfer of materials at least once a month to a
recycling system by a recycling collector (for the purpose of collecting
source separated recyclable materials) authorized by the Borough.
B. The authorized recycling collector shall annually provide to the
Borough evidence of each such arrangement and documentation of the
total number of tons recycled by providing invoices showing the
materials collected from the establishments (or properties) that were
marketed.
C. At all community activities, recyclable materials designated by the
Borough must be separated until collection. Sponsoring organizations
must arrange for the transfer of the materials to a recycling system.
A. The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
housing properties of three or more units shall establish a collection
system for recyclables, at each property. Materials to be separated may
include clear glass, colored glass, aluminum cans, newspapers and any
other materials designated by the Borough in its regulations. The
collection system must include suitable containers for collection and
sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and
written instructions to the occupants concerning the use and
availability of the collection system.
B. These landlords or owners must arrange for the transfer of the
collected recyclables materials to a recycling system at least once a
month.
C. Owners, landlords and agents of owners or landlords who comply with
this article shall not be liable for the noncompliance of occupants of
their buildings.
§ 280-14 LEWISBURG CODE § 280-17
272:162
Leaves are not to be incorporated into the regular waste stream. Nothing
herein shall require any person to gather leaves or prevent any person
from utilizing leaves for compost, mulch, or other agricultural, horticultural,
silvicultural, gardening or landscape purposes.
§ 280-18. Authorization of collectors from multifamily dwellings
and commercial, institutional and municipal establishments.
[Amended 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 877]
The Borough shall authorize by permit recycling collectors to collect and
market source separated recyclable materials from multifamily dwellings
and commercial, institutional and municipal establishments within the
Borough.
A. Permits shall be issued upon application to the Borough, which shall
review and approve such applications in accordance with the following
criteria:
(1) No person, other than persons duly authorized by the Borough,
shall collect, transport and/or market source separated recyclable
materials within or from the Borough;
(2) Permits may be issued to only those persons who can provide
satisfactory evidence that they are capable of providing the
necessary services and can comply with the provisions and intent of
this article and the rules and regulations established by the
Borough; and,
(3) A the time of the application's submission, the applicant shall
indicate that he/she has the appropriate type of truck with which to
collect source separated recyclable materials and shall provide
evidence that he/she carries sufficient liability insurance on the
vehicle.
B. Permits shall be issued on a fiscal year basis and renewed annually, but
may be revoked at any time by the Borough for violation of any law,
statute or ordinance or for just cause in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Borough and/or the Department of Environmental
Resources of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Nothing herein shall prohibit an individual and/or business from taking
their/its source separated recyclable material directly to a designated
drop off site or to market in accordance with this article, if the following
requirements are met:
(1) The persons have otherwise provided for the recycling of materials
that they are required by this article and the regulations
promulgated hereunder to recycle; and,
(2) The persons annually, in February, provide written documentation
to the Borough of the total number of tons of materials and type of
materials recycled.
§ 280-17 SMOKE DETECTORS § 280-19
272:163
§ 280-19. Collection of recyclables by unauthorized person(s).
[Amended 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 877]
§ 280-20. Delivery of recyclables to landfills or incinerators and
brush to recycling collection center. [Amended 4-18-2017 by Ord.
No. 1045]
§ 280-21. Authorization of Borough to contract with collectors.
[Amended 11-19-1991 by Ord. No. 878]
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the Borough from specifically
contracting with collectors of recyclable materials to collect and haul
source separated recyclable materials from commercial, institutional and
municipal establishments and residential and multifamily dwellings within
the Borough.
A. Ownership of any recyclable materials is retained by the owners,
lessees and occupants of residences and commercial or institutional
establishments until the materials are placed at curbside or a similar
location for collection. Thereafter, once the materials are placed at
curbside or a similar location, they become the property of the Borough
or its authorized recycling collector(s), unless deemed to be
unacceptable due to their condition, packaging, or nature or
separation.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for any persons unauthorized by the
Borough to collect, pick up or cause to be picked up, transport or bring
into the Borough, or convey over any of the streets and alleys of the
Borough any such recyclable material. Each such collection in violation
hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as
hereinafter provided.
A. All recyclable materials must be delivered by the authorized collector to
sites for recycling. It shall be a violation of this article for the authorized
collector of recyclable materials to deliver such materials to a landfill or
incinerator for the purpose of disposal unless the markets for such
materials no longer exist. The authorized collector will provide to the
Borough the weight receipts of the recyclable materials.
B. Brush may be delivered to the Borough's recycling collection center to
be added to its brush pile free of charge for Borough residents, who
provide proof of their residency at the time of such delivery, and also for
contractors or nonresident Borough real property owners working on
real property located within the Borough, who provide a pre-approved
receipt issued by the Borough. Nonresidents of the Borough, who
provide a pre-approved receipt issued by the Borough, may deliver
brush to the Borough's recycling collection center subject to the prepayment
of such fees as the Borough may establish from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of Lewisburg.
§ 280-19 LEWISBURG CODE § 280-22
272:164
§ 280-22. Fees. [Amended 11-19-1991 by Ord. No. 878]
A person may rent a container from the Borough for the storage of
recyclable materials at the rate of $7.70 per month, which fee may be
increased from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Lewisburg. The Borough shall also charge to and and collect
from any person, recycling collector, or collector of recyclable materials
such other fee or fees for the collection of recyclable materials as the
Borough may establish from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Lewisburg.
§ 280-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall fail to comply with the requirements of this article
or violate the terms and provisions hereof or the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon
convection thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period
not in excess of 90 days; provided, however, that each day's continuance of
a violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. Responsibility
for the enforcement of this article shall be with the Borough.
§ 280-22 SMOKE DETECTORS § 280-23
272:165
Chapter 290
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 179.
Sewers — See Ch. 255.
Solid waste — See Ch. 280.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
315.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 152.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 280-23 LEWISBURG CODE § 280-23
290:166
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 290-1. Long title.
This chapter establishes rules, regulations, and standards for regulating
land use activities and associated stormwater runoff within Lewisburg
Borough, County of Union, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; sets forth the
powers, duties and procedures to be followed by the Borough in
administering this chapter; and sets forth the penalties for violation thereof.
§ 290-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be referenced and cited as the
“Lewisburg Borough Stormwater Management Ordinance.”
§ 290-3. Authority.
The Borough is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff
by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, 32 P.S., P.L. 864 (Act
167), Section 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Stormwater Management
Act. Stormwater management is also authorized by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, P.L. 805; P.S. § 10101, and
by the Borough Code, Act 581 of 1965, P.L. 1656; 53 P.S. § 45101.
§ 290-4. Statement of findings.
The Lewisburg Borough Council finds that:
§ 290-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety and welfare within
Lewisburg Borough by minimizing the damages described in § 290-4A of
this chapter through provisions designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare,
and the protection of the people of the Borough and all the people of the
Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
A. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
§ 290-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-5
290:167
§ 290-6. Applicability.
§ 290-7. Exemptions.
B. Promote the utilization and preservation of existing natural drainage
systems.
C. Encourage groundwater recharge where appropriate and prevent
degradation of groundwater quality.
D. Maintain existing natural flows of streams including quantity, peak
flows, flow type and quality.
E. Preserve and restore flood-carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management facilities constructed in the Borough.
G. Provide for the protection of wellhead areas and community water
supplies and protection of downstream properties from impacts
resulting from increased development.
H. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide
stormwater management and planning.
A. This chapter shall apply in all watersheds within Lewisburg Borough
and shall only apply to permanent stormwater management facilities
constructed as part of any regulated activities listed in this section. This
chapter contains only the stormwater management performance
standards and design criteria that are necessary or desirable from a
watershed-wide perspective.
B. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter:
(1) Land development.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious or semi-pervious
surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(6) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
A. Any regulated activity on parcels generating less than 5,000 square feet
of total impervious area may be granted an exemption from the
provisions of this chapter. This criterion shall apply to the total
development even if development is to take place in phases. The date of
this chapter adoption shall be the starting point from which to consider
§ 290-5 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-7
290:168
§ 290-8. Compatibility with other ordinances.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable act, code, law, ordinance, plan, policy,
rule, regulation, or statute.
§ 290-9. Liability disclaimer.
The granting of approval of a stormwater drainage plan, stormwater
management design, or any improvement installed as a condition thereof,
shall not constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind
by Lewisburg Borough, or by any official, employee, or appointee thereof,
of the practicality or safety of the proposed use or improvement, and
shall create no liability upon or cause of action against the Borough, its
officials, employees, or appointees for any damage that may result pursuant
thereto. The applicant is responsible for ensuring that any development and
activities regulated by this chapter will not cause injury or damage to other
persons or property.
§ 290-10. References.
Specific methods and publications referenced in this chapter shall, in all
cases, refer to the latest available edition and shall include revisions,
amendments, and/or replacements thereto.
§ 290-11. Amendments.
The Lewisburg Borough Council may, from time to time, revise, modify,
and amend this chapter pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
tracts as "parent tracts" in which future subdivisions and respective
impervious area computations shall be cumulatively considered.
Exemptions shall be at discretion of the Municipal Engineer upon
review of site conditions, topography, soils and other factors as deemed
appropriate.
B. Prior to the granting of an exemption, the applicant must provide
documentation that the increased flows from the site leaves the site in
the same manner as the pre-development condition, and that there will
be no adverse affects to properties along the path of flow(s), or that the
increased flow(s) will reach a natural watercourse or an existing
stormwater management structure before adversely affecting any
property along the path of the flow(s). This documentation must include
a signed statement by the landowner indicating the total impervious
area constructed since the date of adoption of this chapter.
C. No exemption shall be provided for regulated activities as defined in
§ 290-6B(5) and (6) of this chapter and under no circumstances shall an
exemption be granted to the provisions contained in §§ 290-17, 290-18
and 290-19 of this chapter.
§ 290-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-11
290:169
Stormwater Management Act, Act 167 of October 4, 1978, 32 P.S. § 680.1,
P.L. 864; the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968,
P.L. 805, 53 P.S. § 10101; and by the Borough Code, Act 581 of 1965, P.L.
1656; 53 P.S. § 45101, as from time to time reenacted and amended. or other
applicable law in effect at the time of said amendment.
§ 290-11 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-11
290:170
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 290-12. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms and words used
herein shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings indicated
in this section.
§ 290-13. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 290-14. Specific terms.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising
livestock including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing and
installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or
impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
§ 290-12 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-14
290:171
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for
approval to engage in any regulated activities as defined in § 290-6 of this
chapter.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Stormwater structures, facilities
and techniques to control, maintain or improve the quantity and quality of
surface runoff.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — Lewisburg Borough Council.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward cutting of
small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by moderate to large
floods.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Union County Conservation District.
CULVERT — Structure with appurtenant works that carries a stream under
or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid
or semi-fluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semi-fluid.
DESIGNEE — The agent of Lewisburg Borough involved with the
administration, review or enforcement of any provisions of this chapter by
contract or memorandum of understanding.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24-hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate.
DETENTION DISTRICT — Those subareas in which some type of detention
is required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of Act 167.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all overland
or pipe flow from the site would be directed towards it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include streams, channels,
swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
§ 290-14 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-14
290:172
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the municipal governing body
after the drainage plan has been approved. Said permit is issued prior to or
with the final municipal approval.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The plan and documentation prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed and the stormwater management system, if any, to be used for
a given development site, the contents of which are established in this
chapter.
EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity including, but not limited to,
construction, mining, timber harvesting and grubbing which alters,
disturbs, and exposes the existing land surface.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or
basin that is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design
storm controlled by the pond.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind,
ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan that is
designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to
the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped
land, the land use shall be considered as "meadow" in good condition
unless the natural land cover is proven to generate lower curve numbers or
Rational "C" value, such as forested lands.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers,
and other waters of this Commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard
Boundary mapped as being a special flood hazard area. Also included
are areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) Technical
Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from
time to time by PA DEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it
is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
§ 290-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-14
290:173
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include timber
inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high
water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge. The space
is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein. (To) Grade: to finish the
surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct
surface water from cropland.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS (HYDROLOGIC ENGINEERING CENTER HYDROLOGIC
MODELING SYSTEM) — The computer-based hydrologic modeling
technique adapted to a particular watershed as part of an official Act
167 Watershed Plan and calibrated to reflect actual recorded flow values
by adjoining key model input parameters. Miller Run sub-watershed of
Bull Run and West Branch of the Susquehanna have calibrated HEC-HMS
models.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the percolation of water
into the ground. For the purposes of this chapter, impervious surface may
include, but not be limited to, the following: concrete, asphalt, building
coverage, water impoundments, gravel and crushed stone areas, highly
compacted soil, etc.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, seepage trench).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the diversion
end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through which water
may flow.
KARST — A type of topography that is formed over limestone, dolomite,
or gypsum by bedrock solution, and that is characterized by closed
depressions or sinkholes, caves and underground drainage (from AGI,
Glossary of Geology, 1972).
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
the improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
A.
§ 290-14 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-14
290:174
LAND EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling,
digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity
that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land.
LIMESTONE — A rock that is chiefly formed by the accumulation of organic
remains, consisting mainly of calcium carbonate.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in any Act 167 Watershed Plan
hydrologic model runs.
MANNING EQUATION IN (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed
conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed or retained as the engineer
for Lewisburg Borough.
MUNICIPALITY — Lewisburg Borough, Union County, Pennsylvania.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a watery body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTRUCTURAL BMP'S — Stormwater runoff treatment techniques
which use natural measures to reduce pollution levels, do not require
extensive construction efforts and/or promote pollution reduction by
eliminating the pollutant source. Acceptable nonstructural BMP's are
identified in Appendix E.12
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an
open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural
and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes
flowing partly full.
OUTFALL — Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features.
(2)
B. Any subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the PA
Municipalities Planning Code.
C.
12.Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 290-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-14
290:175
OUTLET STRUCTURE — A pipe, weir, or other appurtenant works designed
to control the required detention storm.
OVERBANK AND EXTREME EVENT FLOOD PROTECTION VOLUME — See
“release rates.”
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of impervious parking areas as
temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (PSRM) — The computer-based hydrologic
modeling technique adapted to a particular watershed as part of an official
Act 167 Watershed Plan and calibrated to reflect actual recorded flow
values by adjoining key model input parameters. Portions of the Bull Run
Watershed not impacted by the Plan update of 2002 and the Buffalo Creek
Watershed have calibrated PSRM models.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — Lewisburg Borough Planning Commission.
PMF - PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD — The flood that may be expected
from the most severe combination of critical meteorological and
hydrological conditions that is reasonably possible in any area. The PMF
is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined
based on data obtained from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA).
PSUEDO-HYDROGRAPH — A hydrograph derived from an established
formula without the need for rainfall-runoff data analysis.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow.
RECHARGE VOLUME (Rev) — The volume of stormwater runoff from a
site that must be infiltrated into the soil to promote the maintenance of
groundwater recharge rates that existed prior to development.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that have an
impact on stormwater runoff and that are specified in § 290-6 of this
chapter.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of pre-development peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the post-development peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released from the
basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average of once every 25 years.
§ 290-14 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-14
290:176
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported
by water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the Commonwealth occurring
from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control
measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the ground.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called “curve number” (CN).
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation Service,
into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are
very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very
permeable and produce much more runoff.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and
depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "return
period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The total amount of precipitation reaching the ground
surface.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals, or toxicants than are found in
§ 290-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-14
290:177
typical stormwater runoff, based on monitoring studies. A list of categories
of typical hotspots is contained in this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CREDITS — Incentive based nonstructural
stormwater management applications that can be incorporated into the site
design process to promote water quality, groundwater recharge, volume
control, and other stormwater objectives. These include conservation of
natural areas, disconnection of rooftop runoff, disconnection of non-rooftop
runoff, sheet flow to buffers, grass channels and environmentally sensitive
or low-impact development.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins,
open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plans for managing
stormwater runoff in designated watersheds adopted by Union County and
approved by the PA DEP as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864
(Act 167), the Stormwater Management Act.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated
water of this Commonwealth.
SUBAREA/SUBWATERSHED — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria have been established in an Act
167 Stormwater Management Plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or re-division of a lot, tract or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwellings, shall be exempt.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TECHNICAL RELEASE 20 (TR-20) — Project Formulation-Hydrology,
Computer Program. NRCS.
TECHNICAL RELEASE 55 (TR-55) — Urban Unit Hydrology for Small
Watersheds. NRCS.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See “forest management.”
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of
interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
§ 290-14 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-14
290:178
WATERCOURSE — A stream of water, river, brook, creek, or a channel or
ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv) — The storage needed to capture and
treat the runoff from 90% of the average annual rainfall. For Union County
the depth of rain associated with 90% of the total of all rainfall events is 1.2
inches.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
§ 290-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-14
290:179

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 290-15. Stormwater management areas.
The Lewisburg Borough Stormwater Management Areas are as follows and
appear on a map in Appendix A13 of this chapter.
§ 290-16. Requirements.
A. Buffalo Creek Stormwater Area. Activities within the Buffalo Creek
Watershed shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and the
Buffalo Creek Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan, adopted by the
County of Union and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
B. Bull Run (Limestone Run) Stormwater Area. Activities occurring within
the Bull Run Watershed shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter and the original Bull Run Act 167 Stormwater Management
Plan of 1993 and the Plan Update of 2002 adopted by the County of
Union and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
C. West Branch Susquehanna River Stormwater Area. Activities occurring
within the West Branch Susquehanna River Watershed shall comply
with the requirements of this chapter and the West Branch
Susquehanna River Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan, adopted by
the County of Union and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
A. The management of stormwater on the site, both during and upon the
completion of construction, and the design of any temporary or
permanent facilities or structures and the utilization of a natural
drainage system shall be in full compliance with this section.
B. Site designs shall minimize impervious surfaces and shall promote the
infiltration of runoff through seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc.,
where soil conditions permit to reduce the size or eliminate the need for
detention facilities.
C. Stormwater runoff generated from development discharged directly
into a wetland or other waters of the Commonwealth shall be done in
accordance with Federal and State regulatory requirements and shall
be adequately treated to prevent degradation.
D. Annual groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained by promoting
infiltration. At a minimum annual recharge from the post-development
site shall mimic the annual recharge from the predevelopment site
conditions.
13.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 290-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-16
290:181
E. Applicants may select runoff control techniques, or a combination of
techniques, which are most suitable to control stormwater runoff from
the development site. Lewisburg Borough encourages applicants to
consider alternative solutions, including best management practices
(BMP's) for stormwater management. Applicants are urged to consult
the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for
Developing Areas and with the Municipal Engineer and the County
Conservation District. All stormwater designs are subject to the
approval of the Municipal Engineer. The Borough may request specific
information on design and/or operating features of the proposed
stormwater controls in order to determine their suitability and
adequacy in terms of the standards of this chapter.
F. All stormwater management facilities including detention basins,
BMP's, sewers, and culverts shall be designed by an individual qualified
and/or experienced in their design. These qualifications should be listed
on the front cover of the plan narrative.
G. The anticipated peak rate of stormwater runoff from the site during and
after full development shall not exceed the peak rate of runoff from the
site prior to development activities, measured in accordance with the
standards and criteria of this chapter.
H. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches but shall be allowed to drain to the land surface to
promote overland flow and infiltration of stormwater.
I. Existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered without permission of the affected
property owner(s) and shall be subject to any applicable discharge
criteria specified in this chapter.
J. If existing diffused stormwater flow is proposed to be concentrated the
applicant must document that adequate downstream conveyance
facilities exist to safely transport the concentrated discharge, or
otherwise prove that no erosion, sedimentation, flooding or other harm
will result from concentrated discharge.
K. Storm sewers, swales, culverts and bridges.
(1) Storm sewers, swales, culverts, bridges, and related facilities shall
be provided to:
(a) Permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
(b) Insure the drainage of all points along the line of streets;
(c) Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at reasonable
intervals related to the extent and grade of the area drained,
and to prevent the flooding of intersections and the undue
concentration of Stormwater; and
§ 290-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-16
290:182
§ 290-17. Water quality requirements.
(d) Insure unrestricted flow of stormwater under driveways, and
at natural watercourses or drainage swales.
(2) Consideration should be given to anticipated up slope
development.
L. All natural streams, channels, swales, drainage systems and/or areas of
surface water concentration shall be maintained in their existing
conditions unless an alteration is approved by the Borough due to
topographic conditions.
M. Easements shall be provided conforming to the line of all natural
streams, channels, swales, and drainage systems and other stormwater
infrastructure installed to comply with this chapter. The terms of such
easements shall prohibit excavation, the placement of fill or structures
and any other alterations that may adversely affect the flow of
stormwater.
N. All stream encroachment activities, including work in and adjacent to
waters of the Commonwealth or wetlands, shall comply with applicable
PA DEP requirements.
O. Any stormwater facility located on a state or Borough highway right-ofway
shall be subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation or Lewisburg Borough.
P. Applicants are encouraged to incorporate designs to take advantage of
the stormwater credits presented in Appendix B14 of this chapter.
Q. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development site are not
subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff
rates; however, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site.
R. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
sound engineering principles and practices. The Borough shall reserve
the right to disapprove any design that would result in the occupancy or
continuation of an adverse hydrologic or hydraulic condition.
A. For water quality, the objective is to provide adequate storage to
capture and treat the runoff from 90% of the average annual rainfall in
accordance with the following where P represents the depth of rain
associated with 90% of the total rainfall events over 0.11 inches.
(1) The size of the water quality facility shall be based upon the
following equation:
14.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 290-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-17
290:183
WQv = (1.2) (Rv)(A)
P = 1.2 inches of rainfall
12
Where:
WQv = water quality volume (in ac-ft)
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I) where I is percent impervious
cover
A = area in acres*
*Treatment of the WQv for off-site areas and areas not disturbed
is not required.
(2) Treatment of the WQv shall be provided at all developments where
stormwater management is required. A minimum WQv of 0.2
inches per acre shall be met at sites or in drainage areas that have
less than 15% impervious cover.
(3) The WQv shall be based on the impervious cover for the proposed
site. Off-site existing impervious areas may be excluded from the
calculation of the water quality volume requirements.
(4) When a project contains or is divided by multiple drainage areas,
the WQv shall be addressed for each drainage area.
(5) Drainage areas having no impervious cover and no proposed
disturbance during development may be excluded from the WQv
calculations. Designers are encouraged to use these areas as
nonstructural practices for WQv treatment.
(6) Where structural practices for treating the recharge volume (Rev)
are employed upstream of a BMP, the Rev may be subtracted from
the WQv used for design.
(7) Where nonstructural practices are employed in the site design, the
WQv can be reduced in accordance with the conditions outlined in
Appendix B15 of this chapter.
(8) The design of the facility shall consider and minimize the chances
of clogging and sedimentation potential. Orifices smaller than
three inches diameter are not recommended. However, if the
design engineer can provide proof that the smaller orifices are
protected from clogging by use of trash racks, etc., smaller orifices
may be permitted.
15.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 290-17 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-17
290:184
(9) When designing flow splitters for off-line practices, consult the
small storm hydrology method provided in Appendix L16 of this
chapter.
B. To accomplish adequate water quality treatment the final WQv shall be
treated by an acceptable BMP from the list presented in Appendix M17
or an equivalent practice approved by the Municipal Engineer. The
applicant may submit original and innovative designs to the Municipal
Engineer for review and approval. Such designs may achieve the water
quality objectives through a combination of BMPs.
C. The water quality requirement can be met by providing a twenty-fourhour
draw down of a portion of the (WQv) in conjunction with a
stormwater pond or wetland system. Referred to as “extended
detention” (ED), this is different than providing the extended detention
of the one-year storm for the channel protection volume (Cpv). The ED
portion of the WQv may be included when routing the Cpv.
D. In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the
applicant shall consider the following:
(1) Total contributing area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(3) Slope and topography.
(4) Seasonal high water table.
(5) Depth to bedrock.
(6) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(7) Erodibility of soils.
(8) Subgrade stability and susceptibility to sinkhole formation
(9) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(10) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(11) Stream bank erosion.
(12) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(13) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(14) The nature of pollutants being removed.
(15) Creation and protection of wildlife habitat.
16.Editor's Note: Appendix L is on file in the Borough offices.
17.Editor's Note: Appendix M is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 290-17 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-17
290:185
(16) Enhancement of aesthetic and property value.
(17) Maintenance requirements.
E. Stormwater hotspots. If a site is designated as a stormwater hotspot as
per Table 302-1, it has important implications for how stormwater is
managed.
(1) A greater level of stormwater treatment is required at hotspot sites
to prevent pollutant wash off after construction.
(2) For areas designated as hotspots, a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan may be required to be designed and implemented
that contains operation practices at the site to reduce the
generation of pollutants by preventing contact with rainfall.
(3) Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans shall follow the
requirements of the U.S. EPA NPDES stormwater program.
(4) The following land uses and activities are not normally considered
hotspots:
(a) Residential streets and rural highways, residential
development, institutional development, commercial and office
developments, non-industrial rooftops, pervious areas except
for golf courses and nurseries. Large highways and retail
gasoline outlet facilities are not designated as hotspots
although it is important to ensure that stormwater plans for
these facilities adequately protect groundwater.
Table 302-1: Stormwater Hotspots
Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities*
Vehicle service and maintenance facilities
Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities*
Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.)*
Industrial sites
Marinas (service and maintenance)*
Outdoor liquid container storage
Outdoor loading/unloading facilities
Public works storage areas
Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials*
Commercial container nursery
Golf courses
Other land uses and activities as designated
§ 290-17 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-17
290:186
§ 290-18. Groundwater recharge requirements.
NOTES:
*Stormwater Pollution Plan implementation may be required
for these land uses or activities under the U.S. EPA NPDES
stormwater program.
A. Design of the infiltration/recharge stormwater management facilities
shall give consideration to providing groundwater recharge to
compensate for the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the
ground surface is paved and roofed over. These measures are
encouraged, particularly in hydrologic soil groups A and B and shall be
utilized wherever feasible.
B. The criteria for maintaining recharge is based on the USDA average
annual recharge volume per soil type divided by the annual rainfall in
Union County (40 inches per year) and multiplied by 90%. This keeps
the recharge calculation consistent with the WQv methodology. Thus,
an annual recharge volume requirement shall be specified for a site as
follows:
(1) Percent volume method.
Rev = [(S)(Rv)(A)]/12
Where:
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I) where I is percent impervious cover
A = site area in acres
(2) Percent area method.
Rev = (S)(Ai)
Where:
Ai = the measured impervious cover
Hydrologic Soil Group Soil Specific Recharge Factor
(S)
A 0.40
B 0.27
C 0.14
D 0.07
(3) The recharge volume is considered part of the total WQv that must
be provided at a site and can be achieved either by a structural
practice (e.g., infiltration, bioretention), a nonstructural practice
(e.g., buffers, disconnection of rooftops), or a combination of both.
§ 290-17 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-18
290:187
(4) Drainage areas having no impervious cover and no proposed
disturbance during development may be excluded from the Rev
calculations. Designers are encouraged to use these areas as
nonstructural practices for Rev treatment.
(5) The Rev and WQv are inclusive. When treated separately, the Rev
may be subtracted from the WQv when sizing the water quality
BMP.
(6) Recharge/infiltration facilities may be used in conjunction with
other innovative or traditional BMPs, stormwater control facilities,
and nonstructural stormwater management alternatives.
C. Basis for determining recharge volume.
(1) If more than one hydrologic soil group (HSG) is present at a site, a
composite soil specific recharge factor shall be computed based on
the proportion of total site area within each HSG. The recharge
volume provided at the site shall be directed to the most permeable
HSG available.
(2) The "percent volume" method is used to determine the Rev
treatment requirement when structural practices are used to
provide recharge. These practices must provide seepage into the
ground and may include infiltration and exfiltration structures
(e.g., infiltration, bioretention, dry swales or sand filters with
storage below the under drain). Structures that require
impermeable liners, intercept groundwater, or are designed for
trapping sediment (e.g., forbays) may not be used. In this method,
the volume of runoff treated by structural practices shall meet or
exceed the computed recharge volume.
(3) The "percent area" method is used to determine the Rev treatment
requirements when nonstructural practices are used. Under this
method, the recharge requirements are evaluated by mapping the
percent of impervious area that is effectively treated by an
acceptable nonstructural practice and comparing it to the
minimum recharge requirements.
(4) Acceptable nonstructural practices include filter strips that treat
rooftop or parking lot runoff, sheet flow discharge to stream
buffers, and grass channels that treat roadway runoff.
(5) The recharge volume criterion does not apply to any portion of a
site designated as a stormwater hotspot or any project considered
as redevelopment. In addition, the Municipal Engineer may alter or
eliminate the recharge volume requirement if the site is situated on
unsuitable soils (e.g., marine clays), karst or in an urban
redevelopment area. In this situation, nonstructural practices
(percent area method) shall be implemented to the maximum
extent practicable and the remaining or untreated Rev included in
the WQv treatment.
§ 290-18 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-18
290:188
§ 290-19. Channel protection storage volume (stream bank
erosion).
(6) If Rev is treated by structural or nonstructural practices separate
and upstream of the WQv treatment, the WQv is adjusted
accordingly.
D. Soils evaluation.
(1) A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be performed to
determine the suitability of recharge facilities. The evaluation shall
be performed by a qualified professional, and at a minimum,
address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to
sinkhole formation, and subgrade stability. Advanced testing
methods such as the double ring test are encouraged. The
municipal engineer reserves the right to require an additional soils
evaluation when it is believed that test results are not reasonable.
(2) Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in
geologically susceptible areas such as strip mine or limestone
areas. Extreme caution shall also be exercised where salt or
chloride would be a pollutant since soils do little to filter this
pollutant and it may contaminate the groundwater. It is also
extremely important that the design professional evaluates the
possibility of groundwater contamination from the proposed
infiltration/recharge facility and recommends a hydrogeologic
justification study be performed if necessary. Whenever a basin will
be located in an area underlain by limestone, a geological
evaluation of the proposed location shall be conducted to
determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The design of all
facilities over limestone formations shall include measures to
prevent ground water contamination and, where necessary,
sinkhole formation.
(3) The Borough may require the installation of an impermeable liner
in detention basins underlain by limestone or in areas of karst
topography. A detailed hydrogeologic investigation may be
required by the Borough. The developer may also be required to
provide safeguards against groundwater contamination for uses
which may cause groundwater contamination, should there be an
accident or spill.
E. All recharge/infiltration facilities shall be designed to completely drain
within 72 hours of reaching maximum capacity.
A. Stream channel protection shall be considered in implementing the
standards of § 290-20 of this chapter. If a stormwater storage facility
needs to be constructed then, to protect channels from erosion, the
outflow structure shall be designed to provide twenty-four-hour
extended detention of the one-year twenty-four-hour storm event. The
§ 290-18 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-19
290:189
method for determining the Cpv requirement is detailed in Appendix
N18 of this chapter.
B. For discharges to streams having verified naturally reproducing wild
trout or that are stocked with trout (based upon the most recent
resource classification or other appropriate documentation of the
Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission or other appropriate agency),
only 12 hours of extended detention shall be provided. The rationale for
this criterion is that runoff will be stored and released in such a gradual
manner that critical erosive velocities during bankfull and near-bankfull
events will seldom be exceeded in downstream channels.
C. Basis for determining channel protection storage volume.
(1) The models HEC-HMS, TR-55 and TR-20 (or an equivalent
approved by the Municipal Engineer) shall be used for determining
peak discharge rates.
(2) The rainfall depth for the one-year twenty-four-hour storm event in
Union County is 2.2 inches.
(3) Off-site areas shall be modeled as present land use in good
condition for the one-year storm event.
(4) The length of overland flow used in time of concentration (tc)
calculations is limited to no more than 150 feet.
(5) The Cpv storage volume shall be computed using the detention lag
time between hydrograph procedures outlined in Appendix N of
this chapter. The detention lag time (T) for a one-year storm is
defined as the interval between the center of mass of the inflow
hydrograph and the center of mass of the outflow hydrograph.
(6) Cpv is not required at sites where the one-year post-development
peak discharge (qi) is less than or equal to 2.0 cfs. A Cpv orifice
diameter (do) of less than 3.0 inches is subject to approval by the
Municipal Engineer and is not recommended unless an internal
control for orifice protection is used.
(7) Cpv shall be addressed for the entire site. If a site consists of
multiple drainage areas, Cpv may be distributed proportionately to
each drainage area.
(8) Extended detention storage provided for the Cpv does not meet the
WQv requirement (i.e., Cpv and WQv shall be treated separately).
(9) The stormwater storage needed for the Cpv may be provided above
the WQv storage in stormwater ponds and wetlands, thereby
meeting all storage criteria except Rev in a single facility with
appropriate hydraulic control structures for each storage
requirement.
18.Editor's Note: Appendix N is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 290-19 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-19
290:190
§ 290-20. Overbank and extreme event flood protection
requirements.
For a site located within two or more districts the peak discharge rate
from any sub-area shall be the predevelopment peak discharge for that
sub-area. The calculated peak discharges shall apply regardless of whether
the grading plan changes the drainage area by sub-area. Pre-development
and post-development runoff for specific sites shall be computed using an
approved method as per Table 307-1 for the two- , ten- , twenty-five- , fifty-
, and one-hundred-year storm.
(10) Infiltration is not recommended for Cpv control because of large
storage requirements.
A. Bull run watershed. The Bull Run Watershed Release Rate Percentage
Maps in Appendix I19 of this chapter illustrate the release rate subareas
and define the percentage of pre-development peak rate of runoff that
can be discharged from an outfall on the site after development. The
release rates are also shown in Table 305-1. The release rates apply
uniformly to all land development or alterations within a subarea.
Procedures for applying the release rate percentage are contained in
Appendix J.20
Table 305-1: Bull Run Watershed Release Rates
Subareas
Release Rate
(%)
1 80
2 50
3 100
4 100
5 60
6 60
7 100
8 70
9 50
Bull Run Watershed
10 60
37-40 100
42-45 100
46 75
47 100
Miller Run
49-51 100
19.Editor's Note: Appendix I is on file in the Borough offices.
20.Editor's Note: Appendix J is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 290-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-20
290:191
§ 290-21. Design considerations.
B. Buffalo Creek Watershed. The Buffalo Creek Watershed contains three
runoff control districts, "A," B," and "C." Development sites in the
Buffalo Creek Watershed must control post-development runoff rates to
pre-development runoff rates as shown in Table 305-2. Lewisburg
Borough is completely within the Buffalo Creek Runoff Control District
"C." See Appendix K21 for the Buffalo Creek Runoff Control District and
subwatersheds within the Borough.
Table 305-2: Buffalo Creek
Subareas
Post-
Development
Design Storm
Pre-
Development
Design Storm
Runoff Control
Districts
1-4 2-year 1-year
16 10-year 10-year
28-39 50-year 50-year
A
58-59
5-15
17-27 2-year 1-year
40-55 10-year 5-year
60-65 50-year 25-year
B
70-75
79-81
56-57 2-year 1-year
66-69 10-year 10-year
76-78 50-year 50-year
C
82-92
C. West Branch Susquehanna River. The release rate within the West
Branch Susquehanna River Watershed within Lewisburg Borough is
100%. For sites that discharge directly to the Susquehanna River the
Municipal Engineer may waive the requirements of this section.
However, safe conveyance of runoff must be demonstrated for the two- ,
ten- , twenty-five- , fifty- and one-hundred-year design storms. The
Borough reserves the right to require that the release rates be met.
Procedures for applying the release rates are in Appendix J.22
A. All storm sewers shall be able to convey the post-development runoff
from a ten-year design storm without surcharging inlets and shall be
21.Editor's Note: Appendix K is on file in the Borough offices.
22.Editor's Note: Appendix J is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 290-20 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-21
290:192
constructed using Penn DOT Form 408 Specifications, Standard Details,
unless otherwise directed by the Municipal Engineer. When connecting
to an existing storm sewer system the applicant must demonstrate
that the proposed system will not exacerbate any existing stormwater
problems.
B. Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge into any municipal sanitary
sewer line or over a sidewalk.
C. Inlets shall be placed at the curb line where a curbed section is
installed. Inlets required for parallel or cross drainage without a curbed
section shall be set at the centerline of the ditch.
D. Structures shall be Penn DOT Type M pre-cast concrete or cast-in-place
Class A concrete. Brick or block structures shall not be permitted. Solid
concrete block or brick may be incorporated into a structure only for
grade adjustment of the casting.
E. All water obstructions (bridges, culverts, outfalls or stream enclosures)
shall have ample waterway opening to carry expected flows, based on a
minimum post-development peak storm frequency of 25 years and shall
have a minimum of one foot of freeboard measured below the lowest
point along the top of the roadway.
F. Bridge and culvert construction shall be in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation specifications and shall
meet the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
G. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel that does not fall
under PA DEP Chapter 105 Regulations must be able to convey, without
damage to the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the ten-year
design storm. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater
management facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be designed to
convey the design flow to or from that structure.
H. Roadway crossings located within designated floodplain areas shall be
able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design storm.
I. Any stormwater management facility designed to store runoff and
requiring an earthen berm or embankment shall be designed to provide
an emergency spillway to handle flow up to and including the onehundred-
year post-development conditions. The height of the
embankment must be set as to provide a minimum of one foot of
freeboard above the maximum pool elevation computed when the
facility functions for the one-hundred-year post-development inflow.
J. Stormwater management facilities that require a dam safety permit
under PA DEP Chapter 105 shall meet the applicable dam safety
requirements that may require the facility to pass storms larger than
the one-hundred-year event.
§ 290-21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-21
290:193
K. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels
and at all points of discharge.
L. Detention basins for stormwater peak discharge storage shall comply
with the following criteria:
(1) Basins shall be installed prior to any earthmoving or land
disturbance that they will serve. The phasing of their construction
shall be noted in a narrative and on the plan.
(2) Basins located in an area underlain by limestone may require a
geologic evaluation of the proposed location to determine
susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The design of all facilities
over limestone formations shall include measures to prevent
ground water contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole
formation. The Borough may require basins located over limestone
to have an impermeable liner.
(3) Soils used for the construction of basins shall have low erodability
factors ("K factors").
(4) Energy dissipators and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainage ways discharge to or from basins.
Discharge from basins shall be into a natural waterway or
drainageway.
(5) Exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not exceed one foot vertical
per three feet horizontal and may be further reduced if the soil has
unstable characteristics.
(6) Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed one foot vertical per
three feet horizontal except with the approval of the Municipal
Engineer. Where concrete, stone, or brick walls are used for
steeper interior slopes, the basin shall be fenced with a permanent
wire fence at least 42 inches in height and a ramp of durable, nonslip
materials for maintenance vehicles shall be provided for basin
access.
(7) Outlet structures within basins which will control peak discharge
flows and distribute the flows by pipes to discharge areas shall be
constructed of concrete, polymer-coated steel or aluminum and
shall have childproof, non-clogging trash racks over all design
openings exceeding 12 inches in diameter, except those openings
used to carry perennial stream flows. Small outlet structures may
be constructed of Schedule 40 PVC.
(8) Where spillways will be used to control peak discharges in excess
of the ten-year storm, control weirs shall be constructed of
concrete of sufficient mass and structural stability to withstand the
pressures of impounded waters and outlet velocities.
§ 290-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-21
290:194
§ 290-22. Calculation methodology.
(9) Concrete outlet aprons shall be designed as level spreaders and
shall extend at a minimum to the toe of the basin slope. The
incorporation of any large stone found on the site into the concrete
apron to provide a more natural appearance is encouraged.
(10) Inlet and outlet structures shall be located at maximum distance
from each other. The Borough may require a rock filter berm or
rock-filled gabions between inlet and outlet areas when the
distance is deemed insufficient for sediment trappings.
(11) Temporary and permanent grasses or stabilization measures shall
be established on the sides of all earthen basins within 15 days of
initial construction.
A. Stormwater calculations to determine runoff, peak flow rates, peak
discharge, hydrographs and to design stormwater runoff rate reduction
facilities shall use a generally accepted calculation technique that is
based on the Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) Soil-Cover
Complex method. Table 307-1 summarizes acceptable methods.
B. It is assumed that all methods will be selected by the design
professional based on the individual limitations and suitability of each
method for a particular site. The Borough may allow the use of the
Rational Method to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that
contain 200 acres or less; however, the Rational Method shall not be
used to generate pseudo-hydrographs for drainage areas greater than
10 acres.
C. For predevelopment flow rate determination it shall be assumed that all
undeveloped and pervious land shall be considered as "meadow" in
good condition, unless the natural ground cover generates a lower
curve number or Rational "C" value (i.e., forest) as listed in Appendix C
or Appendix D of this chapter.23
D. All calculations using the Soil Cover Complex method shall use the
appropriate design rainfall depths for the various return period storms
as presented in the table in Appendix E24 of this chapter. If a hydrologic
computer model such as PSRM or HEC-HMS is used for stormwater
runoff calculations then the duration of rainfall shall be 24 hours. The
SCS "S" curve shown in Appendix F25 of this chapter shall be used for
the rainfall distribution.
E. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times of concentration for overland flow
and return periods from the Design Storm Curves from PA Department
23.Editor's Note: Appendixes C and D are on file in the Borough offices.
24.Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the Borough offices.
25.Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 290-21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-22
290:195
of Transportation Design Rainfall Curves (1986) shown in Appendix
G26 of this chapter. Times of concentration for overland flow shall be
calculated using the methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced
from time to time by NRCS). Times of concentration for channel and
pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's Equation.
F. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex method shall be obtained from the
table in Appendix C27 of this chapter.
G. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be obtained from the table in Appendix D28
of this chapter.
H. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning's Equation shall be
used for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Manning's Equation shall not be
used for analysis of pipes under pressure flow or for analysis of
culverts. Values for Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be
consistent with Appendix H29 of this chapter.
I. When existing storm sewers, streets, roadside ditches or drainage
swales are accessible, the applicant shall not connect the stormwater
drainage system to the existing facilities provided without the approval
of the Municipal Engineer and the facility owner.
J. Routing of hydrographs through detention/retention facilities for the
purposes of designing those facilities shall be accomplished using the
Storage-Indication method or other recognized routing method subject
to approval of the Municipal Engineer. For drainage areas greater than
200 acres in size, the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using
a calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. The Municipal
Engineer may approve the use of any generally accepted full
hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff
volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces
a full hydrograph.
K. Any method approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection may be used to design the waterway areas of bridges.
26.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Borough offices.
27.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Borough offices.
28.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Borough offices.
29.Editor's Note: Appendix H is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 290-22 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-22
290:196
§ 290-23. No-harm option.
Table 307-1: Acceptable Stormwater Management Computation
Methodologies
Method Method Developer Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
package based on
TR-20)
USDA NRCS Where use of full
hydrologic computer
model is desirable or
necessary.
TR-55 (or commercial
package based on
TR-55)
USDA NRCS For plans within
limitations described
in TR-55.
HEC-1, HEC-HMS US Army Corps of
Engineers
Where use of full
hydrologic computer
model is desirable or
necessary.
PSRM Penn State University Where use of full
hydrologic computer
model is desirable or
necessary.
Rational Method Emil Kuichling (1889) For sites less than 10
acres, or as approved
by the Municipal
Engineer.
Other Methods Varies Other computations
approved by Municipal
Engineer.
A. For any proposed development site not located in a provisional direct
discharge district, the developer has the option of using a less
restrictive runoff control (including no detention) if the developer can
prove that "no harm" would be caused by discharging at a higher runoff
rate than that specified by the Plan. The no-harm option is used when a
developer can prove that the post-development hydrographs can match
pre-development hydrographs, or if it can be proved that the postdevelopment
conditions will not cause increases in peaks at all points
downstream. Proof of no-harm would have to be shown based upon the
following Downstream Impact Evaluation which shall include a
downstream hydraulic capacity analysis consistent with § 290-23B of
this chapter to determine if adequate hydraulic capacity exists. The
land developer shall submit to the Municipality this evaluation of the
impacts due to increased downstream stormwater flows in the
watershed.
(1) The Downstream Impact Evaluation shall include hydrologic and
hydraulic calculations necessary to determine the impact of
hydrograph timing modifications due to the proposed development
§ 290-22 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-23
290:197
upon a dam, highway, structure, natural point of restricted
streamflow or any stream channel section, established with the
concurrence of the Municipal Engineer.
(2) The evaluation shall continue downstream until the increase in flow
diminishes due to additional flow from tributaries and/or stream
attenuation.
(3) The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the
design return period storms (two- , ten- , twenty-five- , fifty- and
one-hundred-year) shall be the values from the calibrated model
used for the analysis and preparation of the particular Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan. These flow values can be obtained
from the applicable watershed plan.
(4) Developer-proposed runoff controls that would generate increased
peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas would, by
definition, be precluded from successful attempts to prove noharm,
except in conjunction with proposed capacity improvements
for the problem areas consistent with § 290-21G.
(5) A financial distress shall not constitute grounds for granting a noharm
exemption.
(6) Capacity improvements may be provided by the developer as
necessary to implement the no-harm option, which proposes
specific capacity improvements to provide that a less stringent
discharge control would not create any harm downstream.
(7) Any no-harm justifications shall be submitted by the developer as
part of the drainage plan submission per Article IV of this chapter.
(8) Qualification of no-harm does not relieve the applicant of the other
provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the water
quality, groundwater recharge and channel protection volume
requirements of §§ 290-17, 290-18 and 290-19 of this chapter.
B. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any downstream capacity
hydraulic analysis conducted in accordance with this chapter shall use
the following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased
peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon
criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
increased twenty-five-year return period runoff without creating
any hazard to persons or property.
§ 290-23 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-23
290:198
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and,
at minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return period
runoff.
§ 290-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-23
290:199

ARTICLE IV
Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 290-24. Plan requirements.
The drainage plan shall consist of all applicable calculations, drawings,
maps, and plans. The cover sheet of the computations and erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall refer to the associated maps by title and
date. All drainage plan materials shall be submitted to the Borough in a
format that is clear, concise, legible, neat, and well organized; otherwise,
the drainage plan shall be disapproved and returned to the applicant. The
following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials
to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
(4) Drainage plans shall be prepared by a professional with
demonstrated competency in stormwater management and design.
(5) Drainage plans and related documentation shall contain the seal
and signature of the professional that prepared the plans.
B. Drawings, maps and plans of the project area shall be submitted on
twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets and shall be prepared in a
form that meets the requirements for recording at the offices of the
Recorder of Deeds of Union County. The contents of the maps shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of one foot. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, field delineated wetlands, or other
bodies of water within the project area.
(4) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved, and the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and water lines within 50 feet of property lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
§ 290-24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-24
290:201
(7) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would be
added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(9) Final contours at intervals of one foot. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(10) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(11) The date of submission.
(12) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(17) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity.
(18) Overland drainage paths.
(19) A minimum fifteen-foot wide access easement around all
stormwater management facilities that would provide ingress to
and egress from a public right-of-way.
(20) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off-site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(21) A construction detail of any improvements made to sinkholes.
(22) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management system to be a permanent fixture that can
be altered or removed only after municipal approval of a revised
plan.
(23) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
(24) Where pervious pavement is permitted for parking lots,
recreational facilities, non-dedicated streets or other areas,
pavement construction specifications shall be noted on the plan.
§ 290-24 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-24
290:202
§ 290-25. Plan submission.
(25) It shall be the applicant's responsibility to verify if the site is
underlain by limestone. The following note shall be affixed to all
drainage plans and signed and sealed by the engineer, surveyor,
landscape architect or geologist:
I, ____________________, certify that this site and any detention
basins located thereon are/are not underlain by limestone.
C. Supplemental information.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted.
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(2) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, where applicable,
including all reviews and approvals, as required by PA DEP.
(3) A geologic assessment of the effects of runoff on sinkholes as
specified in this chapter.
(4) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows)
on adjacent properties and on any existing municipal stormwater
collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(5) A Declaration of Adequacy and Highway Occupancy Permit from
the PennDOT District Office when utilization of a PennDOT storm
drainage system is proposed.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic
tank infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
A. The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer as part of a
preliminary and/or final plan application for subdivision and land
development activity or separately if the activity regulated by this
§ 290-24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-25
290:203
§ 290-26. Plan review.
chapter is not being conducted in conjunction with a subdivision or land
development.
B. Four copies of the drainage plan and all supplemental material shall be
submitted to the Borough.
A. The Municipal Engineer shall review the drainage plan for consistency
with this chapter and applicable Act 167 Stormwater Management
Plans. The Borough shall require receipt of a complete plan, as
specified in this chapter.
B. For activities regulated by this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall
notify the Borough, in writing, whether the drainage plan is consistent
with this chapter. Should the drainage plan be determined to be
consistent with this chapter, the Municipal Engineer will forward an
approval letter to the Borough Secretary.
C. Should the drainage plan be determined to be inconsistent with this
chapter, the Municipal Engineer will forward a disapproval letter to the
Municipal Secretary citing the specific sections of the chapter and
reason(s) for the disapproval.
D. The Municipal Secretary shall forward a copy of the Municipal
Engineer's review of the drainage plan to the applicant and the
Borough Building Permit Officer, Zoning Officer, and Borough Planning
Commission.
E. For regulated activities requiring a PA DEP joint permit application, the
Municipal Engineer shall notify PA DEP whether the drainage plan is or
is not consistent with this chapter and the Act 167 Stormwater
Management Plan and forward a copy of the review letter to the
Municipality and the developer. PA DEP may consider the Municipal
Engineer's review comments in determining whether to issue a permit.
F. The Borough shall not approve any subdivision or land development for
regulated activities specified in § 290-6 of this chapter if the drainage
plan has been found to be inconsistent with this chapter or the Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan, as determined by the Municipal
Engineer.
G. The Municipal Building Permit and Zoning Officers shall not issue
building and/or zoning permits for any regulated activity specified in
this chapter if the drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with
this chapter as determined by the Municipal Engineer.
H. The applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of all
stormwater management facilities included in the approved drainage
plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with
the design plans shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer for final
approval. In no case shall the Borough approve the record drawings
§ 290-25 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-26
290:204
§ 290-27. Modification of plans; fee.
§ 290-28. Resubmission of disapproved drainage plans.
A disapproved drainage plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Municipal Engineer's concerns documented in writing, to
the Borough Secretary in accordance with this chapter and distributed
accordingly and is subject to review as specified in this chapter.
until a copy of an approved Declaration of Adequacy; Highway
Occupancy Permit is received from the PennDOT District Office, and
any applicable permits from PA DEP.
I. The approval of a drainage plan shall be valid for a period not to exceed
five years. This five-year time period shall commence on the date that
the Borough signs the approved drainage plan. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved drainage plan have not
been constructed, or if constructed, and record drawings of these
facilities have not been approved within this five-year time period, then
the Borough may consider the drainage plan disapproved and may
revoke any and all approvals and/or permits. Drainage plans that are
considered disapproved by the Borough shall be resubmitted in
accordance with this chapter.
A. A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a development site that
involves a change in stormwater management facilities or techniques,
or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater management
facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as
stated on the drainage plan as determined by the Municipal Engineer,
shall require a resubmission of the modified drainage plan and a review
consistent with this chapter.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved drainage plan
shall be submitted to the Borough, accompanied by the applicable
review fee. A modification to a drainage plan for which the Borough has
not taken a formal action shall be submitted to the Borough.
§ 290-26 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-28
290:205

ARTICLE V
Fees and Expenses
§ 290-29. Responsibility for payment.
Applicants are responsible for paying all applicable costs incurred by the
Borough in reviewing drainage plans.
§ 290-30. Fee schedule.
The Borough shall establish a Review Fee Schedule by resolution of the
Borough Council.
§ 290-31. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the drainage plan by the Borough and the Municipal
Engineer.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the drainage plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 290-29 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-31
290:207

ARTICLE VI
Financial Guarantee and Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 290-32. Improvement guarantee.
The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Municipality for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved drainage plan and this chapter equal
to 110% of the construction cost of the required stormwater controls
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the developer. The improvement guarantee shall follow the procedures and
requirements specified for financial guarantees in Chapter 315, Subdivision
and Land Development, and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Act 247 of 1968, P.L. 805, 53 P.S. § 10101.
§ 290-33. Schedule of inspections.
§ 290-34. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The Municipal Engineer shall inspect all phases of the installation of the
permanent stormwater management facilities as deemed appropriate
by the Municipal Engineer.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Municipal Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved drainage plan, the
Municipality shall revoke any existing approvals and/or permits and
issue a cease and desist stop work order until the problem is corrected
by the applicant or until a revised drainage plan is submitted and
approved, as specified in this chapter.
C. At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of
the improvement guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings.
D. After receipt of the certification by the Borough, a final inspection shall
be conducted by the Municipal Engineer or designated representative
to certify compliance with this chapter.
A. The drainage plan for the development site shall contain an operation
and maintenance plan prepared by the developer and approved by the
Municipal Engineer. The operation and maintenance plan shall outline
required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to
insure proper operation of the facility(ies).
§ 290-32 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-34
290:209
§ 290-35. Maintenance agreement for stormwater facilities.
§ 290-36. Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund.
B. The drainage plan for the development site shall establish
responsibilities for the continued operation and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots which are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the Borough, stormwater
control facilities may also be offered for dedication to the Borough
(the Borough is not obligated to accept ownership).
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner
or private management entity.
C. The governing body, upon recommendation of the Municipal Engineer,
shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the drainage plan. The
governing body reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and
operating responsibility for any or all of the stormwater management
controls.
A. Prior to final approval of the site's drainage plan, the property owner
shall sign and record a maintenance agreement, an example of which is
contained in Appendix O,30 covering all stormwater control facilities
that are to be privately owned.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities.
The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Borough Solicitor and governing body.
A. Persons installing stormwater storage facilities shall be required to pay
a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Maintenance Fund to
help defray costs of periodic inspections and maintenance expenses.
The amount of the deposit shall be determined in accordance with this
section.
B. If the storage facility is to be privately owned and maintained, the
deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections performed by the
Borough for a period of 10 years, as estimated by the Municipal
Engineer. After that period of time, inspections will be performed at the
expense of the Municipality.
30.Editor's Note: Appendix O is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 290-34 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-36
290:210
C. If the storage facility is to be owned and maintained by the Borough, the
deposit shall cover the estimated costs for maintenance and inspections
for 10 years. The Municipal Engineer will establish the estimated costs
utilizing information submitted by the applicant.
D. If a storage facility is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility
(e.g., ballfield, lake), the Borough may reduce or waive the amount of
the maintenance fund deposit based upon the value of the land for
public recreation purpose.
E. If at some future time a storage facility (whether publicly or privately
owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers or other
storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund deposit will
be applied to the cost of abandoning the facility and connecting to the
storm sewer system or other facility. Any amount of the deposit
remaining after the costs of abandonment are paid will be returned to
the depositor.
§ 290-36 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-36
290:211

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement; Penalties
§ 290-37. Right-of-entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
the Borough may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
Borough to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities
in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 290-38. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any approvals issued
hereunder, the Borough shall provide written notification of the violation.
Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish
a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply within the
time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions of this
chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and resort by the
Borough from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed
to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with the terms and
conditions of this chapter.
§ 290-39. Enforcement.
The Borough Council is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of
the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance with the
drainage plan shall be the responsibility of the Municipal Engineer or other
qualified persons designated by the Borough.
A. A set of design plans approved by the Borough shall be on file at the site
throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made during construction.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to undertake any
regulated activity under § 290-6 on any property except as provided for
in the approved drainage plan and pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure
required by the drainage plan pursuant to this chapter or to allow the
property to remain in a condition that does not conform to the approved
drainage plan.
C. Suspension and revocation of approvals and/or permits.
(1) Any approval or permit issued under this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the governing body for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the permit.
§ 290-37 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-39
290:213
§ 290-40. Public nuisance.
§ 290-41. Violations and penalties.
§ 290-42. Appeals.
(b) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the
project.
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or
creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the
life or property of others.
(2) A suspended approval or permit shall be reinstated by the
governing body when:
(a) The Municipal Engineer or his designee has inspected and
approved the control measure(s), or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance; and/or
(b) The governing body is satisfied that the violation of the
ordinance, law, or rule and regulation has been corrected.
(c) A permit that has been revoked by the governing body cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this chapter.
D. Occupancy permits. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the
certification of completion pursuant to § 290-33C and D has been
secured. The occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner
and/or developer for all subdivisions and land development in the
Borough.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $ 500 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, the Borough, through its solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
§ 290-39 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-42
290:214
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough or its designee may
appeal to the Borough Council or Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days
of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough Council or the
Zoning Hearing Board may appeal to the Union County Court of
Common Pleas within 30 days of the municipal decision.
§ 290-42 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 290-42
290:215
Chapter 300
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 158.
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
182.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
Solid waste — See Ch. 280.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
315.
Trees — See Ch. 332.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 290-42 LEWISBURG CODE § 290-42
290:216
ARTICLE I
Vegetation
[Adopted 9-6-1909 by Ord. No. 55]
§ 300-1. Removal of grass, weeds and other obstructions. [Amended
10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
It shall be the duty of all owners of vacant properties or the occupants
of improved premises to remove from the gutters and along the sidewalks
all grass and weeds and other obstructions interfering with the free and
full use of the same, and to keep the same removed from the gutters and
sidewalks in the Borough.
§ 300-2. Notice to remove, trim or cut; removal by Borough; costs.
[Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
The Borough Council, or any officer or employee of the Borough designated
thereby for this purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal
service or by United States mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case
may be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation is
growing or remaining in violation of the provisions of § 300-1 of this article,
directing and requiring such occupant to remove, trim or cut such grass,
weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the requirements of this article,
within five days after issuance of such notice. Whenever, in the judgment of
the Enforcement Officer it shall appear to be impracticable to give notice
as above provided, either because the owner or occupant cannot readily
be found or because a search for the owner or occupant would entail
unreasonable delay, the Borough Council or any officer or employee of the
Borough designated thereby for that purpose, may give notice by posting
conspicuously on the property where such nuisance exists, a notice or order
directing and requiring that such nuisance be abated within 10 days. In
case any person, firm or corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply
with such notice within the period of time stated therein, the Borough
Council may order the removal, trimming or cutting of such grass, weeds
or vegetation, and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of the
cost thereof shall be collected by the Borough from such person, firm or
corporation, in the manner provided by law.
§ 300-3. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-20-1988 by Ord. No.
841]
Any person, firm or corporation, who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, together
with the costs of prosecution, or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed
30 days, or both. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
§ 300-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-3
290:217

ARTICLE II
Curb and Sidewalk Construction
[Adopted 5-19-1981 by Ord. No. 81-6]
§ 300-4. Requirements.
§ 300-5. Permit required; application; fee. [Amended 10-20-1987 by
Ord. No. 833]
§ 300-6. Duties of property owner; failure to act. [Amended
10-20-1987 by Ord. No. 833]
A. The Borough may require the owner or owners of property abutting on
any street to grade, construct, reconstruct, pave, and repave the
sidewalk or curb and keep the same in repair, and in safe and usable
condition along such property, as hereinafter provided.
B. No sidewalk or curb shall be constructed or reconstructed within the
Borough except at the grades, upon the conditions, with the materials,
under the regulations and specifications, and in the manner as
hereinafter provided. The provisions of this article shall regulate the
owner or owners of the property abutting the proposed construction or
reconstruction and the agent, employee, or contractor performing the
work.
C. The word "sidewalk" as used in this article shall mean and include the
portion of a street located outside the cartway, and may include paved
footway, unpaved grass plot, curb, and gutter.
A. No sidewalk or curb shall be constructed or reconstructed within the
Borough unless and until the owner of the abutting real estate shall first
have secured from the Borough Secretary a permit for the construction
or reconstruction thereof and unless and until the said owner shall have
paid to the said Borough Secretary a permit fee as hereinafter provided.
B. Application for such permit shall be made upon a form supplied by the
Borough Secretary requiring the disclosure of any and all facts deemed
necessary by the Borough for the enforcement of the provisions of this
article.
C. For the purpose of partially defraying the cost of inspection as
hereinafter provided, a permit fee shall be charged as established by
resolution of Borough Council. When sidewalks and curbs are
constructed at the same time, so that both projects may be inspected at
the same time, only one permit fee, based upon the length of the longer
sidewalk or curb, if such lengths are different, need be paid. Such
permit fee shall be payable prior to the issuance of the permit.
A. Owners of real estate shall provide curbing, recurbing, paving,
repaving, or repairing to the sidewalks of any highway or public street
within 30 days after notice so to do shall have been served upon the
§ 300-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-6
290:219
§ 300-7. Specifications and construction requirements. [Amended
3-20-1990 by Ord. No. 857; 7-25-1995 by Ord. No. 899; 2-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 1056]
owner, his agent, or the occupant of the property, or if there be no
known agent or occupant, within 30 days after the posting of such
notice upon the most public part of the property.
B. Upon the failure of any owner of real estate to curb, recurb, pave,
repave, or repair the sidewalks of any highway or public street within
30 days after notice so to do has been served upon such owner pursuant
to the provisions of Subsection A, such work will be done and
performed by the Borough or by a contractor obtained by the Borough.
Upon completion of such work as may be done and performed by the
Borough or by a contractor obtained by the Borough, the Borough may
collect the cost thereof and 10% additional, together with all charges
and expenses, from such owner, and may file a municipal claim therefor
or collect the same by action in assumpsit, together with interest at the
rate of 10% per annum from the date of completion.
C. The owners of real estate shall make emergency repairs to the
sidewalks abutting their property, where, in the opinion of the Borough
Manager or his authorized representative, a dangerous condition exists
that can be repaired by an expenditure of not more than $100 within 48
hours after notice so to do shall have been served upon the owner, his
agent, or the occupant of the property or if there be no known agent or
occupant, within 48 hours after posting of such notice upon the most
public part of the property. Upon the failure of any owner of real estate
to make such emergency repairs within 48 hours after notice so to do
has been served upon such owner as herein provided, such work will be
done and performed by the Borough or by a contractor obtained by the
Borough. Upon completion of such work as may be done and performed
by the Borough or by a contractor obtained by the Borough, the
Borough may collect the cost thereof and 10% additional, together with
all charges and expenses, from such owner, and may file a municipal
claim therefor or collect the same by action in assumpsit, together with
interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the date of completion.
A. Concrete sidewalks and curbs shall be formed, placed, finished and
cured in conformance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publication 408 (current edition); provided, however, that owners or
real estate developers desiring to use traditional decorative sidewalk
surfaces to enhance historic properties shall be permitted to use
traditional red brick pavers or flagstone. The use of brick pavers or
flagstone shall be in compliance with all of the requirements for the
construction of concrete sidewalks as set forth in this section.
B. Excavation for the sidewalk bed shall be formed at a depth of eight
inches below the parallel with the finished surface of the sidewalk,
except when brick pavers or flagstone are used, in which case the
excavation for the sidewalk bed must exceed eight inches, the exact
§ 300-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 300-7
290:220
depth of which shall be determined by the thickness of the selected
surface. Unsuitable material shall be removed and replaced with an
approved aggregate spread on the prepared foundation to form a
compacted bed four inches in thickness. If cinders are used, they shall
be saturated thoroughly before placing the concrete. Excavation for the
curb shall be made to the required depth, and the material upon which
the curb is to be constructed shall be compacted to a firm, even surface.
C. Expansion joints 1/4 inch in thickness shall be placed at the beginning
of each new section, at the end of sections of curved construction, and
at intervals of not more than 123 feet. Construction joints shall be
formed of two thickness of one-ply bituminous paper. Joints between
blocks of sidewalk shall be spaced in accordance with standard
construction details for concrete sidewalks and curbs which are hereby
made a part hereof and incorporated herein by reference with the same
force and effect as though stated herein.
D. At the end of curved and/or radius curbs there shall be imbedded in the
concrete two reinforcement bars 1/2 inch in diameter and 24 inches in
length. The bars shall be placed three inches and nine inches,
respectively, below the top of the curb and shall extend 12 inches on
each side of the joint. One end of the bars shall be coated with grease,
and enclosed in a capped tube at least 1/2 inch longer than the bar.
E. Surfaces consisting of brick pavers or flagstone shall be treated with
silicone or waterproof agent in the fall of each year.
F. After the concrete has set sufficiently, the space adjacent to the
concrete shall be backfilled to the required depth with acceptable
material placed in layers not more than four inches in depth, and
thoroughly compacted.
G. Sidewalks shall be a uniform depth of four inches, except when crossed
by driveways, where the depth shall be at least six inches for residential
driveways and eight inches for commercial driveways. The entire
sidewalk and grass plot area shall have a slope of 1/4 inch per foot to
the face of the curb. The width of the sidewalk shall be consistent with
the other sidewalks in that block or as established by ordinance of the
Borough.
H. Curbs installed in conjunction with new sidewalk, or in areas where
sidewalk does not exist, shall be at least 18 inches in depth, eight inches
in width (at the base) and include a vertical back. The curb must extend
a minimum of six inches, and not more than eight inches, above the
pavement surface, with a face battered one inch, to a seven-inch top.
Curbs installed along existing sidewalks may match the finish elevation
of the sidewalk. Curb cuts or drop curbs for driveway entrances shall be
approved by the Borough Manager or his authorized representative.
The ends of the curb cut shall be shaped by hand and shall be sloped
from the top of the cut to top of the normal curb in a distance of two
feet. In the curb cut section a reveal of two inches minimum shall be
§ 300-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-7
290:221
§ 300-8. Inspection of work; correction of improper construction.
§ 300-9. Penalty for noncompliance. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord.
No. 833]
retained and the slope of the top of the curb cut shall be as required to
meet existing conditions.
I. At intersections of streets and alleys, curbs shall be built at a radius
fixed by the Borough Manager or his authorized representative.
J. No construction of a sidewalk or curb shall be commenced until the
party intending such construction shall have received from the Borough
Manager or his authorized representative the lines and grades to be
used in such construction.
A. No concrete shall be poured until the forms and preparations have been
approved by the Borough Manager or his authorized representative.
The Borough Manager or his authorized representative shall have the
right to secure a sample of the concrete being used, in order to
determine by standard tests if the strength meets the requirements of
§ 300-7A of this article.
B. The Borough Manager or his authorized representative shall inspect
the construction when completed. When the Borough Manager or his
authorized representative finds as a result of such inspection, or any
time prior thereto, that any of the work, or material, is not in
compliance with the requirements of this article, he shall notify the
owner thereof as soon as reasonably possible. Any sidewalk or curb not
constructed in accordance with the requirements of this article shall be
removed and replaced with a properly constructed sidewalk or curb. In
the event the owner fails to correct such improper construction, the
Borough shall have the right to remove the defective portion, replace
such portion with sidewalk or curb construction in accordance with the
requirements of this article, and recover the cost thereof from the
owner as provided in § 300-6B of this article.
C. When the construction is in accordance with the requirements of this
article, the Borough Manager or his authorized representative shall
furnish the owner with a certificate of satisfactory completion.
A. By property owners. Sidewalks and curbs not laid in conformity with
the provisions of this article and/or the established line and grade of the
street on which they are constructed are hereby declared to be
nuisances and shall be taken up and relaid in accordance with the
requirements of this article within 30 days after notice so to do shall
have been served upon the owner of the abutting real estate. Any owner
who shall fail to regrade, recurb, and/or repave any sidewalk or curb
within 30 days after notice so to do shall, upon conviction in a summary
proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
§ 300-7 LEWISBURG CODE § 300-9
290:222
§ 300-10. Revisions to rules and regulations.
The Borough shall have the right to and may, from time to time, adopt,
revise, amend, and readopt standard construction details as it deems
necessary and proper for the effective administration and enforcement of
this article, and all such standard construction details shall be and become
a part of this article.
§ 300-10.1. Costs of curb. [Added 10-17-2006 by Ord. No. 980]
Except as provided in § 300-8B of this article, whenever the Borough
notifies or requires the owner of real estate abutting on any street to
construct, reconstruct, replace or repair curb pursuant to § 300-6 of this
article, the cost thereof shall be borne by the Borough.
such fine and costs, to be imprisoned for a period not in excess of 90
days; and the Borough shall cause said sidewalk or curb to be regraded,
recurbed, and/or repaved in accordance with the requirements of this
article, the costs of which, plus an administrative charge of 15%,
together with interest at the rate of 10% per annum from the date of
completion, shall be collected from the owner as provided in § 300-6B
of this article.
B. By contractors. Any person, agent, employee, or contractor of the
owner of the abutting real estate who shall fail to construct or
reconstruct any sidewalk or curb in accordance with the requirements
of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, plus
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to be imprisoned for a period not in excess of 90 days.
§ 300-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-10.1
290:223

ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Merchandise Displays
[Adopted 9-21-1982 by Ord. No. 82-5]
§ 300-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
§ 300-12. Outdoor display of merchandise restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to set or place any goods, wares or
merchandise, or stands, tables or racks for the display thereof, or sell the
same or conduct any business or render any commercial service within the
limits of any public street or alley of the Borough of Lewisburg, or on the
sidewalks of any such street or alley, except as follows:
§ 300-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord.
No. 833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Every day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
A. For the purpose of loading or unloading, removing or storing away of
such goods, wares and merchandise for such limited time as may be
necessary.
B. For the purposes of seasonal displays, provided Borough Council
receives adequate and timely notice of such display and approves of the
same at a regular or special meeting and such display does not project
beyond four feet from the building line.
C. For special event days, including but not limited to sidewalk sales by
merchants, historical or holiday celebrations, and the display of art
works, crafts and materials of educational, cultural or historical value,
provided Borough Council receives adequate and timely notice of such
event and approves of the same at a regular or special meeting.
§ 300-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-13
290:225

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 3-21-1995 by Ord. No. 897]
§ 300-14. Removal from sidewalks. [Amended 2-16-2010 by Ord. No.
996]
The owner of every property fronting upon or along any of the streets in
the Borough of Lewisburg is hereby required to remove, or cause to be
removed, from all of the sidewalks in front or along the side of such property
all snow and ice thereon fallen or formed within 12 hours after the same
shall have ceased to fall or to form and to continue to remove, or cause to
be removed therefrom, all such snow and ice; provided, however, that snow
or ice that has ceased to fall or to be formed after 6:00 p.m. of any evening
may be removed at any time before 10:00 a.m. of the next morning. It shall
be unlawful for any owner of property, when clearing sidewalks, private
driveways or parking areas, to deposit snow on the cartway, or within travel
lanes, of all streets and alleys of the Borough of Lewisburg. All snow should
be deposited on the property of the owner or deposited along the curb. It
shall be unlawful for anybody other than Borough employees or contractors
contracted by the Borough of Lewisburg to plow snow on any public rightof-
way within the Borough limits. The owner of a property shall be solely
responsible for conforming to the requirements of this section whether such
property is occupied by the owner, a tenant or other occupier thereof, or is
unoccupied.
§ 300-15. Notice to remove; removal by borough; costs.
The Borough Council, or any officer or employee of the Borough designated
thereby for this purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, either by
personal service or by the United States mail, to the owner of any property
whereon snow or ice is remaining in violation of the provisions of § 300-14
of this article, directing and requiring such owner to remove such snow or
ice in order to conform to the requirements of this article within one day
after receipt of such notice and to also pay an administrative charge in the
amount of $10. Whenever, in the judgment of the designated official, it shall
appear to be impracticable to give the aforesaid notice, either because the
owner cannot readily be found or because a search for the owner would
entail unreasonable delay, the Borough Council, or any officer or employee
of the Borough designated thereby for this purpose, may give such notice
by posting conspicuously on the property whereon snow or ice is remaining
in violation of the provisions of § 300-14 of this article, a notice or order to
conform to the requirements of this article within one day after the posting
of the said notice or order and to also pay an administrative charge in the
amount of $10. If any owner shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with the
aforesaid notice within the required period of time, the Borough Council, or
any officer or employee of the Borough designated thereby for this purpose,
may order the removal of such snow or ice and the cost thereof, plus an
administrative charge in the amount of $25, together with a penalty of 10%
§ 300-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-15
290:227
of the cost thereof, shall be collected by the Borough from such owner in
the manner provided by law.
§ 300-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this article
or fails to pay any cost, charge or penalty imposed pursuant to § 300-15 of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs
of prosecution, for each offense and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days. Every day that a
violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 300-15 LEWISBURG CODE § 300-16
290:228
ARTICLE V
Street Excavations
[Adopted 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 97131]
§ 300-17. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Street Excavation Ordinance of the
Borough of Lewisburg."
§ 300-18. Purpose.
§ 300-19. Definitions.
The following words used in this article shall have, unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings given to them in this section:
ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF COMPLETION — The date on which the Borough
records that the permitted work appears to be completed under the permit
and this article.
ADJACENT AREA — The area surrounding the immediate area of the
permitted work, which can reasonably be assumed to have been affected by
the permitted work.
APPLICANT — A person, organization, government agency, utility, etc.,
seeking an excavation permit from the Borough as directed by this article.
BACKFILL — Material used to replace or the act of replacing material
removed during construction.
BASE COURSE — The layer or layers of specified or selected material of
designed thickness placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a surface
course.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania.
A. Excavations in paved streets owned and maintained by the Borough
degrade and shorten the life of the surface of the streets, and this
degradation increases the frequency and cost to the public of necessary
resurfacing, maintenance and repair. It is appropriate that entities
responsible for excavating into the Borough's rights-of-way bear this
burden rather than the taxpayers of the Borough. In addition,
establishment of variable fees will create an incentive for coordination
of efforts in excavating the streets to lay or rehabilitate utilities in
conjunction with the Borough's street improvement schedule.
B. The purpose of this article is to regulate the placement and
maintenance of utilities within areas designated as public rights-of-way
within the Borough of Lewisburg. This article is adopted to maintain the
safe condition of the public right-of-way to protect public health, safety
and welfare.
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed Ord. No. 76-15, adopted 4-21-1976.
§ 300-17 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-19
290:229
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The duly elected Borough Council of the Borough
of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — The duly appointed civil engineer for the
Borough.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The duly appointed Borough Manager of the
Borough.
BOROUGH'S DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — The duly appointed
representative of the Borough to administer and uphold the requirements
of this article.
CARTWAY — A stoned, paved or hard surface of a street, road or alley
customarily used by vehicles in the regular course of travel.
CLEAR ZONE — The portion of the right-of-way beyond the pavement edge
within which, under Design Manual Part 5, no new obstruction may be
located.
DEGRADATION FEE — Fee charged for an officially authorized street
excavation to defray a percentage of costs for resurfacing and
reconstruction of Borough streets resulting from the depreciation of streets
associated with street openings.
DESIGN MANUAL, PART 2 — A Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) publication containing the Department's highway design
criteria.
DESIGN MANUAL, PART 5 — A Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) publication containing the Department's utility relocation and
accommodation policies relating to permits issued in conjunction with
highway construction projects.
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen occurrence or combination of
circumstances, which calls for immediate action or remedy.
EMERGENCY REPAIR — Repair of damages to a utility facility, resulting
from a vehicle accident or collision with the facility, a failed component
or storm damage. The term does not include service connections or
disconnections unrelated to vehicle accident, a failed component or storm
damage. Emergency repairs shall be subject to Pennsylvania on-call
emergency repair requirements and conditions.
EQUIPMENT — Machinery and equipment, together with the necessary
supplies for upkeep and maintenance, and tools and apparatus necessary
for the proper construction and completion of work.
FLEXIBLE BASE PAVEMENT — A pavement structure, which maintains
intimate contact with and distributes loads to the subgrade and depends on
aggregate interlock, particle friction and cohesion for stability.
GROUT — A mixture of cement, water and sand.
IMPROVED AREA — The area within the right-of-way that has been
constructed to enable travel, including roadbed, pavement, shoulders,
slope, sidewalks, drainage facilities and other appurtenances.
§ 300-19 LEWISBURG CODE § 300-19
290:230
INSPECTOR — The Borough's authorized representative assigned to
inspect permitted operations.
PAVEMENT — The combination of subbase, base course and surface course
placed on subgrade to support the traffic load or distribute it to the
roadbed, or both. The term normally includes the traveled portion of the
highway and extends to the face of the curb in a curbed section. The term
does not include shoulders.
PENNDOT — The Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
PERMIT — A highway occupancy permit issued by the Borough or the
Borough's designated representative.
PERSON — Any person or persons, corporations, company, partnership,
firm, associations, entity, trust or any entity with legal responsibilities.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a fine or
imprisonment, or both, "person" shall mean, as applied to associations, the
partners or members thereof and, as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
PLANS — Drawings that show the location, character and dimensions of
the proposed occupancy and related highway features, including layouts,
profiles, cross sections and other details.
PLOWING — Direct burial of a utility line by means of plow-type mechanism
that breaks the ground, places the utility line and closes the break in the
ground in a single operation.
PUBLICATION 408 — A PennDOT publication containing the Department's
highway construction specifications, as supplemented.
PUBLIC STREET or STREET — A right-of-way owned and maintained by
the Borough intended for use as a means of vehicular and/or pedestrian
circulation, which provides a means of access to abutting tracts of land or
lots. Any and all Borough streets, roads, lanes, alleys and rights-of-ways.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Entity providing electricity, natural gas,
telecommunications, water or other service as defined and regulated by the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission. Additionally, a Municipal Authority
providing a similar service shall be considered a utility under this article.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (EASEMENT) — A strip of land occupied, used or intended
to be occupied and used exclusively or in conjunction with other uses
as street, road, highway, alley, walkway, or for utility lines, pipes and
structures, stormwater drainage systems and structures or similar uses.
ROADBED — The graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes,
prepared as a foundation for the pavement and shoulder.
ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS — A PennDOT Publication No. 72
containing the Department's design standards for highway construction.
SEAL COAT — A thin treatment consisting of bituminous or other approved
material, usually with cover aggregate, applied to a surface course.
§ 300-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-19
290:231
SELECT GRANULAR MATERIAL OR NO. 2A — A material meeting
specifications in Section 703.3 of PennDOT's Publication 408.
SHOULDER — The existing improved area or graded portion of the highway,
contiguous to the traffic lanes, for accommodation of stopped vehicles,
for emergency use or for lateral support of base and surface courses of
pavement.
STREET SECTION — The portion of a street between two intersecting
streets.
STRUCTURE — Any material or combination of materials that are
constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground,
or attached to something located on or below the ground and shall include
poles and towers.
SUBBASE — The layers of specified or selected material of designated
thickness placed on a subgrade to support a base course.
SUBGRADE — The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement
structure and shoulders, including curbs, are constructed.
SUPPLEMENT — An amendment to the highway occupancy permit issued
by the Borough.
TACK COAT — An application of bituminous material to an existing surface
to provide bond with a superimposed course.
TEST HOLE — An exploratory opening less than 100 square inches.
UTILITY FACILITY OR FACILITIES — Privately, publicly or cooperatively
owned lines, facilities and systems for producing, transmitting or
distributing communications, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude
products, coal, water, steam, waste stormwater, and including fire and
police signal systems and streetlighting systems, which directly or
indirectly serve the public or any part thereof.
VEHICLE — Any device that is or may be moved or drawn upon a highway,
street, alley or similar paved or unpaved area.
WEARING COURSE — One or more layers of a pavement structure
designed to accommodate the traffic load, the top layer of which resists
skidding, traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate. The top
layer is sometimes called the "surface course."
§ 300-20. Application and issuance of permit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel,
bore, undermine or in any manner break up any street or to make or
cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street or
to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other material
obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street unless
such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit from the
Borough as herein provided.
§ 300-19 LEWISBURG CODE § 300-20
290:232
B. No excavation permit shall be issued unless an application for same or
forms provided for that purpose are submitted to the Borough or the
Borough's designated representative.
C. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
(1) Name, address, telephone number, fax number and a contact
person of the applicant.
(2) Name and location of the street and designation of public or private
streets.
(3) Anticipated date of commencement of work and estimated date of
completion of work with typical work hours.
(4) Name, address, telephone number, fax number and contact person
for contractor performing the work, if other than the applicant.
(5) Description of utility.
(6) Attached to the application shall be the following:
(a) Drawings and plans, satisfactory to the Borough and of a
workable scale, setting forth the location of existing and
proposed utilities, and all components thereof, name of street,
width of right-of-way, cartways and shoulders, and locations of
stormwater drainage facilities, curbs and sidewalks. The
drawings and plans shall be provided with a properly executed
financial security agreement.
(b) A narrative of all work to be done, including a description of all
materials to be used.
(c) Copies of all permits required by other regulatory agencies.
D. The application for a permit shall be reviewed by the Borough or the
Borough's designated representative and acted upon within 30
calendar days of submission. The action by the Borough or the
Borough's designated representative shall be (1) approval and issuance
of the permit or (2) denial of permit. Written notice of said action shall
be mailed to applicant by First Class Mail within the said 30 calendar
days. In the event of a denial of the application, the said notice shall set
forth the reasons for the denial. Failure to comply with the notice
requirements herein shall be deemed to be an approval of the
application.
E. The permittee may request in writing a supplement to the permit to
amend a permit condition, such as the traffic control plan, or to extend
the permit expiration date. A permit is valid for a six-month period, as
specified in the permit, subject to the following conditions:
§ 300-20 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-20
290:233
§ 300-21. Financial security agreements.
If the permittee, excluding a public utility, would be authorized to perform
a substantial amount of work within the right-of-way, the Borough may,
at it sole discretion, require the applicant to execute a financial security
agreement in an amount equal to 110% of the estimated restoration costs of
the construction or reconstruction. If financial security is required, it shall
be delivered to the Borough or the Borough's designated representative
in a form and amount acceptable to the Borough's Solicitor and shall
guarantee restoration and maintenance of the highway for a period of at
least two years after the acknowledged completion of the permitted work.
The following documents are acceptable forms of financial security:
§ 300-22. Insurance.
(1) No work may be performed on an expired permit. If the permittee
has not completed the authorized work by the completion date
specified on the permit, an application shall be submitted
requesting a time extension on the permit.
(2) If approved, a supplement to the permit authorizing a new
completion date will be issued by the Borough or the Borough's
designated representative.
(3) No extension of the permit will be authorized unless the permittee
obtains an extension on the duration of the bond, insurance or
other security required under this article, which extension of the
bond, insurance or other security corresponds with the permit time
extension. The permittee shall provide evidence of the extension to
the Borough or the Borough's designated representative.
(4) No time extension supplement will be issued for a request received
more than 30 days after the expiration of the permit. In that case,
an application for a new permit must be submitted to the Borough
or the Borough's designated representative and additional fees
may apply.
F. When permitted work has been completed, the permittee shall notify, in
writing, the Borough or the Borough's designated representative for a
final closeout inspection.
A. An individual or blanket bond executed by the permittee and naming
the Borough as obligee.
B. An irrevocable letter of credit signed by a bank officer and naming the
Borough as sole beneficiary, to be honored on presentment.
C. An assignment of cause of action when authorized by the Borough.
D. An escrow account in a form acceptable to the Borough.
§ 300-20 LEWISBURG CODE § 300-22
290:234
§ 300-23. Indemnification.
Applicant shall indemnify, keep and hold the Borough, its officers, agents
and employees and the Borough's designated representative, free and
harmless from any and all liability on account of injury or damage to
person or property arising or growing out of the applicant's work pursuant
to the said permit. In the event a suit is brought against the Borough
either individually or jointly with applicant or others on account thereof,
applicant, upon notice from the Borough, shall pay the Borough's and/
or the Borough's designated representative's costs in defending the said
suit. In the event there is a final judgment against the Borough and/or the
Borough's designated representative on the same, applicant shall pay said
judgment, together with all costs, and shall save the Borough harmless
therefrom.
§ 300-24. Fees.
A. Contemporaneous with the submission of an application for a permit,
the applicant shall submit to the Borough or the Borough's designated
representative written evidence, satisfactory to the Borough, of
permanent public liability insurance in an amount of not less than
$1,000,000. The same shall remain in full force and effect until two
years after the date of the completion of the work for which the permit
has been issued. The insurance will be in such form and with such
company as shall be satisfactory to the Borough. The Borough shall be
named as a co-insured and the policy shall include a provision to defend
the Borough.
B. In the event the applicant fails to provide written evidence of said
insurance as required herein or fails to maintain the said insurance as
required herein, applicant shall cease all work and the Borough may
exercise its rights under the Financial Security Agreement to complete
the work or take such action as is necessary to make the area of work
safe or pay for liability insurance. The costs of any action taken by the
Borough shall be paid from the financial security required hereunder or
the same shall be collectible by the Borough in the manner provided by
law for collection of municipal clams. Applicant shall be responsible for
all costs incurred but not paid from the financial security.
A. A permit application fee shall be charged to defray costs incurred by
the Borough in reviewing and processing the application and plans,
including the preliminary review of the site location identified in the
application. The application fee includes costs incurred by the Borough
or the Borough's designated representative in spot inspections of
permitted work or subsequent inspections after the permitted work has
been completed and to monitor compliance with the permit and this
article. The permit application fee, whether or not a permit is issued
and processed, shall be paid with the submission of an application.
Additionally, the Borough will determine all additional fees that may be
required based on opening size and if a degradation fee is applicable.
§ 300-22 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-24
290:235
B. If the Borough or the Borough's designated representative anticipates
that the cost of reviewing the required application information or
inspecting the permitted work will exceed the permit application fees
by a significant amount, the following additional fees shall be assessed:
(1) If the Borough or the Borough's designated representative
determines that the permitted work is of sufficient magnitude or
importance to warrant assignment of one or more persons to
inspect the permitted work on a more than spot inspection basis,
the permit will so indicate, and the permittee shall be charged the
inspection fee hourly rate incurred by the Borough or the
Borough's designated representative for inspection.
(2) The charges will be calculated either on an actual cost basis or a
standard unit cost basis.
(3) The Borough or the Borough's designated representative will
provide an itemized invoice for additional fees due the Borough.
C. All fees, which shall be established from time to time by a duly adopted
resolution of Borough Council, shall be paid in full prior to the start of
work.
D. Permit application fees are not required from the following:
(1) The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of its political
subdivisions.
(2) The federal government.
(3) Utility facility owners for:
(a) The installation or maintenance of highway lighting at the
request of the Borough.
(b) The replacement or renewal of their facilities prior to a
Borough maintenance project after notice from the Borough.
(c) Emergency repairs.
(d) The removal of poles and attached appurtenances.
(e) Facilities moved at the request of the Borough.
(f) Facility relocations necessitated by Borough street vacations
or abandonments.
E. Excavations in streets scheduled for pavement or other structural
improvements in the Borough's capital improvement construction
schedule within one year of the date of excavation shall be exempt from
the permit application fee. The Borough or the Borough's designated
representative shall endeavor to notify public utilities of streets so
scheduled.
§ 300-24 LEWISBURG CODE § 300-25
290:236
§ 300-25. Conditions of permit.
A. All work done pursuant to an excavation permit issued under the
provisions of this article shall be performed under the direction and to
the satisfaction of the Borough or the Borough's designated
representative.
B. The permit is binding upon the permittee, its agents, contractors, heirs,
personal representative, successors and assigns, and shall be in
compliance with the following:
(1) The permittee is responsible for causing compliance with the terms
and conditions of the permit by its employees, agents and
contractors. Responsibility for compliance with the terms of the
permit may not be assigned or transferred by the permittee without
first obtaining approval from the Borough or the Borough's
designated representative after submitting a written request to do
so. If a permit is assigned or transferred without first obtaining
approval from the Borough or the Borough's designated
representative, the assignment or transfer is void.
(2) The permit shall be located at the work site and be available for
inspection by a Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department police
officer or representative of the Borough. [Amended 4-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 1014]
(3) The permit shall be maintained by the permittee as a permanent
record and remain in effect, subject to the permit conditions and
this article, as long as the permittee's facilities authorized by the
permit occupy the right-of-way.
(4) The permittee is liable to the Borough for failure to comply with the
permit and this article. The liability of the permittee to the Borough
does not preclude the permittee, the Borough, or a property owner
adjacent to permitted work from bringing an action against the
permittee's contractor, subcontractor, engineer, architect,
assignee, agent, workers, employees or other persons.
C. The permittee shall be responsible to maintain traffic control devices
during duration of work. All maintenance and protection of traffic
control devices shall be in accordance with PennDOT Publication 203,
as amended.
D. All work shall occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
unless the permit specifically allows a variance from this work or if the
work was completed as an emergency repair.
E. At the end of a workday, an opening in the right-of-way shall be covered,
backfilled or protected. If work is stopped on a project the permittee
shall promptly backfill the opening and restore the surface, and work
may not be resumed until the permittee is prepared to proceed with the
work to its completion. If the permittee fails to backfill the opening or
§ 300-25 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-25
290:237
proceed until completion of the work, the Borough reserves the right
to do the work upon notice to the permittee, where practicable, and
shall be reimbursed for the costs by the permittee within 30 days after
receipt of the Borough's invoice.
F. If the permittee, after making an opening in the surface to place or
repair a facility or for another purpose, fails to restore a portion of the
right-of-way to conform with this article, the Borough reserves the right
to do the work upon notice to the permittee, where practicable, and the
permittee shall reimburse the Borough for the cost thereof within 30
days after receipt of the Borough's invoice therefor and upon failure of
the permittee to do so, the Borough shall be paid from the financial
security required hereunder or the same shall be collectible by the
Borough in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal
claims.
G. Any person or firm to whom a street excavation permit has been issued
shall notify all utility companies of the intent to excavate in accordance
with Pennsylvania Act 187 of 1996, as amended. This notification shall
be given not less than 72 hours in advance of the commencement of the
work and shall indicate the time, place and purpose of the street
excavation.
H. Any person or firm to whom a street excavation permit or work contract
has been issued shall have the duty of determining the location and
depth of all existing underground utility installations. If a utility line is
broken or damaged in any way, the permittee or contractor shall
immediately notify the utility owner.
I. Drainage alterations.
(1) Altering drainage is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the
permit. The permittee shall not:
(a) Alter the existing drainage pattern or the existing flow of
drainage water.
(b) Direct additional drainage of surface water toward, onto, or
into or in any way affect the highway right-of-way or highway
facilities. Additionally, the permit does not authorize the
permittee to direct, divert or otherwise drain surface waters
over the property of another property owner.
(2) The permit does not relieve the permittee from acquiring the
consent, permission or other authorization from a property owner
who may be adversely affected by drainage alterations.
J. A highway shall be protected from equipment damage in accordance
with the following:
(1) To protect the pavement and shoulders, equipment shall have
rubber wheels or runners and have rubber, wood or similar
§ 300-25 LEWISBURG CODE § 300-25
290:238
§ 300-26. Pavement restoration; backfill and compaction.
protective pads between the outriggers and the surface unless
otherwise authorized by the permittee.
(2) If other than rubber equipped machinery or equipment is used, the
pavement and shoulders shall be protected from equipment
damage by the use of matting or other suitable protective material,
unless the permittee requests a waiver thereof in writing. Such a
waiver from the use of protective material does not relieve the
permittee of its obligation and commitment to repair or reconstruct
the pavement and shoulder, if damaged, to its former condition.
(3) If any equipment damages the pavement, shoulder, curb and/or
sidewalk, the permittee shall restore the damaged pavement,
shoulder, curb and/or sidewalk to its former condition in a manner
authorized by the Borough or the Borough's designated
representative.
K. If backfill or restoration work will be performed for the permittee by a
contractor, the permittee shall identify to the Borough both its
contractor and its inspector-in-charge who shall be assigned to monitor
backfill and restoration work performed within the improved area. The
permittee's inspector-in-charge, as well as the permittee, is responsible
for ensuring that the work is performed in compliance with the permit.
A. All excavation and trenches shall be backfilled to the original ground
surface or to grades specified. The backfill shall begin as soon as
practical after the pipe or other construction has been placed and shall
thereafter be carried on as rapidly as the protection of the balance of
the work will permit. Depositing of the backfill shall be done in such a
manner that the shock of falling material will not injure the pipe or
adjacent structures. All excavation backfill shall be PennDOT certified
No. 2A coarse aggregate. Under no circumstance may the original
backfill be utilized.
B. Compaction of the backfill shall be done in lifts of uniform layers not to
exceed eight inches in depth. Each lift shall be compacted over the full
width of the excavated area. Backfill shall be compacted to 97% of its
maximum dry density as measured using the standard proctor density
test method.
C. Special compaction shall be done around all valves, hydrants and other
structures and utilities by the use of pneumatic tampers, plate tampers
or plate vibrators, with lifts not to exceed eight inches in depth.
D. Service trenches must be compacted in the same manner as the main
trench. In areas where curb and sidewalk exists, sufficient curbing shall
be removed to allow the prescribed compaction over the entire
distributed area. The curb and sidewalk shall be replaced in accordance
with Borough requirements.
§ 300-25 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-26
290:239
E. At the end of excavation and backfill operations, the permittee shall
provide temporary flexible pavement restoration in accordance with the
following:
(1) The temporary flexible pavement shall consist of a minimum of
three inches of bituminous concrete meeting the requirements of
Section 305 of Publication 408 or other base course material
authorized by the Borough or the Borough's designated
representative.
(2) The temporary flexible pavement shall remain in place a minimum
of 60 days prior to placement of the final pavement restoration.
F. Final base and surface restoration of flexible base pavements shall be in
accordance with the following:
(1) Prior to replacement of the pavement, one foot outside of each
edge of the opening shall be sawed the full depth of pavement in a
neat straight line. The detached material shall be removed without
damaging the adjacent pavement. The use of a pavement breaker is
prohibited. The permittee may partially saw cut the pavement to a
depth of at least three inches and cut the remaining pavement with
a jackhammer weighing no more than 90 pounds.
(2) Exposed vertical and horizontal surfaces shall be prepared under
Section 401.3(g) of PennDOT Publication 408.
(3) The base course shall consist of Superpave 25.0 MM Base Course
material, PG 64-22, 0.0 to 0.3 ESAL's meeting the requirements of
Section 309 of Publication 408 or other base course material
authorized by the Borough. The base course material shall have a
minimum depth of five inches or a depth equal to the existing base
course, whichever is greater.
(4) The wearing course shall consist of Superpave 9.5 MM Wearing
Course material, PG 64-22, 0.0 to 0.3 million ESAL's meeting the
requirements of Section 409 of Publication 408 The wearing course
shall have a minimum depth of 1 1/2 inches or a depth equal to the
existing wearing course, whichever is greater.
G. Special requirements.
(1) In all cases, the contractor shall blade and compact the highway
after the trench has been backfilled, so that it shall be passable to
traffic at all times. The contractor shall maintain the roadway in a
condition acceptable to the Borough or the Borough's designated
representative at all times until final approval of the entire work by
the Borough or the Borough's designated representative.
(2) When an applicant or permittee cuts a trench larger than three by
50 feet or makes five or more cuts in any section of a street, or
street section, the Borough or the Borough's designated
§ 300-26 LEWISBURG CODE § 300-26
290:240
§ 300-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof
in a summary proceeding before a District Judge, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and/or be imprisoned
for a period not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
representative shall require the applicant or permittee to mill and
overlay the full width to the centerline of the street, with 1 1/
2 inches of PennDOT ID-2 wearing course or Superpave Asphalt
Mixture Design pavement material equal to the existing material
type used on that particular street. The length to be overlaid will
be determined by measuring one foot on either side of the cut in
the case of one cut, and one foot behind the first cut to one foot
behind the last cut in the case of two or more cuts. When an area
is overlaid as described above, no charge will be made for future
maintenance on the permit for the fourth or more cuts prior to said
overlay; however, for any defects or deficiencies, as provided in this
article, once a section is overlaid as aforesaid, the number of cuts
per section shall be counted again and the requirements of this
subsection shall apply to all subsequent cuts into the street section
and all permits issued thereafter.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the person opening the street to
continue the maintenance of that repaired opening for the life of
the street or until the Borough resurfaces the street.
§ 300-26 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 300-27
290:241
Chapter 315
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 158.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 179.
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
182.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 120.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 76.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 255.
Solid waste — See Ch. 280.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 290.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
Trees — See Ch. 332.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 152.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 300-27 LEWISBURG CODE § 300-27
290:242
ARTICLE I
Purpose and Authority
§ 315-1. Title.
These regulations, rules, and standards for planning, subdividing, and
developing land within the Borough of Lewisburg, including procedures for
the application for approval of land development and subdivision plans and
the approval thereof, as well as penalties for the violation of any regulations
herein contained, will be known, cited and referred to as the "Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance" for the Borough of Lewisburg.
§ 315-2. Purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safely and
general welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Lewisburg through the
establishment of uniform standards and procedures for subdivision and land
development activity within the Borough it is intended that the regulation of
development throughout the Borough will be of mutual benefit to residents,
property owners, developers, adjacent municipalities. Union County, and
the general public. The Borough Council hereby cites the following as
specific purposes for which this chapter was ordained and enacted:
A. To provide for orderly, safe, efficient development of the land to obtain
harmonious and stable neighborhoods.
B. To promote new development that is well designed, of high quality, and
suited to the natural conditions of the site.
C. To coordinate land development in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance,32 and other plans of the Borough.
D. To provide for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation
throughout the Borough.
E. To assure that the adverse impacts of development on valued scenic,
historic and cultural features and resources of the Borough are
minimized to the greatest practical extent.
F. To responsibly manage and control stormwater runoff, by maintaining
groundwater infiltration, water quality, reducing stream erosion and
maintaining natural stormwater runoff characteristics.
G. To establish adequate and economical provisions for utilities and public
services to conserve public funds.
H. To assure that sites are suitable for development, building, and human
habitation and to prevent development that may be hazardous, may
aggravate an existing hazard, or may endanger life or property.
32.Editor's Note: See Chapter 360, Zoning.
§ 315-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-2
290:243
§ 315-3. Application.
The provisions of this chapter will be considered to be the minimum
standards necessary to meet the purposes contained herein and the general
purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act 247 of 1968.
P.L. 805, No. 247 (53 P.S. § 10101, et seq.) as from time to time reenacted
and amended. As such all persons are required to submit to the Union
County Planning Commission a subdivision and/or land development plan
for any activity that constitutes a subdivision or land development as
defined in this chapter.
§ 315-4. Effect of adoption.
I. To promote the consideration of and compliance with other federal,
state, county, and/or local acts, codes, laws, ordinances, plans, policies,
rules, regulations, and statutes, including the comprehensive plans of
Union County.
J. To provide for the equitable processing of all subdivision and land
development plans.
K. To ensure that provisions are made for encouraging and promoting
flexibility, economy, and ingenuity in the layout and design of
subdivisions and land developments, and for encouraging practices
which are in accordance with modern and evolving principles of site
planning and development.
L. To provide uniform standards and procedures for the preparation and
recording of all subdivision and land development plans with the Union
County Office of Recorder of Deeds so that the land records of the
county are accurate and complete.
A. General. Pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247 (53 P.S. § 10101, et
seq.) as from time to time reenacted and amended no subdivision or
land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land will be made, no
street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other improvements
in connection therewith will be laid out, constructed, opened, or
dedicated for public use or travel, or for the common use of occupants
of buildings abutting thereon, except in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
B. Pending or approved applications. The provisions of this chapter will
not affect any application for subdivision or land development that is
pending approval prior to the effective date of this chapter. Such
applications will comply with regulations in effect at the time the
application was filed in addition no provision of this chapter will
adversely affect the right of an applicant to complete any aspect of a
plan that was approved prior to the effective date of this chapter in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five years from the
date of first approval.
§ 315-2 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-4
290:244
§ 315-5. Amendments.
The Borough Council may from time to time revise modify and amend
this chapter pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code Act 247 of 1968 P.L. 805 No. 247 (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq), as
from time to time reenacted and amended, or other applicable law in effect
at the time of said amendment. However in the event that the amendments
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code require changes in the
provisions of this chapter (e.g., definitions, approval requirements,
guarantee for completion of improvements, etc.), said amendments will
automatically become a part of this chapter and the Borough Council will be
authorized to attach to this chapter and to copies hereof written addendum
setting forth such Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code amendments
and the sections of this chapter affected thereby.
§ 315-6. Compatibility with other ordinances.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable act, code, law, ordinance, plan, policy,
rule, regulation or statute.
§ 315-7. Conflict with other ordinances.
Where a municipality under jurisdiction of this chapter has enacted a local
zoning ordinance, building code, road ordinance, or other ordinance, code,
resolution, or regulation other than a subdivision and land development
ordinance which imposes more restrictive standards and requirements than
contained herein, such other standards and requirements will take
precedent and prevail where there is conflict with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 315-8. Conflict with private provisions.
If the requirements of this chapter conflict with those contained in deed
restrictions, covenants, easements, or other private agreements, the
requirements that are more restrictive or which impose higher standards
will govern, provided that the private provisions are otherwise lawful.
C. Recording required. All subdivision and land development plans
approved by the Borough Council in accordance with this chapter will
be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for Union
County Pennsylvania, within 90 days of the date of approval affixed to
the plan Failure to record the plan within the ninety-day period will
render the plan null and void as if it were never approved.
D. County approval/review notation. The Union County Recorder of Deeds
will not accept any subdivision or land development plan for recording
unless the plan officially notes the approval of the Borough Council, the
recommendation of the Lewisburg Planning Commission, and the
nonjurisdictional review by the Union County Planning Department.
§ 315-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-9
290:245
§ 315-9. Repealer.
The Lewisburg Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
enacted March 15, 1983, Ordinance No. 83-3 as amended by Ordinance
No. 833 enacted October 20, 1987, Ordinance No. 866 and 871 enacted
September 18, 1990, Ordinance No. 894, enacted October 18, 1994,
Ordinance No. 993, enacted July 21, 2009, and all other ordinances or
sections thereof and resolutions, which are inconsistent with any of the
provisions herein, are hereby repealed. Repeal of said ordinances or
resolutions will not be construed to affect any suit or proceeding now
pending in any court or any rights accrued or liability incurred or any
cause or causes of action accrued or existing under any ordinance repealed
hereby; nor will any right or remedy be lost, impaired, or affected by this
chapter.
§ 315-10. Severability.
Should a court of competent jurisdiction declare any section, subsection, or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision will not affect the validity of
this chapter as a whole, or any other part of the remaining provisions of the
ordinance. The Borough Council hereby declares that it would have enacted
the remainder of this chapter even without any such part, provision, or
application.
§ 315-11. Liability disclaimer.
The granting of approval of a subdivision or land development plan or
any improvement installed as a condition thereof, will not constitute a
representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the Borough of
Lewisburg, or by any official, employee, agent, or appointee thereof of the
practicality or safety of the proposed use or improvement, and will create
no liability upon or cause of action against the Borough of Lewisburg,
its officials, employees, agents or appointees for any damage that may
result pursuant thereto. The applicant is responsible for ensuring that any
subdivision or land development will not cause injury or damage to other
persons or property.
§ 315-12. References.
Specific methods and publications referenced in this chapter will in all cases
refer to the latest available edition and will include revisions, amendments,
and/or replacements thereto.
§ 315-13. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon enactment.
§ 315-9 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-13
290:246
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 315-14. General.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms and words used
herein will for the purposes of this chapter have the meaning indicated in
this section.
§ 315-15. General terms.
§ 315-16. Specific terms.
ACCESS DRIVE — A vehicular approach or entry to or exit from a multiunit
residential or any nonresidential land development.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — See "building, accessory."
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and/or rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious, land disturbance.
AMUSEMENT PARK — A commercially operated park with a predominance
of outdoor games and activities for entertainment including motorized,
mechanical, aquatic or other devices that hold or carry passengers for
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The words "includes" and "including" will not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "applicant," "person," "subdivider," "developer" and "owner"
apply to an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, company, corporation, or any other similar entity.
D. The words "lot," "plot" and "parcel" are interchangeable.
E. The word "structure" includes "building" and the use of either word will
be construed as if followed by the phrase "or a part thereof."
F. The words "will" and "must" are mandatory; the word "may" is
permissive.
G. The phrase "used or occupied" should be understood to mean
"intended, designed, maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied, or
maintained."
H. Periods of time stated as a number of days refer to consecutive calendar
days, unless specified as "working days."
§ 315-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-16
290:247
amusement over a fixed or restricted area. Also typically includes booths for
the sale of food and drink.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development including any heirs, successors, and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative, or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development including but not limited to an
application for a building permit for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan, or for the approval of a development plan. Every application will
include the required and necessary application form, plans, fees, and any
other data or documentation submitted on behalf of a subdivision or land
development.
ASSOCIATION OF OWNERS — See "homeowner's association."
BACKFILL — Material used to replace or the act of replacing the land
surface following the removal of material during construction.
BASE COURSE — The layer or layers of specified or selected material of
designed thickness placed on a subbase or a subgrade to support a surface
course.
BASIN — A barrier, dam, and retention or detention basin located and
designed to retain water and/or rock, sand, gravel, silt, and other material
transported by water.
BERM — A raised earthen mound with landscape plantings that provides
visual screening.
BLOCK — A unit of land containing one or more lots which is entirely
bounded by existing or proposed streets, public lands, cemeteries, railroads
rights-of-way, watercourses or any other barriers to contiguous
development.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Lewisburg Borough Council and, where
appropriate, its staff.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — An individual or professional consulting firm
appointed by the Borough of Lewisburg to perform independent review
of engineering and technical site design details of subdivisions and land
developments.
BRIDGE — A structure including supports having an opening measured
along the center of the pavement of more than 20 feet between supports
(i.e., undercroppings, abutments) designed to convey vehicles, pedestrians
§ 315-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-16
290:248
or other moving loads over a watercourse, railroad, public or private rightof-
way, or any depression.
BUFFER YARD — A portion of a site, together with any structures or
landscape plantings thereupon, used and intended to provide a visual
barrier between different land uses or to shield, block, or provide other
protection from noise, light, or nuisance between adjacent parcels of land.
For the purposes of this chapter the buffer yard is the applicable building
setback distance requirement and any additional buffer distance required
as per § 315-52 to lessen the impacts of incompatible land uses.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area of a lot remaining after the minimum rightsof-
way, setbacks (front, rear, and side) and open space requirements have
been met.
BUILDING — Any combination of materials forming a structure which
is designed, intended or arranged for the housing, sheltering, enclosure,
or structural support of persons, animals, equipment, goods, process or
property of any kind.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a property defining the
minimum distance as established by this chapter between any structure to
be erected or altered and an adjacent right-of-way, street or property line.
The setback line will be measured at right angles and run parallel to the
adjacent street, right-of-way or property line.
CALIPER — The outside diameter of trees measured for buffering and
landscaping purposes at a point on the trunk six inches above the natural
ground line.
CARBONATE — A sediment formed by the organic or inorganic
precipitation of mineral compounds characterized by the fundamental
chemical ion CO3, the principal element in limestone and dolomite strata.
CARTWAY — The improved surface of a right-of-way that is available and
intended for vehicular traffic in the form of a street, alley or driveway.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A detached subordinate building, the use of
which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal
building, which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the
principal building. An accessory building is not used for dwelling
purposes nor normally occupied by personnel associated with any use.
A.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — The main structure on a given lot, in which
the principal use of the site is conducted.
Figure 2-2
B.
§ 315-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-16
290:249
CENTERLINE — A line running parallel to and equidistant from both sides
of the traveled portion of a street.
CLASS A, AA AND AAA CONCRETE — Cement concrete meeting the
requirements set forth in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publication 408, as amended.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections or street and driveway intersections defined by lines of sight
between points at a given distance from the intersection of the street and/
or driveway centerlines.
CLOSED or UNDRAINED DEPRESSION — In a karst geologic area, a
distinct bowl-shaped depression in the land surface; size and amplitude are
variable, drainage is internal. It differs from a sinkhole in that the ground
surface is unbroken and usually occurs in greater density per unit area.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development design and site-planning
concept in which several buildings are concentrated in specific areas on the
site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open
space and protection of valued natural, historic, and cultural features and
resources.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The individual or organization
appointed by the Borough to administer the construction code officially
adopted by the Borough.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water within a development site that
is designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set
aside for public facilities.
COMMONWEALTH — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMPACTED STONE — A material meeting the specifications in the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 408, when placed
and compacted.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official comprehensive plan of the Borough
of Lewisburg, Pennsylvania adopted by the Borough Council which
establishes broad goals for land use and growth management and may
include plans for future land use, parks, transportation, public facilities and
services, and the like.
CONDOMINIUM — A building or group of buildings in which dwelling units,
offices or floor areas are owned individually and the structure, common
areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional and
undivided basis and where there is an association of owners organized for
§ 315-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-16
290:250
the purpose of maintaining, administering, and operating common areas
and facilities.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Union County Conservation District.
CONSTRUCTION — The erection, fabrication, installation, demolition or
removal of any structure, facility, feature or addition thereto, including all
related activities such as clearing of land, grading, earthmoving, paving and
all other activities regulated by this chapter.
COUNTY — County of Union, Pennsylvania.
CROSSWALK — A publicly or privately owned designated area for
pedestrian use that crosses paved areas used for motor vehicles.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street that provides a single means of ingress and egress
by intersecting another street at one end and terminating at the other end
in a vehicular turnaround.
CULVERT — A structure, typically constructed of metal, plastic or concrete,
not classified as a bridge, which provides an opening under a roadway, rail
bed, pedestrian path or other right-of-way designed to catch surface water
from side ditches and direct it away from a roadway, rail bed, pedestrian
path or other right-of-way and/or designed to convey a stream under such a
crossing without constricting water flow or movement of aquatic species.
CURB — A concrete, stone or other improved boundary usually marking the
edge of the roadway or paved area.
CURB CUT — A section of curb where the curb height is lowered to
correspond to the predominate street elevation in order to facilitate access
to driveways and sidewalks.
CURB RADIUS — The measure of curve of the curb return at an
intersection, measured at the edge of the cartway.
CURB RETURN — The curved segment of curb connecting the curbs of two
intersecting streets or driveways.
Figure 2-4
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill, or structure for highway, railroad,
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DECIDUOUS — Plants that drop their foliage annually before becoming
dormant.
§ 315-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-16
290:251
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation or conveyance of land or an
interest in land by the owner to another party (i.e., municipality) for public
use through a written instrument and completed with an acceptance by the
municipality.
DEED — A legal document conveying ownership of real property.
DEED OF RECORD — A legal document conveying ownership of real
property officially on file in the Recorder of Deeds Office of Union County,
Pennsylvania.
DEED RESTRICTION — A restriction upon the use of a property, lot, or
parcel set forth in a deed that runs with the title of the land and is binding
upon subsequent owners of the property but which is enforced by the
landowners involved and not the county municipality or other public agency
Sometimes known as a private or restrictive covenant.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units or units of occupancy permitted
to be constructed or situated on a specific unit of land generally expressed
as a "per acre" value.
DESIGN MANUAL, PART 2 — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) publication, as amended, containing highway design criteria.
DESIGN SPEED — Speed, selected for a specific street, which takes into
consideration the geometric limits such as degree of curvature, super
elevation, sight distances, etc., and which controls the safe operation of the
vehicle as well as allowing for safe pedestrian traffic. The design speed is
governed by the volume of traffic, parking, speed limits, turning movements
at intersections, intersection controls, land width, and pavement surface
conditions.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Borough of Lewisburg involved with the
administration review or enforcement of any provisions of this chapter by
contract or memorandum of understanding.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of a landowner, or tenant with the
permission of a landowner who makes or causes to be made a subdivision
of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT — Any
subdivision or land development that because of its character, magnitude,
or location will have a substantial effect upon the health, safety, or welfare
of citizens in more than one municipality.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract(s) of land for which an activity
regulated by this chapter is proposed.
§ 315-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-16
290:252
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all overland
or pipe flow from the site would be directed towards it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transmit stormwater runoff and will include streams, channels,
swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of the landowner's private land for stormwater
management purposes and/or required for the preservation or maintenance
of a natural stream or watercourse or other drainage facility.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch,
swale or similar depression into which surface water flows.
DRIVEWAY — A private cartway providing vehicular access between a
street and a parking area or structure.
DUPLEX — See "dwelling, two-family."
DWELLING — Any structure, or part thereof designed or used exclusively
for human habitation. The term dwelling will not be deemed to include
dormitory, fraternity, motel, rooming house, sorority, tourist home, hotel,
hospital, assisted living facility or skilled nursing home.
DRIVEWAY, HIGH VOLUME — A driveway normally used by more than
1,500 vehicles per day and often requiring traffic signalization, such as
those serving large shopping centers, multibuilding apartment, or office
complexes.
A.
DRIVEWAY, LOW VOLUME — A driveway normally used by more than
25 but less than 750 vehicles per day such as those serving office
buildings, elementary and junior high schools or car washes.
B.
DRIVEWAY, MEDIUM VOLUME — A driveway normally used by more
than 750 but less than 1,500 vehicles per day and not normally require
traffic signalization such as those serving motels, fast food restaurants,
service stations, small shopping centers or plazas.
C.
DRIVEWAY, MINIMUM USE — A driveway normally used by not more
than 25 vehicles per day, such as those serving single-family dwellings,
duplexes, or apartments with five units or less.
D.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building on a single lot with three
or more dwelling units.
A.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A single dwelling unit
constituting the entirety of a building, designed for and occupied by not
more than one family, and having no roof, wall or floor in common with
any other dwelling unit.
B.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED — A dwelling attached
to one other dwelling by a common vertical wall and located on a
C.
§ 315-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-16
290:253
DWELLING UNIT — Two or more rooms in a dwelling structure designed
for the use by one or more individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit, with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity, including, but not limited to,
construction, mining, timber harvesting and grubbing which alters,
disturbs, and exposes the existing land surface.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation or another person or
entity.
ELEVATION — A vertical distance above or below a predetermined and
fixed reference level i.e., above or below sea level.
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen occurrence or combination of
circumstances that calls for immediate action or remedy.
ENGINEER — A licensed professional engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water, windice,
or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
that is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation and to
meet the requirements of the PA DEP.
EVERGREEN — A plant with foliage that remains green year round.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated, bulldozed, and including all methods of replacement.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed construction.
FINAL PLAN — The plan of a proposed subdivision or land development
including all supplemental information required by this chapter, or by an
applicable municipal ordinance, submitted to obtain final approval and
having a form acceptable for recording in the office of the recorder of deeds.
FIRE LANE — A way cleared of obstacles and vegetation at all times so as
to permit ingress and egress for vehicles during a fire or other emergency.
separate lot. For determining setbacks and other requirements, each
dwelling is understood to have only a single side yard.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A single-family dwelling in a row of at
least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear
access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit
is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fireresistant
walls.
D.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — Two dwelling units attached side by side
or one above the other, located on a single lot, where each unit has an
individual access to the outside.
E.
§ 315-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-16
290:254
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers,
and other waters of this Commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the flood hazard area outside of the
floodway, based on the total area inundated during the regulatory base flood
plus 25% of the regulatory base flood discharge.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source and/or those areas delineated by Flood Insurance Studies
for Union County and its individual municipalities prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) These areas are mapped and
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Hazard Boundary
Maps.
FLOODPLAIN, 100-YEAR — Any land area susceptible to inundation by
water from any natural source and/or those areas delineated by the FEMA
Flood Insurance Studies and associated maps for Union County and its
individual municipalities in which there is a 1% chance of inundation
occurring in any given year.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that is reasonably required to carry and discharge the
100-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the
floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies for Union
County and its municipalities provided by FEMA. In an area where no
FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year frequency
floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway
extends 50 feet from the stream to the top of stream bank on each side of
the stream.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the designed
high water level and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
FRONTAGE — A side of a lot abutting on a street; the length of a lot
measured at the street right-of-way line.
GRADE —
As a noun. A slope, usually of a road, street, other public way, channel
or natural ground specified in percentage change in elevation per
horizontal distance and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
As a verb. To manipulate the land surface and its slope through
excavation, filling or leveling.
B.
§ 315-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-16
290:255
GRADE, EXISTING — The surface of the ground or pavement as it exists
prior to disturbance in preparation for activities regulated by this chapter.
GRADE, FINISHED — The final elevation of the ground surface after
development.
GRADE, NATURAL — The elevation of the ground level in its natural state
before construction, filling, or excavation.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad
and willow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, commonly used to
convey surface water from cropland.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
GROUT — A mixture of cement, water and sand used to seal wellheads and
other structures to prevent the infiltration of liquids and solids.
HISTORIC RESOURCE/FEATURE — Any building, site, structure, object,
district, or area that is listed on any officially adopted municipal, county,
state, or federal plan, registry, or inventory of historic resources and
features, such as the National Register of Historic Places, or has received
a Determination of Eligibility for the National Register from the U.S.
Department of the Interior National Park Service. This term will include the
site, principal structures, accessory structures, yards, vegetation, fences,
road alignments, and signage associated with such resource/feature.
HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION — An incorporated or unicorporated
nonprofit, cooperative organization operating under recorded land
agreements through which: each lot and/or homeowner in a described
land area is automatically a member; each lot is automatically subject to
a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's
activities, such as maintaining a common property (i.e., streets, open space,
stormwater facility); and the charge if unpaid becomes a lien against the
property.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the percolation of water
into the ground. For the purposes of this chapter, impervious surface will
include, but not be limited to the following: concrete, asphalt, building
coverage, water impoundments, gravel and crushed stone areas, highly
compacted soil, etc.
IMPROVEMENT — Those physical additions and installations required and
made to a property to render land suitable for an intended use, including,
but not limited to, buildings, streets, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, street
signs and lights, walkways, sewage disposal and water supply facilities,
monuments, markers, shade trees and landscaping, grading, stormwater
management facilities, and the like.
IMPROVEMENTS GUARANTEE — A deposit of cash, a bond, a binding
letter of credit, a line of credit, an escrow account, or negotiable securities
and an agreement guaranteeing the developer will install all required
improvements.
§ 315-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-16
290:256
IMPROVEMENTS MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — A deposit consisting of
cash, a bond, a binding letter of credit, a line of credit, an escrow account,
or negotiable securities and an agreement insuring that improvements
constructed as part of an approved subdivision or land development have
been properly installed and guaranteeing their integrity.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, or seepage trenches).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain, a structure at the diversion
end of a conduit, the upstream end of any structure through which water
may flow.
KARST — A type of topography that is formed over calcareous minerals
such as limestone, dolomite, or gypsum by bedrock solution, and that is
characterized by closed depressions or sinkholes, caves and underground
drainage (from AGI Glossary of Geology, 1972).
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The written and graphic description of a
development including, as applicable, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location, and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, rights-of-way, parking
facilities, common open spaces and public facilities.
LAND USE — Any activity, business, function, or purpose for which any
piece of land or structure is used or intended to be used.
LAND/EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling,
digging or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity
that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land.
LANDOWNER — The legal or equitable owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A professional landscape architect licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LATERAL — A utility line between a main line, located in a utility easement
or street right-of-way, and the building the line serves.
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on
a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
A.
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features.
B.
§ 315-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-16
290:257
LEVELING AREA — A safe stopping area at the intersection of streets or
the intersection of a driveway and a street.
LIMESTONE — A rock that is chiefly formed by the accumulation of organic
remains, consisting mainly of calcium carbonate.
LOCAL SEWER AUTHORITY — The Lewisburg Area Joint Sewer Authority
(L.A.J.S.A.).
LOT — A parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or as otherwise
permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The computed area contained within the property lines of a
lot as shown on a plan, excluding space within a street right-of-way but
including the area of any easement.
LOT LINE MARKER — A metal plate or pin set by a professional land
surveyor to permanently identify curves along property lines, angles in
property lines, and lot line intersections.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot.
A. LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting the intersection of two or more streets.
LOT DEPTH — The mean (average) distance measured between the
front and rear lot lines.
B.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot with street frontage at both the front
and rear.
C.
D. LOT, INTERIOR — A lot with only one frontage on a street.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot with front and rear street frontage
where vehicular access is prohibited to and from the higher intensity
street.
E.
LOT, OPEN SPACE — A parcel intended not to be developed or
encumbered with structures.
F.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line most closely parallel to the street
identified by the official U.S. postal address of any structure on the lot.
A.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite, generally parallel to and most
distant from, the front lot line.
B.
C. LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
§ 315-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-16
290:258
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
at the shortest distance between the front and rear building lines as
determined by the prescribed front and rear yard requirements.
MONUMENT — For the purposes of this chapter, a monument will be
defined to mean a reinforced concrete monument, stone, or other
permanent object containing magnetic material set by a professional land
surveyor to permanently identify surface elevation and/or survey reference
points such as the intersection of lines forming angles in the boundary of
a lot or tract, rights-of-ways of streets and utilities, or at other locations
determined appropriate by the Planning Commission for the purpose of
reference in land and property surveys.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic or corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, No. 164, known as the "Municipal
Authorities Act of 1945."33
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, P.L. 805, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as from
time to time reenacted and amended.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a body of water
from diffuse origins and does not result from discernible, confined, or
discrete conveyances.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (Previously Soil
Conservation Service—SCS).
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article VI of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968 P.L. 805, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq., as from time to time reenacted and amended.
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows within
an open surface. Open channels include, but will not be limited to, natural
and man-made drainage ways, swales, streams, ditches and canals.
OPEN SPACE — An area that is intended to provide land free of
development and is designed for environmental, scenic, or recreation
purposes. Open space may include but is not limited to lawns, decorative
plantings, walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds,
fountains, wooded areas and watercourses. Open space will not include
driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular
travel, or detention and retention ponds. In addition, no area of future road
right-of-way will be counted as open space.
33.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 315-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-16
290:259
OUTFALL — Point where water flows out from a conduit, pipe, stream or
drain, such as the point of discharge for a stormwater detention basin.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
PA DEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARCEL — See "lot."
PARENT TRACT — The original lot or tract of land from which a new lot is
being subdivided.
PARK — A tract of land dedicated and used by the public for active and/or
passive recreation.
PARKING AREA — Any public or private area designed and used for parking
motor vehicles, including parking lots, garages, private driveways and
legally designated areas of public streets.
PARKING LOT — Any off-street area or structure that is designed solely
for the transient storage of motor vehicles and includes the driveways,
passageways and maneuvering space appurtenant thereto.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street parking area available and designated for
the parking of a single vehicle.
PAVEMENT — A sub-base, base course or surface course placed on a subgrade
to support traffic load.
PAVEMENT STRUCTURE — The layers of pavement which together
comprise a roadway.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PEAK HOUR — The hour during which the heaviest volume of traffic occurs
on a street or road.
PEDESTRIAN WAY — A specified easement or right-of-way, publicly or
privately owned, which is designed and designated for the exclusive use of
pedestrians.
PENNDOT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — See "improvements guarantee."
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure including
appurtenances that convey stormwater.
PLAN — A map or plat of a subdivision or land development along with
supplementary data if required. Types of plans are as follows:
AS-BUILT PLAN — A plan prepared and submitted at the request
of Borough Council after all required improvements approved for a
subdivision or land development have been completed.
A.
FINAL PLAN — A complete and exact plan of a proposed subdivision
or land development, prepared in accordance with this chapter and
B.
§ 315-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-16
290:260
PLANNING COMMISSION — Lewisburg Borough Planning Commission.
PLANTING STRIP — The area of grass or other plants, including trees, that
is located between the sidewalk and curb or, if there is no curb, edge of
roadway and that is not improved for use by pedestrians.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PLOT — See "lot."
PRESERVATION — The conservation and safeguarding of natural and
historic resources.
PROTECTION — See "preservation."
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
including all supplementary information required by this chapter or
other applicable Borough ordinance that is submitted to obtain final
approval.
LOT ADDITION (ADD-ON) PLAN — A complete and exact subdivision
plan, including all supplementary data and prepared in accordance
with this chapter intended to convey a parcel of ground that is located
immediately adjacent to other property owned by the intended grantee
and is being added to the grantees existing lot of record.
C.
LOT CONSOLIDATION PLAN — A plan showing the entire areas of two
or more adjacent existing lots of record combined or consolidated to
effectually eliminate one of more of the original lots and create one new
lot.
D.
PLOT PLAN — A Final Plan which contains the original endorsement
of the Borough the Lewisburg Borough Planning Commission and the
Union County Planning Commission and is intended to be recorded with
the Union County Recorder of Deeds Office.
E.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A plan of a proposed subdivision or land
development prepared in accordance with this chapter and including all
supplementary information required by this chapter or other applicable
Borough ordinance that is submitted to obtain preliminary approval.
F.
SKETCH PLAN — An informal plan not necessarily to exact scale
indicating salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and
the general layout of a proposed subdivision or land development as
prepared in accordance with this chapter.
G.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths, other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, water treatment, and other
publicly owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 315-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-16
290:261
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council, Planning Commission, or Zoning Hearing Board intended
to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking certain actions in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code or prior to
amending this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Sunshine
Act, Act 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
PUBLICATION 408 — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
publication containing highway construction specifications, as amended and
supplemented.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A corridor of land reserved or dedicated, in whole or part,
with the intention of its being occupied as a street, alley, pedestrian way, or
other means of public or private transportation and access or by an electric
transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer
or other similar use. A right-of-way includes the entire area reserved or
dedicated for the use.
RUNOFF — Precipitation that does not enter the soil but runs across the
surface of the land.
SCREENING — A method of visually shielding or obscuring one structure
or land use from adjacent properties by means of fencing, walls, berms or
densely planted vegetation.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control
measures and control facilities.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which solid materials are accumulated
or deposited by wind, water, or gravity.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse, noncompactable material, into which surface
water is directed for infiltration into the ground.
SETBACK LINE — See "building setback line."
SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewer collection and treatment system which serves
developed properties on a community, area-wide, or regional basis in which
sewage is collected from buildings and piped by means of a conveyance
system to a sanitary sewage treatment plant that is designed, approved and
permitted in accordance with the requirements of the PA DEP.
§ 315-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-16
290:262
SHOULDER — The improved or graded portion of the highway, contiguous
to the traffic lanes, for accommodation of stopped vehicles, emergency use,
or lateral support of base and surface courses or pavements.
SIDEWALK — A level improved concrete surface that is typically separated
from but located adjacent to a roadway and intended for pedestrian travel.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The unobstructed distance a driver is able to see.
SINKHOLE — A localized, gradual or rapid sinking of the land surface
to a variable depth, which occurs in areas of carbonate bedrock and is
generally characterized by a roughly circular outline, a breaking of the
ground surface, and a downward movement of soil into bedrock voids.
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by the Soil
Conservation Service (now NRCS) into four runoff potential groups. The
groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little
runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more
runoff.
SOIL SURVEY — The most recent edition of a series of aerial photographs
on which soils are classified according to a variety of characteristics and
accompanying explanatory text, prepared by the United States Department
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service (now NRCS).
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin that
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond.
SQUARE FOOTAGE — The unit of measure used to express the area of
a lot, tract, or parcel involved in a subdivision or land development. It is
determined by multiplying the length of a lot, in feet, by the width of a lot,
in feet (L x W = square footage area).
STABILIZATION — The proper placing, grading, and/or covering of soil,
rock, or earth to ensure their resistance to erosion, sliding, or other
movement.
STAFF — The staff of the Borough of Lewisburg, including both in-house
staff and contracted professional staff.
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Precipitation reaching the ground surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any natural or man-made
structure that due to its condition, design or construction conveys, stores
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, basins, open channels, storm
sewers, pipes, swales, and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan, including data and
calculations, that indicates how stormwater runoff will be managed at the
particular site of interest according to this chapter.
§ 315-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-16
290:263
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN, ACT 167 — The plan for managing
stormwater runoff in a particular watershed adopted by Union County and
approved by the PA DEP as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864,
Act 167 of 1978 (32 P.S. § 6801 et seq.).
STREET — A public or private right-of-way, excluding driveways, intended
for use as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation that provides
a means of access to abutting property. The word "street" will apply to
thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway, highway, lane,
road or similar terms. Types of streets are as follows:
STREET GRADE — The slope of a street or road between two points,
typically expressed as a percentage.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
ALLEY — A street, usually located to the rear or side of properties and
used primarily for vehicular service access and a secondary means of
access to abutting lots.
A.
ARTERIAL STREET — A high-capacity street that delivers traffic from
collector streets to freeways or expressways, and between population
centers at the highest level of service possible.
B.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street that carries traffic from local streets
to arterial streets.
C.
DEAD-END STREET — A street with only one means of vehicular traffic
ingress and egress.
D.
HALF STREET — A street, generally parallel with and adjacent to a
property line, having a lesser right-of-way and/or cartway width than
required by this chapter for improvement as a street.
E.
LOCAL STREET — A street that allows circulation of traffic within a
neighborhood.
F.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A local street parallel and adjacent
to a major street (but physically separated from it) which provides
both access to abutting properties and control of intersections with the
major street.
Figure 2-9
G.
H. PRIVATE STREET — A street which is not public.
PUBLIC STREET — A street ordained, maintained, or dedicated to
and accepted by the Borough of Lewisburg or the state or federal
government and open to public use.
I.
§ 315-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-16
290:264
SUBBASE — The layers of material placed on a subgrade to support a base
course. Refer to Figure 6-2 and Figure 6-3 for typical roadway sections
diagram.
SUBDIVIDER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
SUBDIVISION — Any change in the boundaries of one or more lots, parcels
of land, or other divisions of land. Types of subdivisions are as follows:
SUBGRADE — The top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement
structure and shoulders, including curbs, are constructed. Refer to Figure
6-2 and Figure 6-3 for typical roadway sections diagram.
SUBJECT TRACT — The lot, parcel, or site proposed for a subdivision or
land development.
SURFACE COURSE — One or more layers of a pavement structure designed
to accommodate the traffic load, the top layer of which resists skidding,
traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate. The top layer is
sometimes called "wearing course."
SURVEYOR — A licensed professional land surveyor registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TECHNICAL RELEASE 55 (TR-55) — The publication of the NRCS entitled
"Urban Unit Hydrology for Small Watersheds."
TOPOGRAPHY — The general configuration of a land surface, including its
relief and position of its natural and man-made features.
TRACT — See "lot."
LOT ADDITION SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision that conveys a
portion of a lot to a lot immediately adjacent to that portion.
A.
CONSOLIDATION SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision by which the entire
area of one or more lots is added to an adjacent lot thereby eliminating
one or more of the original lots.
B.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision as defined herein involving
six or more lots, parcels of land, or other divisions of land whether or
not it involves new streets, additional utilities, or other improvements;
all subdivisions not considered minor subdivisions for plan processing
purposes.
C.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision that abuts an existing public
street or road, cumulatively involves no more than five lots, parcels of
land, or other divisions of land from the same parent tract, and does not
require a new street, access easements, or the installation of any other
improvements.
D.
§ 315-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-16
290:265
TRACT RESIDUAL — The lot or parcel created through subdivision that is
the remaining portion of the parent tract after subdivision occurs.
TRIP — The movement of a vehicle in a single direction.
UNBUILDABLE SITE — A portion of a tract of land which, due to physical
or environmental conditions, cannot support or is inappropriate for
construction of a road, structure, or any other man-made improvement.
UNDEVELOPED CONDITION — Land in its natural state.
WAIVER — A decision by the Borough Council to grant an applicant's
request to be released from specific requirements imposed by this chapter.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system for the collection, treatment, storage
and distribution of potable water from the source of supply to the consumer.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, PUBLIC OR COMMUNITY — A water collection,
treatment, and distribution system which serves developed properties on a
community, area-wide or regional basis.
WATER SUPPLY, ON-LOT — A water supply system located on and serving
a single property. It typically takes the form of a well.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream of water or a
channel for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other body
of water, whether natural or artificial.
WEARING COURSE — See "surface course."
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
WOODLAND — A vegetated area that is predominated by trees.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — Lewisburg Borough Zoning Hearing Board.
ZONING OFFICER — The individual or organization appointed by the
Borough to administer the Borough's Zoning Ordinance.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Zoning Ordinance enacted by the Lewisburg
Borough Council.34
34.Editor's Note: See Chapter 360, Zoning.
§ 315-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-16
290:266
ARTICLE III
Exemption
§ 315-17. Exempted activities.
The following activities will be exempted from the requirements of this
chapter with concurrence of the Zoning Officer who will determine whether
the exemptions cited herein are applicable. The decision of the Zoning
Officer may be appealed to the Borough Council after review by the
Planning Commission.
§ 315-18. Activities that may be exempted.
The following activities may be exempted from the requirements of this
chapter by Borough Council upon recommendation by the Planning
Commission and Borough Engineer:
A. The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or singlefamily
semi-detached dwelling into not more than three residential
units unless such units are intended to be a condominium.
B. The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on a lot
or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
C. The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of
an amusement park. This exclusion will not apply to newly acquired
tracts or parcels being added to an existing amusement park.
D. The division of land by lease for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres that do not involve any new street, right-of-way or
residential dwelling. Upon the request of the property owner and upon
receipt of a signed statement or letter from the property owner and
leasee stating that the lands to be leased meet the preceding
conditions, the Borough will forward a statement of exemption to the
concerned parties.
A. The enlargement of a building by an addition of no more than 15% of
the building's existing square footage provided the following conditions
are met:
(1) The addition does not exceed 500 square feet and is not separated
from the existing structure.
(2) There is no change to any street or public way.
(3) There is no interference or substantial change to drainage or the
flow of water.
(4) The Zoning Officer determines that the enlarged building would be
in compliance with all zoning requirements.
(5) The Borough Engineer determines that the enlarged building
would be in compliance with all land development requirements.
§ 315-17 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-18
290:267
B. The replacement of a structure that is necessitated by unpreventable
acts of God (including but not limited to fire, flood and storm damage)
and that meets the following conditions:
(1) The structure has been deemed unoccupiable by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(2) Repair of the damage to the existing structure is significantly more
costly than the structure's replacement.
(3) The new structure will be relatively the same size.
(4) The layout and lot access are relatively unchanged from what had
been approved under a previous land development application.
(5) The Zoning Officer confirms that the proposal meets all applicable
land use regulations.
(6) The applicant provides written confirmation that the proposal
meets all applicable state regulations.
§ 315-18 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-18
290:268
ARTICLE IV
Plan Processing: Submission, Review, and Approval
§ 315-19. Classification.
For the purposes of plan processing, plans for proposed land developments
and the various types of subdivision are classified as follows:
§ 315-20. Preapplication conference and review.
§ 315-21. Plan submission deadlines and filing dates.
A. Sketch plan.
B. Preliminary plan.
C. Final plan (includes minor subdivision plans and lot addition and lot
consolidations plans).
D. As-built plan.
A. The purpose of the preapplication conference and review is to afford an
applicant opportunity to receive the advice and assistance of the
Borough regarding the procedures for submission of subdivision and
land development applications, as well as the standards and provisions
of this chapter, and to alert the applicant to other factors pertinent to
the design and effectuation of the subdivision or land development.
B. Although not required, a preapplication conference and review is
strongly recommended before submission of a formal plan, particularly
for proposals that involve the creation of new streets, stormwater
facilities, or proposals for new or expanded nonresidential structures.
C. The preapplication conference and review will not constitute the filing
of an application for approval, and all such meetings and/or review will
be considered informal. At the discretion of the applicant a proposal
may be presented at a public Borough Planning Commission meeting
for informal review and comment, and if deemed appropriate or
necessary by the Planning Commission, said proposal may then be
presented at a Borough Council meeting for informal review and
comment.
A. Plan submission deadlines.
(1) Subdivision, lot addition/consolidation, and land development
plans. Plans and supporting documentation will be submitted to the
Borough or designated administrator of this chapter with a
completed application form accompanied by all applicable fees at
any time during normal office hours. Plans will be submitted at
least 15 calendar days prior to the next regularly scheduled
Planning Commission meeting for consideration at that meeting.
B. Official plan filing dates.
§ 315-19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-21
290:269
§ 315-22. Sketch plan.
§ 315-23. Preliminary plans.
(1) Subdivision, lot addition/consolidation, and land development
plans. Plans will be considered officially filed at the next monthly
meeting of the Planning Commission following the delivery of a
completed application form, applicable fees, and the requisite
number of plans and other supporting documents to the Borough or
designated administrator and the Borough or designated
administrator has acknowledged that the application is complete.
Should the next monthly meeting of the Lewisburg Borough
Planning Commission be more than 30 days following the delivery
of the completed application to the Borough or designated
administrator, the date of plan receipt will be the 30th day
following the filing of the application.
C. Effect of filing date. After an application has been officially filed in
accordance with § 315-21B and while a decision is pending, no change
in any zoning, subdivision, or other local governing ordinance or plan
will affect the decision on the application adversely to the applicant,
and the applicant will be entitled to a decision in accordance with the
provisions of the local governing ordinances and regulations effective
on the official plan filing date.
A. Applicants are encouraged to submit a sketch plan during or after the
preapplication conference and review in order to present the overall
development concept of a particular tract before preparing and
submitting a formal preliminary or final plan.
B. The sketch plan, like the preapplication conference and review, is not
mandatory but is recommended.
C. Presentation of a sketch plan will not constitute the filing of an
application for approval of a plat. The applicant may present the sketch
plan at a Planning Commission meeting for informal review and
comment.
D. No formal action will be taken on a sketch plan submission, but the
Planning Commission and/or the Borough's consultant(s) may after
review and evaluation of the proposal notify the applicant in writing of
findings and recommendations regarding preparation of preliminary or
final plans.
E. The Borough may complete a review of sketch plans within 30 days of
delivery to the Borough or designated administrator and may
communicate findings to the applicant within 15 days of completing the
review; however, if such review is not conducted and findings are not
communicated within these timeframes, no vested rights will be
deemed to accrue to the applicant.
§ 315-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-23
290:270
A. Subdivisions and land developments requiring a preliminary plan. An
application for preliminary plan review and approval must be submitted
for any proposed subdivision or land development that meets any of the
following conditions:
(1) Proposed are streets, sanitary sewers, stormwater management
facilities, or other improvements that will be offered for public
dedication.
(2) An applicant opts to forgo posting an improvements guaranty and
intends to construct improvements prior to final plan approval and
the sale of lots.
(3) All cases where an applicant proposes phasing of construction
activities.
B. Application requirements. All preliminary plan applications will include
the following:
(1) Eight copies of the preliminary plan prepared in compliance with
§§ 315-29 and 315-30 of this chapter. Additional copies will be
submitted if the proposed site is a project of regional significance.
The applicant is also responsible for providing the necessary copies
for sewage planning review. (Additionally, applicants are
encouraged to submit an electronic copy of the plan as a portable
document format [.pdf] file.)
(2) Three copies of all reports, deed covenants, notifications,
regulatory permit applications and reviews and certifications which
are not provided on the preliminary plan, including but not limited
to traffic studies, stormwater management narrative and
calculations, and maintenance and use agreements.
(3) One completed "Lewisburg Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Application" form with all information legible and
bearing the required signatures.
(4) Appropriate filing fee in the form of a check or money order made
payable to the Borough of Lewisburg for an amount established by
a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Borough Council.
C. Incomplete applications. The Borough or designated administrator will
have seven days from the date an application is submitted to check the
plans and accompanying documents to determine if on their face they
are in proper form and contain all the information required by this
chapter. If incomplete, the application will be returned to the applicant
with a statement that the application is incomplete within the seven-day
period, otherwise, the application will be deemed accepted for filing.
Acceptance will not constitute a waiver of any deficiencies or
irregularities.
D. Distribution of copies.
§ 315-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-23
290:271
(1) Upon receipt of a completed application, the Borough or
designated administrator will distribute one copy of the
preliminary plan and any related documentation to the following,
as appropriate, for their review and report:
(a) Borough Office.
(b) Borough Planning Commission.
(c) Borough Zoning Officer.
(d) Borough Engineer.
(e) Municipalities within 1/2 mile of the proposed site if the project
is expected to generate 200 or more vehicle trips per day or is
otherwise deemed to be of regional significance.
(f) Union County Planning Commission.
(2) The applicant will be responsible to distribute plans and related
documentation to all agencies having jurisdiction and will provide
verification of transmittals to the Borough or Designated
Administrator.
E. Phased development. If an applicant intends to develop land in phases,
the preliminary plan application will encompass the entire land area
proposed for development and will serve as a master plan.
F. Optional hearing. The Borough may conduct a public hearing pursuant
to public notice in order to inform the public and obtain comment prior
to taking action on a preliminary plan application.
G. Borough action. The Borough will review and render a decision to
approve the preliminary plan as submitted, to approve the plan subject
to conditions specified by the Borough, or to disapprove the plan at a
scheduled public meeting not later than 90 days after such application
for preliminary approval was officially filed, unless the applicant and
the Borough mutually agree in writing to an extension of time.
H. Written decision. The applicant will be notified in writing, via certified,
return receipt requested mail, of Borough action within 15 consecutive
days following the decision. Said notice will be mailed to the last known
address of the applicant on file at the Borough Office with a copy of said
notification provided, as appropriate, to the following:
(1) Landowner, if different from applicant.
(2) Firm that prepared the plan.
(3) Borough Zoning Officer.
(4) Borough Solicitor.
(5) Borough Engineer.
§ 315-23 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-23
290:272
I. Acceptance of conditions. If an application for a preliminary plan is
approved subject to conditions, such conditions will be specified by the
Borough and will be accepted by the applicant in writing within 15 days
after the written decision of the Borough is delivered to the applicant or
the approval will be automatically rescinded.
J. Approval pending receipt of additional information. When a preliminary
plan is conditionally approved, the applicant will submit revised plans
and necessary documents to the Borough for approval within 45 days of
acceptance of the conditions. Failure to meet the conditions of plan
approval within 45 days will constitute an automatic disapproval of the
plan unless the Borough and the applicant mutually agree upon a time
extension. For plans conditionally approved, the date of official plan
approval will be the date on which all conditions are met.
K. Specified defects. If an application for a preliminary plan is disapproved
as filed, the decision will specify the defects found in the application
and identify the requirements that have not been met, citing the
provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
L. Deemed approval. Failure of the Borough to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant in the manner prescribed herein will be
deemed approval of the application as presented.
M. Preliminary plan certification. After preliminary plan approval and the
applicant's compliance with all conditions of approval, the Borough will
execute the plan approval certification with one copy retained by the
Borough and one copy provided to the applicant along with any other
copies deemed necessary by the applicant.
N. Effect of preliminary plan approval.
(1) Approval of the preliminary plan application by the Borough will
constitute approval of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development in regard to general design, character and intensity of
development, general arrangement of streets, lots, structures, and
other planned facilities, but will not constitute final plan approval.
(2) A preliminary plan will not be accepted for recording in the office of
the Union County Recorder of Deeds.
(3) Preliminary plan approval will be effective for a five-year period
from the date of the Borough's approval of the preliminary plan
application, thereafter final plan application(s) for the entire
project will be made within five years of preliminary plan approval
unless the Borough grants a waiver by extending the effective time
period of the approval.
(4) After receipt of preliminary plan approval the applicant may
proceed to construct the improvements shown on the approved
preliminary plan. The applicant will indicate the intent to construct
§ 315-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-23
290:273
§ 315-24. Final plans.
improvements in writing to the Borough prior to the start of
construction.
(5) Preliminary plan approval will not authorize the sale of lots of
occupancy of buildings shown on the plan regardless of whether or
not proposed improvements have been installed.
A. Final plan submission. An application for final plan review and approval
may be submitted under the following circumstances:
(1) A preliminary plan was not required.
(2) The preliminary plan was approved without conditions.
(3) The improvements required by this chapter and shown on the
preliminary plan have been completed and acknowledged by the
Borough as having been completed correctly when said
improvements were not assured by a financial improvements
guarantee.
B. Application requirements. All final plan applications will include the
following:
(1) Eight copies of the final plan prepared in compliance with
§§ 315-29, 315-31, 315-32 or 315-33 of this chapter. Additional
copies will be submitted if the proposed site is a project of regional
significance. The applicant is also responsible for providing the
necessary copies for sewage planning review. (Additionally,
applicants are encouraged to submit an electronic copy of the plan
as a Portable Document Format [.pdf] file.)
(2) Three copies of all reports, deed covenants, notifications,
regulatory permit applications and reviews, and certifications
which are not provided on the final plan, including but not limited
to traffic engineer reports, stormwater management narrative and
calculations, improvements guaranty, and maintenance and use
agreements.
(3) One completed "Borough of Lewisburg Application for Subdivision
or Land Development" form with all information legible and
bearing the required signatures.
(4) Appropriate filing fee in the form of a check or money order made
payable to the Borough of Lewisburg for an amount established by
a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Borough Council.
C. Incomplete applications. The Borough or Designated Administrator will
have seven days from the date an application is submitted to check the
plans and accompanying documents to determine, if on their face, they
are in proper form and contain all the information required by this
chapter. If incomplete, the application will be returned to the applicant
§ 315-23 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-24
290:274
with a statement that the application is incomplete within the sevenday
period; otherwise, the application will be deemed accepted for
filing. Acceptance will not constitute a waiver of any deficiencies or
irregularities.
D. Conformance with Preliminary Plan. Final plans will conform in all
important respects with the approved preliminary plan otherwise the
plan submitted will be considered as a revised preliminary plan.
E. Distribution of copies. Upon receipt of a completed application, the
Borough or designated administrator will distribute one copy of the
final plan and any related documentation to the following, as
appropriate, for their review and report:
(1) Borough Office.
(2) Borough Planning Commission.
(3) Borough Zoning Officer.
(4) Borough Engineer.
(5) Municipalities within 1/2 mile of the proposed site if the project is
expected to generate 200 or more vehicle trips per day or is
otherwise deemed to be of regional significance.
(6) Union County Planning Commission.
F. Phased development. The final plan may be submitted in phases as long
as the following conditions are met:
(1) Each phase covers a reasonable portion of the entire proposed
subdivision or land development as shown on the approved
preliminary plan.
(2) Each phase, except for the last section, contains a minimum of 25%
of the total number of units to be occupied as depicted on the
approved preliminary plan unless the Borough approves a lesser
percentage for one of the phases.
(3) A schedule is submitted indicating the intended submission of final
plans for remaining phases.
(4) Final plan approval of all phases is within five years of preliminary
plan approval.
G. Borough action. The Borough will review and render a decision to
approve the final plan as submitted, to approve the plan subject to
conditions specified by the Borough, or to disapprove the plan at a
scheduled public meeting not later than 90 days after such application
for final plan approval was officially filed or after order of the court
remanding an application, unless the applicant and the Borough
mutually agree in writing to an extension of time.
§ 315-24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-24
290:275
H. Written decision. The applicant will be notified in writing, via certified,
return receipt requested mail, of Borough action within 15 calendar
days following the decision. Said notice will be mailed to the last known
address of the applicant on file at the Borough Office with a copy of said
notification provided as appropriate to the following:
(1) Landowner if different from applicant.
(2) Firm that prepared the plan.
(3) Borough Zoning Officer.
(4) Borough Solicitor.
(5) Borough Engineer.
I. Acceptance of conditions. If an application for a final plan is approved
subject to conditions, such conditions will be specified by the Borough
and will be accepted by the applicant in writing within 15 days after the
written decision of the Borough is delivered to the applicant, or the
approval will be automatically rescinded.
J. Approval pending receipt of additional information. When a final plan is
conditionally approved, the applicant will submit revised plans and
necessary documents to the Borough for approval by the staff within 45
days of acceptance of the conditions. Failure to meet the conditions of
plan approval within 45 days will constitute an automatic disapproval of
the plan, unless the Borough and the applicant mutually agree upon a
time extension For plans conditionally approved, the date of official
plan approval will be the date on which all conditions are met.
K. Specified defects. If an application for a final plan is disapproved as
filed, the decision will specify the defects found in the application and
identify the requirements that have not been met, citing the provisions
of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
L. Deemed approval. Failure of the Borough to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant in the manner prescribed herein will be
deemed approval of the application as presented.
M. Final plan certification. After receipt of final plan approval and
compliance with all conditions of approval, the Borough will execute the
plan approval certification with one copy being retained by the Borough
and one copy provided to the applicant along with any other copies
deemed necessary by the applicant. No final plan will be recorded with
the Office of the Union County Recorder of Deeds without bearing the
original signatures of the Borough Planning Commission Chairperson
and the Borough Council President and Vice President denoting
approval of the plan.
N. Assignment of uniform parcel identifier. Prior to the acceptance of a
plan for recording by the Union County Recorder of Deeds the applicant
§ 315-24 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-24
290:276
§ 315-25. As-built plans.
After final plan approval and upon completion of all required improvements,
the applicant or developer will submit at the request of the Borough Council
an as-built plan prepared in compliance with § 315-34 of this chapter
showing the location, dimension and elevation of all improvements. Asbuilt
plans generally will be required when constructed improvements and
developed conditions deviate from the originally approved plan. The as-built
plan will specify all deviations from the previously approved drawings. Five
copies of the as-built plan will be submitted to Borough Council. Depending
on the severity of the deviations from the approved plan shown by the asbuilt
plan, a full subdivision and land development plan revision may need
to be submitted and approved.
§ 315-26. Reviews by Engineer or other qualified person.
will obtain and show on the plans a uniform parcel identifier assigned
by the Union County Tax Assessment Office for each parcel.
O. Recording. Approval of a final plan application by the Borough will
entitle the applicant to record the plan in the Office of the Union County
Recorder of Deeds once necessary approval signatures and certificates
are executed. A final plan approved by the Borough will be recorded by
the applicant in the Office of the Union County Recorder of Deeds
within 90 days of the Borough approval date noted on the plan. Failure
of the applicant to record the plan within this time will render the plan
null and void unless a time extension is requested by the applicant in
writing and is granted by the Borough in writing prior to the expiration
date Under no circumstances will a plan be recorded as an attachment
to or an exhibit of the instrument of conveyance.
P. Sale of lots. The sale of lots and/or construction of proposed buildings in
a subdivision or land development will not commence until the
approved final plan is filed and recorded with the Union County
Recorder of Deeds Office The Borough may seek preventive remedies,
injunctions or enforcement remedies in accordance with Article X,
§§ 315-86, 315-87 and 315-88 of this chapter if lots are sold or
occupancy of buildings occurs prior to final plan approval.
Q. Effect of ordinance changes on approval. When an application has been
granted final plan approval, no change in this chapter or in any
applicable Borough ordinance will adversely affect the right of the
applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of the approved
development in accordance with the terms of such approval within five
years. Where final plan approval is preceded by preliminary plan
approval the five-year period will be counted from the date of
preliminary plan approval.
A. The Borough Engineer and/or other consultant experienced in a
particular discipline will review any application that involves
engineering or other specialized considerations, and any comments
§ 315-24 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-26
290:277
§ 315-27. Site inspections.
The Borough or designated administrator may visit any site proposed for
subdivision and/or land development before any action is taken to approve
or disapprove a plan in order to evaluate a plan application on the basis of
the information presented.
received from said engineer and/or other consultants will be considered
a part of the application review and incorporated therein. Costs of such
review by the Borough Engineer and/or other consultants will be borne
by the applicant.
B. Where a conflict of interest arises due to an application being filed by
the Borough Engineer or other consultant or their office, the Borough
will appoint an independent engineer or consultant to review said
application.
§ 315-26 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-27
290:278
ARTICLE V
Plan and Application Requirements
§ 315-28. Sketch plan.
A sketch plan should contain sufficient information to clearly indicate the
character and extent of the proposed subdivision or land development and
its relationship to existing conditions and facilities within the area in which
it is to be located. It should include the following data and information,
legibly drawn, but not necessarily to scale or showing precise dimensions.
§ 315-29. Drafting standards for preliminary and final plans.
A. A location map with sufficient detail such as roads and significant
community facilities to enable the Planning Commission to locate the
property.
B. Title block indicating the applicant and/or landowner, municipality,
date, individual that prepared the plan, scale of the drawing or notation
"Drawing Not to Scale."
C. North arrow.
D. Locations of significant existing topographic and physical features (e.g.,
water bodies, floodplains, streets, structures).
E. Existing tract boundaries accurately labeled with the names of adjacent
landowners.
F. Proposed general street, parking, building and lot layout including the
acreage of the area to be developed.
G. Proposed land use, if multiple land uses are proposed the general
location of each land use will be shown.
H. Statement explaining the methods of water supply and sewage disposal
to be used.
A. The preparation of plans will adhere to the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, including but not limited to, the Engineer, Land
Surveyor and Geologist Registration Law, May 23, 1945, P.L. 913, No.
367 (63 P.S. § 148 et seq.) and the Landscape Architects Registration
Law January 24, 1966, 1965 P.L. 1527, No. 535 (63 P.S. § 901 et seq.) as
from time to time reenacted and amended.
B. Plans will be either black on white or blue on white prints with a sheet
size no smaller than 18 inches by 22 inches and no larger than 24
inches by 36 inches. If the plan is drawn in two or more sections, a key
map showing the location of the sections will be placed on each sheet
with the match lines showing All sheets will be the same size and
numbered to show the relationship to the total number of sheets in the
plan i.e., "Sheet 1 of _____ Sheet 2 of _____ Sheet 3 of _____ etc."
§ 315-28 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-29
290:279
§ 315-30. Preliminary plan.
All preliminary plan applications will be prepared in accordance with this
section to provide sufficient design information to demonstrate
conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Plans will be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50
feet or one inch equals 100 feet or other suitable scale if approved by
the staff.
D. Dimensions will be in feet and decimals to the nearest hundredth of a
foot, bearings will be in degrees, minutes, and seconds.
E. Lot line descriptions will read in a clockwise direction.
F. Surveys and other professional services associated with plan
preparation will be consistent with prevailing professional standards
and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Project description and location. For preliminary plan applications the
following will be shown on or, where appropriate, accompany the plan.
(1) A brief narrative describing the proposed project.
(2) Title block containing the following:
(a) Project name or identifying title including the words
"preliminary plan."
(b) Address or physical description describing where the project is
located.
(c) Plan date and dates of all revisions.
(d) Name and address of the owner or applicant.
(3) Name, address, and telephone number of the individual or firm
preparing the plan, assigned project number and name, signature
registration number, and seal of engineer, surveyor or landscape
architect involved in preparation of the plan.
(4) North arrow.
(5) Graphic and written scale.
(6) A location map of a sufficient size and scale to clearly show the
location of the property in relation to the surrounding area. It
should include the roadway system, municipal boundaries, and
community facilities within 1/2 mile of the project area. (May be
taken from a U.S.G.S. quadrangle map with sheet name identified.)
(7) Deed book and page number and tax parcel identification number
of the tract to be subdivided or developed.
(8) Total acreage of the entire existing tract.
§ 315-29 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-30
290:280
(9) The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances showing the
relationship of the proposed development to the entire tract and, at
the request of the Borough, all prior conveyances.
(10) Owner's names, deed book and page numbers, and parcel
identification numbers of adjacent unplotted land and the names
and deed book and page numbers of all abutting recorded
subdivisions.
(11) Schedule or table of zoning district requirements, including lot
area and bulk regulations, density building and impervious
coverage, and yard requirements.
(12) Zoning for adjacent lands if different from tract to be subdivided or
developed.
(13) The list of any waivers along with supporting evidence that are
requested in accordance with § 315-80 of this chapter.
B. Existing site characteristics. The following existing conditions will be
shown on the plan:
(1) Topographic contours at one-foot vertical intervals for land with
average slope less than 25% and, at a minimum, two-foot vertical
intervals for slopes greater than 25%. One-foot topographic
contours may be required for more densely developed projects or
when deemed appropriate by Borough Council. Contours will be
accompanied by the location of the benchmark and notation
indicating the datum used.
(2) Steep slopes delineated as areas 16% to 25% and areas greater
than 25%.
(3) Soil types and boundaries as shown in the Union County Soil
Survey.
(4) Prominent natural and topographic features including but not
limited to watercourses, wetlands, drainage channels, sinkholes,
rock outcroppings, regulatory 100-year floodplains and floodways,
tree masses, plant and wildlife habitat for rare, threatened or
endangered species, areas identified in the Union County Natural
Areas Inventory and other pertinent elements that may influence
design. Additionally, the preliminary plan will indicate any
proposed disturbance, encroachment, or alteration to such features
when located upon the site proposed for development.
(5) General vegetative cover of the site including a brief description
and type (e.g., meadow, woodland, transitional).
(6) A note on the plan indicating whether the site is/is not underlain by
carbonate geology (limestone and dolomite).
§ 315-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-30
290:281
(7) Location of quarry sites, solid waste disposal areas, illegal dumps,
EPA Superfund sites, hazardous waste contamination, and other
potentially hazardous conditions on the site and on adjacent tracts.
(8) Approximate location and source of information for significant
historic and cultural features such as cemeteries, burial sites,
archaeological sites, historic buildings, structures, plaques,
markers, or monuments on the subject tract and within 200 feet on
adjacent tracts.
(9) All existing or recorded streets, roads, alleys, or other means of
access and easements on or adjacent to the tract, including name
or number, ownership, right-of-way or easement width, width and
condition of pavement and grades, and, in the case of easements,
the purpose for which they were created.
(10) The location, width, and ownership of associated right-of-way or
easement for any of the following features: existing buildings,
storm and sanitary sewers, water supply lines, culverts, natural gas
lines, on-lot sewage facilities, petroleum or petroleum products
lines, power transmission and telephone lines, fire hydrants,
stormwater management facilities, cellular towers, railroads, trails,
wellhead protection areas and other significant man-made features
on or adjacent to the site.
(11) Location and material of all existing permanent monuments and lot
line markers.
C. Proposed site conditions. The following proposed conditions will be
shown on the plan:
(1) Tabulation of site data, including total acreage of land to be
subdivided or developed, number of lots, proposed density, number
of dwelling units, existing land use, proposed land use, acreage of
any proposed open space or other public/common areas, amount of
impervious area and the amount of tract residual. Site plans for
multifamily residential and nonresidential uses will also show the
total square footage of all proposed buildings, percent of lot
coverage, number of parking spaces required, and the number of
parking spaces provided.
(2) All building setback lines, with distances as required by the
Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Lot layout with lot lines, approximate dimensions, and lot square
footage.
(4) Block and lot numbers in a consecutive and clockwise or left to
right order.
(5) Exact location, name, width, and grade of proposed streets, alleys,
driveways, or other means of access.
§ 315-30 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-30
290:282
(6) Location and width of rights-of-way and cartways.
(7) Delineation of clear sight triangles and sight distances.
(8) Design information for horizontal curves (degree of curvature,
point of tangents, radius, arc length, chords, etc.).
(9) Length of tangents between reverse curves.
(10) Curb radii at intersections and intersection equalities between
streets.
(11) Location of curbs and gutters.
(12) Location of sidewalks, trails and ramps showing width, grades, and
applicable ADA accessibility requirements.
(13) Location of streetlights, street name signs, and traffic control
devices and/or signs and pavement markings.
(14) Location and type of vegetation to be planted between curb and
shoulder and right-of-way line.
(15) Location and species of shade trees within street rights-of-way.
(16) Lighting plan in accordance with §§ 315-48D and 315-51A(10) of
this chapter indicating the types, size, quantity and location of light
fixtures.
(17) Proposed public buildings and areas, playgrounds, reserved areas,
and open space areas, including any related conditions or
restrictions.
(18) Identification of buildings and historic features proposed to be
demolished.
(19) Location, width, and intended use of utility, drainage, and all other
proposed easements.
(20) Location and pipe inside diameter of stormwater, sanitary sewer,
and water mains and laterals to each lot.
(21) Location of fire hydrants and other operational water main
infrastructure.
(22) Location of all proposed stormwater management and erosion
control facilities.
D. Other required information and reports to be submitted.
(1) Copies of private deed restrictions, covenants, grants of
easements, homeowner and business association agreements or
other restrictions.
(2) Preliminary design of proposed bridges and culverts.
§ 315-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-30
290:283
(3) Typical street cross section for each proposed street, and typical
cross section for any existing street that will be improved as part of
the application. Each cross section will include the entire right-ofway
width and show materials for base and surfacing as well as
method of construction.
(4) Street centerline profile for each proposed street showing finished
grade at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch
equals five feet vertical or other appropriate legible scales.
(5) A grading plan showing all final topographic contours and cross
sections for cut and fill areas for general site development
activities, including parking areas, buildings, stormwater facilities,
etc.
(6) Typical curb and gutter design, materials, and method of
construction.
(7) Typical sidewalk or trail design, materials, and method of
construction.
(8) A sewage facilities plan and/or engineering feasibility study and
required documentation in accordance with § 315-53 of this
chapter.
(9) A water facilities plan and required documentation in accordance
with § 315-54 of this chapter.
(10) For proposals to be served by an existing public water and/or sewer
service provider(s), a letter of intent or an executed agreement to
provide service from the service provider(s).
(11) A Stormwater Management and Drainage Plan and narrative
including runoff calculations with complete hydrologic and
hydraulic design and analysis of all conveyance and control
facilities in accordance with Lewisburg Borough Ordinance 964 of
2005.
(12) When the preliminary plan covers only a part of the applicant's
holdings, a sketch of proposed streets and sanitary, storm sewer
and water lines for the remainder of the tract.
(13) Estimated cost of all improvements, including an itemized list of
components of work with quantities, unit cost, and total cost.
(14) For a preliminary plan indicating phased installation of
improvements, a schedule detailing all proposed sections as well as
deadlines when it is expected that applications for final plan
approval for each section will be filed.
(15) A landscaping plan in accordance with § 315-52 of this chapter.
§ 315-30 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-30
290:284
(16) An erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan and narrative
showing all erosion and sedimentation control measures,
temporary as well as permanent, and a letter from the Union
County Conservation District stating that the proposed measures
meet all state, federal and local requirements.
(17) If any portion of the project is in a floodplain area, documentation
indicating compliance with all applicable laws and regulations of
the Borough and of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PA DEP).
(18) Copies of required permits from the PA DEP and/or other
appropriate regulatory agencies for any proposed alteration,
excavation, relocation, encroachment, or obstruction of a
watercourse.
(19) A community impact analysis, natural features analysis, and traffic
engineering study in accordance with §§ 315-44 and 315-64 of this
chapter for all subdivision or land development proposals of 25 lots
or more or for a proposal that generates more than 200 vehicle
trips per day.
(20) When the tract contains a natural gas pipeline, petroleum or
petroleum products pipeline, an electric transmission line,
telecommunications line, or other utility a letter from the owner or
lessee of such utility stating the minimum setback distance and
other requirements pertaining to such features or valid occupancy
permit from the utility provider.
(21) A letter from the Union County Emergency Communications
Center verifying approval of proposed subdivision and road names.
(22) When the land included in the subject tract has agricultural,
woodland, or other natural resource protection easement(s)
located within the tract, a letter from the party holding the
easement(s) stating any conditions on the use of the land.
(23) When lots require access onto a state route or highway, a PennDOT
Highway Occupancy Permit (HOP) or a letter from PennDOT
indicating a HOP can be obtained. When lots require access onto a
Borough street, a Borough driveway permit if applicable.
(24) When the proposed subdivision or land development site contains
hazardous substances or groundwater contamination a
geotechnical report, a remedial investigation/feasibility study, and
a remediation plan. For sites that formerly contained hazardous
substances or groundwater contamination, a letter(s) from
applicable state and federal agencies verifying that the site meets
the remediation standards for the proposed use.
(25) All applicable plan processing applications and review fees in
accordance with Article IV of this chapter.
§ 315-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-30
290:285
§ 315-31. Final plan.
All final plan applications, except those for minor subdivisions (see
§ 315-32) will be prepared in accordance with this section to provide
sufficient design information to demonstrate conformance with the
requirements of this chapter.
E. Certification and notification.
(1) Certificate, signature and seal of the professional land surveyor
certifying the accuracy of the survey.
(2) Certificate, signature, and seal of the landscape architect, surveyor,
or professional engineer that all other details on and accompanying
the plan are correct.
(3) Certification of ownership in the form of a notarized statement by
the owner(s) certifying ownership of the property.
(4) Preliminary plan recommendation for approval block for Lewisburg
Borough Planning Commission with a signature line for Planning
Commission Chairperson.
(5) Preliminary plan approval certification block for Lewisburg
Borough Council, with signature lines for Borough Council
President and Vice President.
(6) Plan recommendation block for Union County Planning
Commission.
(7) Notation on the plan of any waivers granted by Borough Council
pursuant to this chapter.
(8) Notation on the plan of any variances granted in accordance with
the Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance.35
A. Project description and location. For final plan applications the
following will be shown or, where appropriate, accompany the plan.
(1) A brief narrative describing the proposed project.
(2) Title block containing the following:
(a) Project name or identifying title including the words "final
plan."
(b) Address or physical description describing where the project is
located.
(c) Plan date and dates of all revisions.
(d) Name and address of the owner or applicant.
35.Editor's Note: See Chapter 360, Zoning.
§ 315-30 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-31
290:286
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the individual or firm
preparing the plan; assigned project number; and name, signature,
registration number and seal of engineer, surveyor or landscape
architect involved in preparation of the plan.
(4) North arrow.
(5) Graphic and written scale.
(6) A location map of a sufficient size and scale to clearly show the
location of the property in relation to the surrounding area. It
should include the roadway system, municipal boundaries, and
community facilities within 1/2 mile of the project area. (May be
taken from a U.S.G.S. quadrangle map with sheet name identified.)
(7) Deed book and page number and tax parcel identification number
of the tract to be subdivided or developed.
(8) Total acreage of the entire existing tract.
(9) The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances showing the
relationship of the proposed development to the entire tract and at
the request of the Borough, all prior conveyances.
(10) Owners' names, deed book and page numbers, and parcel
identification numbers of adjacent unplotted land and the names
and deed book and page numbers of all abutting recorded
subdivisions.
(11) Schedule or table of zoning district requirements, including lot
area and bulk regulations, density building and impervious
coverage, and yard requirements.
(12) Zoning for adjacent lands if different from tract to be subdivided or
developed.
(13) The list of any waivers along with supporting evidence that are
requested in accordance with § 315-80 of this chapter.
B. Existing site characteristics. The following existing conditions will be
shown on the plan:
(1) Topographic contours at one-foot vertical intervals for land with
average slope less than 25% and, at a minimum, two-foot vertical
intervals for slopes greater than 25%. One-foot topographic
contours may be required for more densely developed projects or
when deemed appropriate by Borough Council. Contours will be
accompanied by the location of the benchmark and notation
indicating the datum used.
(2) Steep slopes delineated as areas 16% to 25% and areas greater
than 25%.
§ 315-31 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-31
290:287
(3) Soil types and boundaries as shown in the Union County Soil
Survey.
(4) Prominent natural and topographic features, including but not
limited to watercourses, wetlands, drainage channels, sinkholes,
rock outcroppings, regulatory 100-year floodplains and floodways,
tree masses, plant and wildlife habitat for rare, threatened, or
endangered species, areas identified in the Union County Natural
Areas Inventory, and other pertinent elements that may influence
design. Additionally the final plan will indicate any proposed
disturbance, encroachment, or alteration to such features when
located upon the site proposed for development.
(5) General vegetative cover of the site including a brief description
and type (e.g., meadow, woodland, transitional).
(6) A note on the plan indicating whether the site is/is not underlain by
carbonate geology (limestone and dolomite).
(7) Location of quarry sites, solid waste disposal areas, illegal dumps,
EPA Superfund sites, hazardous waste contamination and other
potentially hazardous conditions on the site and on adjacent tracts.
(8) Approximate location and source of information for significant
historic and cultural features such as cemeteries, burial sites,
archaeological sites, historic buildings, structures, plaques,
markers, or monuments on the subject tract and within 200 feet on
adjacent tracts.
(9) All existing or recorded streets, roads, alleys or other means of
access and easements on or adjacent to the tract, including name
or number, ownership, right-of-way or easement width, width and
condition of pavement and grades, and, in the case of easements,
the purpose for which they were created.
(10) The location, width, and ownership of associated right-of-way or
easement for any of the following features: existing buildings,
storm and sanitary sewers, water supply lines, culverts, natural gas
lines, on-lot sewage facilities, petroleum or petroleum product
lines, power transmission and telephone lines, fire hydrants,
stormwater management facilities, cellular towers, railroads, trails,
wellhead protection areas, and other significant man-made
features on or adjacent to the site.
(11) Location and material of all existing permanent monuments and lot
line markers.
C. Proposed site conditions. The following proposed conditions will be
shown on the plan.
(1) Tabulation of site data, including total acreage of land to be
subdivided or developed, number of lots, proposed density, number
§ 315-31 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-31
290:288
of dwelling units, existing land use, proposed land use, acreage of
any proposed open space or other public/common areas, amount
of impervious area and the amount of tract residual. Site plans
for multifamily residential and nonresidential uses will also show
the total square footage of all proposed buildings, percent of lot
coverage, number of parking spaces required, and the number of
parking spaces provided.
(2) All building setback lines, with distances as required by the
Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Lot layout with lot lines, exact dimensions, lot square footage and
location and material of all permanent monuments and lot line
markers, including a note that all monuments and lot line markers
are set.
(4) Block and lot numbers in a consecutive and clockwise or left to
right order.
(5) Exact location, name, width, and grade of proposed streets, alleys,
driveways, or other means of access.
(6) Location and width of rights-of-way and cartways.
(7) Delineation of clear sight triangles and sight distances.
(8) Design information for horizontal curves (degree of curvature,
point of tangents, radius, arc length, chords, etc.).
(9) Length of tangents between reverse curves.
(10) Curb radii at intersections and intersection equalities between
streets.
(11) Location of curbs and gutters.
(12) Location of sidewalks, trails and ramps showing width, grades, and
applicable ADA accessibility requirements.
(13) Location of streetlights, street name signs and traffic control
devices and/or signs and pavement markings.
(14) Location and type of vegetation to be planted between curb and
shoulder and right-of-way line.
(15) Location and species of shade trees within street rights-of-way.
(16) Lighting plan in accordance with §§ 315-48D and 315-51A(10) of
this chapter indicating the types, size, quantity, and location of light
fixtures.
(17) Proposed public buildings and areas, playgrounds, reserved areas,
and open space areas, including any related conditions or
restrictions.
§ 315-31 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-31
290:289
(18) Identification of buildings and historic features proposed for
demolition.
(19) Location, width, and intended use of utility, drainage and all other
proposed easements.
(20) Location and pipe inside diameter of stormwater, sanitary sewer,
and water mains and laterals to each lot.
(21) Location of fire hydrants and other operational water main
infrastructure.
(22) Location of all proposed stormwater management and erosion
control facilities.
(23) Where available from the Union County Tax Assessment Office,
assigned tax parcel identification numbers.
(24) Addresses for each parcel as issued by the Union County
Emergency Communications Center.
D. Other required information and reports to be submitted.
(1) Copies of private deed restrictions, covenants, grants of
easements, homeowner and business association agreements, or
other restrictions.
(2) Final design of proposed bridges and culverts.
(3) Typical street cross section for each proposed street, and typical
cross section for any existing street that will be improved as part of
the application. Each cross section will include the entire right-ofway
width and show materials for base and surfacing as well as
method of construction.
(4) Street centerline profile for each proposed street, showing finished
grade at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch
equals five feet vertical or other appropriate legible scales.
(5) A grading plan showing all final topographic contours and cross
sections for cut and fill areas for general site development
activities, including parking areas, buildings, stormwater facilities,
etc.
(6) Typical curb and gutter design, materials, and method of
construction.
(7) Typical sidewalk or trail design materials and method of
construction.
(8) A sewage facilities plan, engineering feasibility study and required
documentation in accordance with § 315-53 of this chapter.
§ 315-31 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-31
290:290
(9) A water facilities plan and required documentation in accordance
with § 315-54 of this chapter.
(10) For proposals to be served by an existing utility water and/or sewer
service provider(s), a letter of intent or an executed agreement to
provide service from the service provider(s).
(11) A stormwater management and drainage plan and narrative
including runoff calculations with complete hydrologic and
hydraulic design and analysis of all conveyance and control
facilities in accordance with Lewisburg Borough Ordinance 964 of
2005.
(12) When the final plan covers only a part of the applicant's holdings a
sketch of proposed streets and sanitary, storm sewer and water
lines for the remainder of the tract.
(13) Final cost of all improvements, including an itemized list of
components of work, with quantities, unit cost, and total cost.
(14) A fully executed improvements guaranty agreement, including
required financial surety (e.g., irrevocable letter of credit) that sets
forth the responsibilities of all parties regarding the installation
and inspection of the required improvements as per Article VII of
this chapter.
(15) A landscaping plan in accordance with § 315-52 of this chapter.
(16) An erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan and narrative
showing all erosion and sedimentation control measures,
temporary as well as permanent, and a letter from the Union
County Conservation District stating that the proposed measures
meet all state, federal and local requirements.
(17) If any portion of the project is in a floodplain area, documentation
indicating compliance with all applicable laws and regulations of
the Borough and of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PA DEP).
(18) Copies of required permits from the PA DEP and/or other
appropriate regulatory agencies for any proposed alteration,
excavation, relocation, encroachment, or obstruction of a
watercourse.
(19) A community impact analysis, natural features analysis, and traffic
engineering study in accordance with §§ 315-44 and 315-64 of this
chapter for all subdivision or land development proposals of 25 lots
or more or for a proposal that generates more than 200 vehicle
trips per day.
(20) When the tract contains a natural gas pipeline, petroleum or
petroleum products pipeline, an electric transmission line,
telecommunications line or other utility, a letter from the owner or
§ 315-31 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-31
290:291
lessee of such utility stating the minimum setback distance and
other requirements pertaining to such features or a valid
occupancy permit from the utility provider.
(21) A letter from the Union County Emergency Communications
Center verifying approval of proposed subdivision and road names.
(22) Letter(s) from the appropriate Union County agencies verifying
approval of assigned lot addresses, and tax parcel identification
numbers.
(23) When the land included in the subject tract has agricultural,
woodland, or other natural resource protection easement(s)
located within the tract, a letter from the party holding the
easement(s) stating any conditions on the use of the land.
(24) When lots require access onto a state route or highway, a PennDOT
highway occupancy permit (HOP) or a letter from PennDOT
indicating a HOP can be obtained. When lots require access onto a
Borough street, a Borough driveway permit if applicable.
(25) When the proposed subdivision or land development site contains
hazardous substances or groundwater contamination, a
geotechnical report, a remedial investigation/feasibility study, and
a remediation plan. For sites that formerly contained hazardous
substances or groundwater contamination, a letter(s) from
applicable state and federal agencies verifying that the site meets
the remediation standards for the proposed use.
(26) All applicable plan processing applications and review fees in
accordance with Article IV of this chapter.
E. Certification and notification.
(1) Certificate, signature and seal of the professional land surveyor
certifying the accuracy of the survey.
(2) Certificate, signature and seal of the landscape architect, surveyor
or professional engineer that all other details on and accompanying
the plan are correct.
(3) Certification of ownership in the form of a notarized statement by
the owner(s) certifying ownership of the property.
(4) Final plan recommendation for approval block for Lewisburg
Borough Planning Commission with a signature line for Planning
Commission Chairperson.
(5) Final plan approval certification block for Lewisburg Borough
Council with a signature lines for Borough Council President.
§ 315-31 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-31
290:292
§ 315-32. Minor subdivision plan.
All final plan applications for minor subdivisions may be prepared in
accordance with this section.
(6) A four-inch by two-inch space in the upper left-hand corner to
accommodate the Certification Block of the Union County Recorder
of Deeds Office.
(7) A certificate of dedication of streets, sidewalks, and other public
property.
(8) A notification placed on the plan indicating any areas and/or
improvement(s) that are not to be offered for dedication.
(9) Notation on the plan of any waivers granted by the Borough
Council pursuant to this chapter.
(10) Notation on the plan of any variances granted in accordance with
the Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance.36
A. Project description and location. For all final plan applications for minor
subdivisions the following will be shown on or, where appropriate,
accompany the plan.
(1) A brief narrative describing the proposed project.
(2) Title block containing the following:
(a) Project name or identifying title including the words "final
plan-minor subdivision."
(b) Address or physical description describing where the project is
located.
(c) Plan date and dates of all revisions.
(d) Name and address of the owner or applicant.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the individual or firm
preparing the plan, assigned project number and name, signature,
registration number, and seal of engineer, surveyor or landscape
architect involved in preparation of the plan.
(4) North arrow.
(5) Graphic and written scale.
(6) A location map of a sufficient size and scale to clearly show the
location of the property in relation to the surrounding area. It
should include the roadway system, municipal boundaries and
36.Editor's Note: See Chapter 360, Zoning.
§ 315-31 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-32
290:293
community facilities within 1/2 mile of the project area. (May be
taken from a U.S.G.S. quadrangle map with sheet name identified.)
(7) Deed book and page number and tax parcel identification number
of the tract to be subdivided or developed.
(8) Total acreage of the entire existing tract.
(9) The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances showing the
relationship of the proposed development to the entire tract and, at
the request of the Borough, all prior conveyances.
(10) Owner's names, deed book and page numbers, and parcel
identification numbers of adjacent unplotted land and the names
and deed book and page numbers of all abutting recorded
subdivisions.
(11) Schedule or table of zoning district requirements, including lot
area and bulk regulations, density, building and impervious
coverage, and yard requirements.
(12) Zoning for adjacent lands if different from tract to be subdivided or
developed.
(13) The list of any waivers along with supporting evidence that are
requested in accordance with § 315-80 of this chapter.
B. Existing site characteristics. The following existing conditions will be
shown on the plan.
(1) Topographic contours at one-foot vertical intervals for land with
average slope less than 25% and, at a minimum two-foot vertical
intervals for slopes greater than 25%. One-foot topographic
contours may be required for more densely developed projects or
when deemed appropriate by Borough Council. Contours will be
accompanied by the location of the benchmark and notation
indicating the datum used.
(2) Steep slopes delineated as areas 16% to 25% and areas greater
than 25%.
(3) Soil types and boundaries as shown in the Union County Soil
Survey.
(4) Prominent natural and topographic features, including, but not
limited to, watercourses, wetlands, drainage channels, sinkholes,
rock outcroppings, regulatory 100-year floodplains and floodways,
tree masses, plant and wildlife habitat for rare, threatened, or
endangered species, areas identified in the Union County natural
areas inventory, and other pertinent elements that may influence
design. Additionally the plan will indicate any proposed
disturbance, encroachment, or alteration to such features when
located upon the site proposed for development.
§ 315-32 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-32
290:294
(5) General vegetative cover of the site including a brief description
and type (e.g., meadow, woodland, transitional).
(6) A note on the plan indicating whether the site is/is not underlain by
carbonate geology (limestone and dolomite).
(7) Location of quarry sites, solid waste disposal areas, illegal dumps,
EPA Superfund sites, hazardous waste contamination and other
potentially hazardous conditions on the site and on adjacent tracts.
(8) Approximate location and source of information for significant
historic and cultural features such as cemeteries, burial sites,
archaeological sites, historic buildings, structures, plaques,
markers, or monuments on the subject tract and within 200 feet on
adjacent tracts.
(9) All existing or recorded streets, roads, alleys, or other means of
access and easements on or adjacent to the tract, including name
or number, ownership, right-of-way or easement width, width and
condition of pavement and grades, and, in the case of easements,
the purpose for which they were created.
(10) The location, width, and ownership of associated right-of-way or
easement for any of the following features: existing buildings,
storm and sanitary sewers, water supply lines, culverts, natural gas
lines, on-lot sewage facilities, petroleum or petroleum product
lines, power transmission and telephone lines, fire hydrants,
stormwater management facilities, cellular towers, railroads, trails,
wellhead protection areas, and other significant man-made
features on or adjacent to the site.
(11) Location and material of all existing permanent monuments and lot
line markers.
C. Proposed site conditions. The following proposed conditions will be
shown on the plan:
(1) Tabulation of site data, including total acreage of land to be
subdivided or developed, number of lots, proposed density, number
of dwelling units, existing land use, proposed land use, acreage of
any proposed open space or other public/common areas, amount of
impervious area and the amount of tract residual. Site plans for
multifamily residential and nonresidential uses will also show the
total square footage of all proposed buildings, percent of lot
coverage, number of parking spaces required, and the number of
parking spaces provided.
(2) All building setback lines, with distances as required by the
Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Lot layout with lot lines, exact dimensions, lot square footage, and
location and material of all permanent monuments and lot line
§ 315-32 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-32
290:295
markers, including a note that all monuments and lot line markers
are set.
(4) Block and lot numbers in a consecutive and clockwise or left to
right order.
(5) Location and width of rights-of-way and cartways.
(6) Delineation of clear sight triangles and sight distances.
(7) Identification of buildings and historic features proposed to be
demolished.
(8) Location, width, and intended use of utility, drainage, and all other
proposed easements.
(9) Location of all proposed stormwater management and erosion
control facilities.
(10) Assigned tax parcel identification numbers from the Union County
Tax Assessment Office and addresses for each parcel as issued by
the Union County Emergency Communications Center.
D. Other required information and reports to be submitted where
applicable.
(1) Copies of private deed restrictions, covenants, grants of
easements, homeowner and business association agreements or
other restrictions.
(2) A sewage facilities plan, engineering feasibility study and required
documentation, in accordance with § 315-53 of this chapter.
(3) A stormwater management and drainage plan and narrative
including runoff calculations with complete hydrologic and
hydraulic design and analysis of all conveyance and control
facilities in accordance with Lewisburg Borough Ordinance 964 of
2005.
(4) An erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan and narrative
showing all erosion and sedimentation control measures,
temporary as well as permanent, and a letter from the Union
County Conservation District stating that the proposed measures
meet all state, federal and local requirements.
(5) If any portion of the project is in a floodplain area, documentation
indicating compliance with all applicable laws and regulations of
the Borough and of the PA DEP.
(6) Copies of required permits from the PA DEP and/or other
appropriate regulatory agencies for any proposed alteration,
excavation, relocation, encroachment, or obstruction of a
watercourse.
§ 315-32 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-32
290:296
(7) When the tract contains a natural gas pipeline, petroleum or
petroleum products pipeline, an electric transmission line,
telecommunications line, or other utility, a letter from the owner or
lessee of such utility stating the minimum setback distance and
other requirements pertaining to such features or a valid
occupancy permit from the utility provider.
(8) Letter(s) from the appropriate Union County agencies verifying
approval of assigned lot addresses and tax parcel identification
numbers.
(9) When the land included in the subject tract has agricultural,
woodland, or other natural resource protection easement(s)
located within the tract, a letter from the party holding the
easement(s) stating any conditions on the use of the land.
(10) When lots require access onto a state route or highway, a PennDOT
highway occupancy permit (HOP) or a letter from PennDOT
indicating a HOP can be obtained. When lots require access onto a
Borough street, a Borough driveway permit if applicable.
(11) When the proposed subdivision or land development site contains
hazardous substances or groundwater contamination a
geotechnical report, a remedial investigation/feasibility study, and
a remediation plan. For sites that formerly contained hazardous
substances or groundwater contamination, a letter(s) from
applicable state and federal agencies verifying that the site meets
the remediation standards for the proposed use.
(12) All applicable plan processing applications and review fees in
accordance with Article IV of this chapter.
E. Certification and notification.
(1) Certificate, signature, and seal of the professional land surveyor
certifying the accuracy of the survey.
(2) Certificate, signature, and seal of the landscape architect, surveyor,
or professional engineer that all other details on and accompanying
the plan are correct.
(3) Certification of ownership in the form of a notarized statement by
the owner(s) certifying ownership of the property.
(4) Final plan recommendation for approval block for Lewisburg
Borough Planning Commission with a signature line for Planning
Commission Chairperson.
(5) Final plan approval certification block for Lewisburg Borough
Council with a signature line for Borough Council President.
§ 315-32 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-32
290:297
§ 315-33. Lot addition and lot consolidation plans.
Lot addition and lot consolidation plans will be subject to the plan
requirements in this section. When no new subdivision or land development
activity is proposed, surveys to correct survey errors of existing lots of
record and/or for property transfer purposes will also be prepared in
accordance with this section.
(6) A four-inch-by-two-inch space in the upper left-hand corner to
accommodate the certification block of the Union County Recorder
of Deeds Office.
(7) Notation on the plan of any waivers granted by the Borough
Council pursuant to this chapter.
(8) Notation on the plan of any variances granted in accordance with
the Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance.
A. Project description and location. For all final plan applications for lot
additions and lot consolidations the following will be shown on or,
where appropriate, accompany the plan.
(1) A brief narrative describing the proposed project.
(2) Title block containing the following:
(a) Project name or identifying title including the words "lot
addition" or "lot consolidation."
(b) Address or physical description describing where the project is
located.
(c) Plan date and dates of all revisions.
(d) Name and address of the owner or applicant.
(3) Name, address, telephone number of the individual or firm
preparing the plan, assigned project number, name, signature,
registration number and seal of engineer, surveyor or landscape
architect involved in preparation of the plan.
(4) North arrow.
(5) Graphic and written scale.
(6) Site location map of a sufficient size and scale to clearly show the
location of the property, its relation to the surrounding area
including roadway system, municipal boundaries, and community
facilities within 1/2 mile of the project area. (May be taken from a
U.S.G.S. quadrangle map with sheet name identified.)
(7) Deed book and page number and tax parcel identification number
of the subject tract(s) and/or those to be subdivided.
§ 315-32 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-33
290:298
(8) Owner's names, deed book and page numbers, and parcel
identification numbers of adjacent unplotted land and the names
and deed book and page numbers of all abutting recorded
subdivisions.
(9) Total acreage of the entire existing tracts.
(10) The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances.
(11) Schedule or table of zoning district requirements indicating lot
area, width and density.
B. Existing site characteristics. The following existing conditions will be
shown on the plan.
(1) All existing or recorded streets, roads, alleys or other means of
access and easements on the subject tract(s), including name or
number, ownership, right-of-way or easement width, and, in the
case of easements, the purpose for which they were created.
(2) Location and material of all existing permanent monuments and lot
line markers.
C. Proposed site conditions. The following proposed conditions will be
shown on the plan:
(1) Lot layout with lot lines, exact dimensions, lot square footage, and
location and material of all permanent monuments and lot line
markers, including a note that all monuments and lot line markers
are set.
(2) Assigned tax parcel identification numbers from the Union County
Tax Assessment Office and addresses for each parcel as issued by
the Union County Emergency Communications Center.
D. Other required information and reports to be submitted.
(1) Copies of private deed restrictions, covenants, grants of
easements, homeowner association agreements, or other
restrictions.
(2) When the land included in the subject tract has agricultural,
woodland, or other natural resource protection easement(s)
located within the tract, a letter from the party holding the
easement(s) stating any conditions on the use of the land.
(3) All applicable plan processing applications and review fees in
accordance with Article IV of this chapter.
E. Certification and notification.
(1) Certificate, signature, and seal of the professional land surveyor
certifying the accuracy of the survey.
§ 315-33 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-33
290:299
§ 315-34. As-built plan.
(2) Certificate, signature and seal of the landscape architect, surveyor
or professional engineer that all other details on and accompanying
the plan are correct.
(3) Certification of ownership in the form of a notarized statement by
the owner(s) certifying ownership of the property.
(4) Final plan recommendation for approval block for Lewisburg
Borough Planning Commission with a signature line for Planning
Commission Chairperson.
(5) Final plan approval certification block for Lewisburg Borough
Council with a signature line for Borough Council President.
(6) A four-inch-by-two-inch space in the upper left-hand corner to
accommodate the certification block of the Union County Recorder
of Deeds Office.
(7) Notation on the plan of any waivers granted by the Borough
Council pursuant to this chapter.
(8) Notation on the plan of any variances granted in accordance with
the Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance.37
(9) Appropriate notation indicating purpose of plan, e.g., lot additions,
lot consolidations, tract surveys, correction of previous survey
errors, etc.
A. Prior to the final release of the financial security by the Borough
Council, and prior to acceptance of dedication of any improvements
easements or rights-of-way the developer will provide the Borough with
two paper prints of the as-constructed plan prepared and certified by a
professional engineer or land surveyor, at the same size and scale of the
approved plans, showing the following:
(1) Actual location of all concrete monuments and/or markers which
were found or set at all angle breaks, points of curvature and
tangents around the perimeter of the total tract. When the outside
perimeter of a tract falls within or along an existing road right-ofway,
then the right-of-way of that roadway will be monumented at
the above referenced points.
(2) Actual location of all iron pins or drill holes in curbs for all
individual lot lines.
(3) Actual cul-de-sac radius.
(4) Actual horizontal location of cartway centerline versus right-of-way
centerline should be indicated by dimension.
37.Editor's Note: See Chapter 360, Zoning.
§ 315-33 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-34
290:300
(5) Actual horizontal location of floodplain by elevation and dimension
from property line.
(6) Actual horizontal location and cross section of swales and
accompanying easements.
(7) Actual horizontal and vertical location of stormwater management
facilities including type and size of drainage pipes.
(8) Retention and detention basin:
(a) Actual contours of the detention basin.
(b) Actual outlet structure details including type size and inverts
of outlet pipes.
(c) Actual elevation of the embankment and emergency spillway.
§ 315-34 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-34
290:301

ARTICLE VI
Design Standards for Proposed Improvements and Other
Requirements
§ 315-35. General requirements.
§ 315-36. Hazardous areas.
Those lands that are subject to hazards of life, health, or property as
may arise from fire, flood, disease, geologic conditions, excessive slopes,
contamination by hazardous materials and substances, unstable soils or
soils of inadequate weight-bearing strength and sites with very poor access
or considered to be uninhabitable for other reasons, will not be approved
for development unless the hazards have been eliminated or adequate
safeguards and/or remediation have been taken to the satisfaction of the
Borough Council to prevent further aggravation to and damage from such
hazards.
§ 315-37. Blocks.
A. The principles, standards, and requirements of this article will be
applied by the Borough Council in evaluating and reviewing proposed
subdivision and land development plans and will be considered the
minimum allowable standard. The Borough Council may impose more
restrictive standards where it is deemed appropriate or necessary in
order to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.
B. Land will be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided or
developed.
C. The location and design of all subdivisions and land developments will
conform to and be generally consistent with the Lewisburg Borough
Comprehensive Plan, the Union County Comprehensive Plan, and any
and all other plans and official maps duly adopted by the Borough and
County pertaining to subdivisions and land developments.
D. New subdivisions and land developments will be coordinated with all
existing or proposed developments on adjacent properties in order to
provide for the harmonious development of the entire area.
E. The location and design of all subdivision and land developments will
conform to the Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance. The Borough
Council will not grant plan approval until the Borough Zoning Officer
certifies that the plan is consistent with local zoning requirements.
A. Blocks for residential developments will generally have a minimum
length of 300 feet and a maximum length of 1,000 feet.
B. Residential blocks will be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers
of lots. Exceptions to this may be permitted for double or reverse
frontage lots that border an arterial or collector street or where a
barrier such as a watercourse or railroad is present.
§ 315-35 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-37
290:303
§ 315-38. Lot standards.
C. The depth and width of blocks in nonresidential areas may vary from
§ 513-38A and B and will be determined by the nature of the use in
order to serve the public convenience. Nonresidential blocks will be
adequate to provide for safe and convenient traffic circulation, offstreet
parking and loading areas, setbacks, and landscaping as required
by this chapter and the Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance.
A. General lot standards.
(1) Lots will be laid out to provide buildable areas, reasonable access,
usable yards, and open space areas with minimum disturbance to
the site.
(2) The soil, geologic, and topographic conditions of the site should be
compatible with proposed lot uses.
(3) The configuration of lots will be based upon the minimum and
maximum lot area requirements, the salient natural features,
existing improvements, proposed improvements and the adjacent
development pattern.
(4) Lot configurations should provide for safe vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
(5) Lots that are two or more times the minimum lot area requirements
will be designed with configurations that allow for additional
subdivision.
B. Specific lot requirements.
(1) Lot lines will follow zoning district boundaries rather than cross
them. Should a lot be divided by a zoning district boundary the
minimum standards of each district will apply.
(2) Side lot lines will be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines.
(3) All lots will front on and have access to an existing or proposed
public street or a private street in accordance with §§ 315-43 and
315-50 of this chapter.
(4) Lots that require access to an arterial or collector street will be
avoided. Where lots adjoin arterial or collector streets access to
said lots will be from local streets, service roads, or marginal
access roads.
(5) Lots will be laid out and graded to provide proper drainage away
from all buildings.
(6) All portions of a tract will be developed so that no landlocked area
will be created.
§ 315-37 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-38
290:304
§ 315-39. Lot or area requirements.
The minimum lot or area requirements will be determined by the Lewisburg
Borough Zoning Ordinance.38
§ 315-40. Building setback lines.
Building setback lines will be determined by the Lewisburg Borough Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 315-41. Monuments and markers.
(7) Corner lots will have additional width to permit sufficient setbacks
from both streets.
(8) Double frontage lots are prohibited except where provided as
reverse frontage lots to reduce driveway intersections along a
street with a high volume of vehicular movements.
A. All pins, monuments, and markers will be established by a professional
land surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The work
will be performed in accordance with criteria recognized by the
professional licensing board. No existing property line evidence will be
disturbed or removed in the course of establishing and locating
boundaries but will be located and identified on a property survey plan
and labeled as is deemed necessary to delineate ownership.
B. Monuments, pins, or markers will consist of the following materials and
dimensions and will be embedded no less than 30 inches:
(1) Monuments. Concrete will be at least four inches by four inches by
36 inches or similar circular area with a permanent distinguishing
magnetic mark identifying the point on the property.
(2) Pins and markers. Steel and other similar durable all weather
permanent marker materials will be at least 36 inches long and 1/2
inch in diameter. Railroad spikes or similar products can be used to
locate intersections of streets and property corners within paved
surfaces.
(3) For newly erected monuments it is recommended that a brightly
colored wooden stake at least one inch by two inches by 36 inches
be placed near the monument and/or colored flagging be placed on
the monument. Survey caps and underground magnetic markers
may also be utilized in conjunction with bars used for markers.
C. It is encouraged that all boundary surveys and monuments be located in
reference to the established control for the Union County GIS mapping.
Surveys and subdivisions that are located within 1,500 feet of a Union
County GIS Monument will be tied to that monument with bearings to
38.Editor's Note: See Chapter 360, Zoning.
§ 315-38 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-41
290:305
§ 315-42. Easements.
Easements for sanitary sewer, water supply, stormwater drainage facilities,
public or private utilities, and pedestrian access will meet the standards of
this section.
the nearest second and dimensions to the nearest hundredth of a foot
to identify the coordinates of at least two monuments.
D. Monuments will be placed at all newly established property corners and
right-of-way lines to identify the intersection of adjoining properties
separately deeded properties of the same ownership, and access, utility,
and drainage easements. Curved lines will be identified at the points of
tangent and changing degree of curvature.
E. In subdivisions of 10 lots or greater, a minimum of two permanent
reference monuments will be established in the external boundary of
the subdivision where the bar is set in concrete to meet the standards of
a monument.
F. Monuments for new subdivision or land development projects will be
set prior to final plan approval. Monuments disturbed during
construction will be reestablished by the professional land surveyor
promptly at the completion of construction activities, but in all cases
prior to any lot sale or building occupation.
G. Maintenance or removal. It will be the responsibility of the subdivider
or developer to see that all monuments or markers are properly
maintained until such time as the lot or tract is conveyed. Maintenance
of such monuments or markers will then become the responsibility of
the new owner. Any monuments or markers that are removed will be
replaced by a registered professional land surveyor at the expense of
the person(s) removing them.
A. Easements will be adjacent to property lines and street rights-of-way to
the fullest extent possible.
B. Nothing will be placed, planted, set, or put within an area of an
easement that would adversely affect the function of the easement or
conflict with the easement agreement.
C. Utility easements. The location and size of utility easements will be
reviewed and approved by the applicable utility company, but such
easements will not be less than 15 feet in width.
D. Drainage easements. Where a subdivision or land development is
traversed by an existing or proposed watercourse, drainage way,
channel, or stream, a drainage easement will be provided that conforms
substantially with the line of such feature at a width adequate to
preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage without damaging
adjacent property. The minimum width of drainage easements will be
15 feet.
§ 315-41 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-42
290:306
§ 315-43. Street system general arrangement.
The following criteria will be considered in the design of streets (including
private streets not dedicated) in all subdivisions and land developments.
E. Stormwater facility easements. Easements will be reserved where
stormwater drainage facilities exist or are proposed and will have a
minimum width of 15 feet extending from the top of bank of any basin,
channel, or berm. They will be adequately designed to provide an area
for the collection and discharge of water, the maintenance, repair, and
reconstruction of the drainage facilities and the passage of machinery
for such work, and to provide ingress and egress from a public right-ofway.
The easement will remain unobstructed at all times; excavation,
the placing of fill, the erecting of buildings or other permanent
structures or the making of any other alterations that may adversely
affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement will be
prohibited.
F. Right of access and maintenance. All easements will clearly identify
who has the right of access and the responsibility for maintenance.
G. Easements, including easement maintenance provisions, will be
prepared in a format specified by the Union County Recorder of Deeds
Office and will be referenced in the deeds of the lots.
A. The arrangement of streets will minimize congestion, avoid hazardous
intersections and provide convenient and safe access to the
accompanying properties.
B. Proposed streets will be coordinated with adjacent existing or proposed
streets and will be planned and designed for the continuation of
existing streets in adjoining areas, the proper projection of streets into
adjoining undeveloped or unplatted areas, and the continuation of
proposed streets to the boundaries of the tract being developed. No
subdivision or land development will be approved that will result in a
tract or parcel of land being landlocked.
C. Streets will be laid out to be harmonious with the existing and proposed
site characteristics, including, but not limited to, slope, best use, parcel
layout, runoff, soil capacity, water table, floodplain, sight distance,
traffic volume and safety, pedestrian use, traffic control, and parking.
D. Curvilinear streets should be utilized only when the historic grid cannot
be extended due to the topography and natural features of the site and
when used will be consistent with adjoining development patterns
topography and natural features.
E. Culs-de-sac and dead-end streets are prohibited.
F. Streets will be laid out to preserve the integrity of their engineering
design.
§ 315-42 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-43
290:307
G. Streets will be laid out to conform as much as possible to the
topography in order to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, to
minimize the number of streets necessary for convenient and safe
access and to result in usable lots and satisfactory street grades.
H. Streets which provide ingress and egress to residential areas of singleand
multiple-family dwellings will be laid out to discourage and
minimize their use by through traffic and to discourage excessive
speeds; however, street connectivity into and from adjacent areas is
encouraged and will generally be required.
I. If lots resulting from a subdivision or land development, including the
tract residual, are large enough for resubdivision, adequate street
right-of-way to permit further subdivision and land development will be
provided as necessary.
J. Where a subdivision or land development abuts a collector or arterial
street, the Borough Council may require an internal street system,
marginal access street, rear service street, reverse frontage lots,
shared driveways, or such other treatment as will provide protection for
abutting properties, reduction in the number of intersections and
driveways with the collector or arterial street, and separation of local
and through traffic.
K. Adequate vehicular and pedestrian access will be provided to all lots.
L. Where streets continue into adjacent municipalities, the applicant will
coordinate the design of the street with both municipalities in order to
ensure uniform cartway widths, pavement cross sections, and other
public improvements.
M. Streets will be designed with drainage grates that are safe for crossing
by bicycles and horse-drawn vehicles.
N. All streets being offered for dedication must meet the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) requirements for liquid fuel
allocation.
O. When streets are offered for dedication the applicant will provide the
required right-of-way, street geometry, street section, drainage
facilities, and traffic control. Additional infrastructure may be required
where design standards warrant further improvements based on traffic
impact studies.
P. Proposed private streets (those not offered for dedication) will meet all
the design standards of this chapter, including but not limited to rightof-
way, curbs, sidewalks, drainage, construction, traffic control, and
setbacks.
Q. Where a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an existing
street right-of-way of improper width or alignment, the Borough
Council may require the dedication or reservation of additional land
§ 315-43 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-43
290:308
§ 315-44. Traffic engineering report.
§ 315-45. Required rights-of-way and cartways.
sufficient to widen the street or correct the alignment. Where an
additional dedication or reservation is required, all building setback
lines will be measured from such dedicated or reserved right-of-way
line.
R. The Borough Council will have the right to determine the classification
of roadway and street systems. This determination, if necessary should
be obtained prior to the design process.
A. The applicant will prepare a traffic engineering report where any of the
following conditions exist:
(1) It is estimated that the subdivision or land development will
generate over 200 vehicle trips a day based upon the Institute of
Transportation Engineers generation rates.
(2) The subdivision or land development will result in the creation of
25 or more lots.
(3) Current traffic problems exist in the local area, such as a high
accident location, a confusing intersection, or a congested
intersection that directly affects access to the subdivision or land
development.
(4) The ability of the existing roadway system to handle increased
traffic or the feasibility of improving the roadway system to handle
increased traffic is limited.
(5) The proposed development alters the transportation patterns on a
public street providing access to the development or proposes the
removal or relocation of a street.
B. The traffic engineering report will be prepared under the supervision of
qualified and experienced transportation engineers with specific
training in traffic and transportation engineering.
C. The traffic engineering report will at minimum be prepared in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 201 "Engineering and Traffic
Studies."
D. The scope of the traffic study will be reviewed and approved by the
Borough Council and Borough Engineer prior to commencement. The
scope will include the proposed intersection and roadway as well as the
surrounding impacted transportation facilities.
A. Right-of-way and cartway widths contained in this and other Borough
Ordinances are the minimum required for public streets based upon the
need to provide efficient movement of vehicles to serve utilities and to
accommodate ponding runoff storage of plowed snow emergency
§ 315-43 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-45
290:309
§ 315-46. Street design standards.
parking, temporary roadway adjustments during maintenance and
accidents, and future improvements.
B. The applicant will certify prior to final plan approval of a subdivision or
land development that the title to any street right-of-way proposed for
dedication is free and clear of all liens and encumbrances and that no
prior right-of-way has been granted to any utility or any other person.
C. All rights-of-way and cartways designed for public dedication will be
designed in conformance with PennDOT's Liquid Fuels requirements.
Additionally, all right-of-way and cartway widths will be large enough to
incorporate all elements of the design cross sections, including
required cartway width, utility accommodation, landscape areas and
sidewalks where appropriate/required.
D. The Borough Council will reserve the right to require a right-of-way
width greater than PennDOT specifications and the standards set forth
in the Borough Zoning Ordinance for reasons of public safety and
convenience; to provide acceleration and deceleration lanes into
parking lots, streets, or high-density residential developments; or to
provide for future service roads.
E. The right-of-way and cartway width of a new public street that is a
continuation of an existing street will in no case be continued at a width
less than the existing street. Where the right-of-way and cartway width
of the new street is greater than the existing street, a transition area
will be provided the design of which is subject to Borough Council
approval.
F. All of the right-of-way will have a grade similar to the street grade. The
slope of banks adjacent to rights-of-way will be no steeper than the
following:
(1) One foot of vertical measurement for three feet of horizontal
measurement for fills.
(2) One foot of vertical measurement for two feet of horizontal
measurement for cuts.
G. Where a cut or fill abuts a sidewalk, there will be two feet of level area
adjacent to the sidewalk and the fill slope will not exceed a three-to-one
slope.
H. Private rights-of-way will be in accordance with those requirements
prescribed for private streets.
I. Where a subdivision or land development adjoins undeveloped acreage,
new streets or reserved rights-of-way will be provided to the boundary
lines of the development.
§ 315-45 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-46
290:310
A. Streets will be designed for a twenty-year service life. If a street is to be
utilized prior to completion of construction, the utilized portion must be
structurally designed to support all anticipated loading without
significant loss of the designed service life of the street.
B. Special consideration for future bus and truck routes must be taken into
account in the design of streets for pavement thickness and width, sight
distances and curb radii.
C. Streets located in floodplain or flood-prone areas will be designed and
constructed to meet the requirements of the § 315-59 of this chapter.
D. The existing level of service (LOS) as designated in the 2000 Highway
Capacity Manual (HCM 2000) published by the Transportation
Research Board on any adjacent street and intersection that will be
affected by a proposed subdivision or land development will not fall
below LOS C if it is currently at LOS A, B or C and will not be further
reduced if it is at LOS D, E or F.
E. Traffic calming techniques may be required by the Borough Council for
projects that result in high vehicular or pedestrian traffic, areas of
commercial development, and transition areas between commercial
and residential development. Techniques will be employed based on
PennDOT Publication 383.
F. Local roads. The design criteria shown in Table 6-1 will be considered
the minimum standards in the design of local roads serving all
subdivisions and land developments.
Table 6-1 Local Road Design Standards
Criteria/
Context
(See
PennDOT
Pub 70 M) Rural
Suburban
Neighborhood
Town/
Village Private
Design
Speed
25-30 MPH 20-25 MPH 20-25 MPH 20-25 MPH
Travel Lanes 2 2 2 2
Minimum
Vertical
Grade1
0.5% 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
Maximum
Vertical
Grade2
12% 12% 12% 12%
Right-of-way
Width (Feet)
50 50 50 50
Cartway
Width (Feet)
9 10 10 9
§ 315-46 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-46
290:311
Table 6-1 Local Road Design Standards
Criteria/
Context
(See
PennDOT
Pub 70 M) Rural
Suburban
Neighborhood
Town/
Village Private
Shoulder
Width (Feet)3
2 4 2 2
Parking Lane
Width (Feet)
N/A 8 8 N/A
Minimum
Cross Slope
2% 2% 2% 2%
Maximum
Cross Slope
6% 6% 6% 8%
Horizontal
Curvature
(Feet)3
150 150 150 150
Reverse
Curve Offset
(Feet)
100 100 100 100
Vertical
Curves
(Feet)
See (4) See (4) See (4) See (4)
Notes:
1. Streets constructed at minimum grades of 0.5% will have a 3%
cross slope minimum.
2. Maximum vertical grades in commercial and industrial areas will
not exceed 8%.
3. Shoulders in streets with curbs will be constructed to cartway
standards.
4. All sight distances will be in accordance with the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, Title 67, Transportation, Chapter 441 as from
time to time reenacted and amended.
G. Arterials and collectors. Design criteria and standards for arterials and
collectors will be in accordance with PennDOT Publication 70M.
H. Vertical alignment.
(1) Vertical curves will be used in changes of grade exceeding 1%. In
order to provide proper sight distances, the minimum length (in
feet) of vertical curves will be as computed in accordance with the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Title 67, Transportation, Chapter
441, as from time to time reenacted, amended, and/or replaced.
§ 315-46 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-46
290:312
(2) The minimum grade on all local streets will be 0.5%. The maximum
grade on any street will not exceed 12%; however, grades not more
than 16% may be used for limited distances less than 300 feet and
will be subject to the approval of the Borough Council upon
recommendation by the Borough Engineer prior to design. Refer to
Table 6-1.
(3) Grades at intersections will be as flat as possible. The grade of the
approach where the traffic is required to stop will not exceed 4%
grade change for 40 feet or greater depending on the stacking
length of the vehicles caused by high traffic volume areas. Refer to
Table 6-2 for further design requirements.
I. Horizontal alignment.
(1) Alignment between control points should conform to topography,
following closely the natural contours, consistent with the design
speed, the traffic volumes to be served, the right-of-way and the
construction cost.
(2) Horizontal curves will be designed in accordance with Table 6-1.
J. Intersections.
(1) Streets will intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no
street will intersect another at an angle of less than 75° or more
than 105°.
(2) No more than two streets will intersect at the same point.
(3) Street intersections will be designed with a minimum radius of 15
feet, but should at all times be designed to safely accommodate the
intended vehicular traffic, e.g., combination trucks and buses.
Refer to Table 6-2 for additional minimum curb radii.
(4) The corner sight distances or clear sight triangle for each design
speed will be as specified in Table 6-2. The clear sight triangle will
be maintained as open space with no visual obstructions (Refer to
Figure 6-1).
(5) Sight distances for all intersection horizontal alignments, or
vertical alignments will be designed to achieve the required
minimum safe sight distances and safe stopping distances as
§ 315-46 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-46
290:313
specified in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Title 67,
Transportation, Chapter 441, as from time to time reenacted,
amended and/or replaced.
(6) Any street intersecting with another street will not be located
closer than the distances specified in Table 6-2. Distances will be
measured from the centerline of the two intersecting streets along
the centerline of said local, collector or arterial street.
(7) Any subdivision or land development that can be expected to
generate more than 200 vehicle trips per day may be required to
provide traffic control devices such as the following in order to
provide safe and efficient operation at any proposed driveway or
street:
(a) Acceleration or deceleration lanes.
(b) Concrete median or median barriers.
(c) Left-turn lanes.
(d) Traffic signals.
(e) Lane markers.
(8) Turning lanes, medians, acceleration and deceleration lanes, traffic
signals, lane markers, and other such traffic control devices will be
designed in accordance with Penn DOT Design Manuals.
Table 6-2 Intersection Design Specifications
Description Intersection Types
Arterial
With
Collector
Arterial
With
Local2
Collector
With
Collector
Collector
with Local
Local
With
Local
Minimum
Distance
Between
Centerlines
(Same
Side/
Opposite
Side)
800 feet/
800 feet
800 feet/
300 feet
500 feet/
300 feet
500 feet/
300 feet
300 feet/
150 feet
Angle of
Street
Intersections1
90° 90° 90° 75° to 105° 75° to
105°
§ 315-46 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-46
290:314
Table 6-2 Intersection Design Specifications
Description Intersection Types
Arterial
With
Collector
Arterial
With
Local2
Collector
With
Collector
Collector
with Local
Local
With
Local
Length/
Grade
Change of
Intersection
Approaches
100 feet/
4%
80 feet/4% 80 feet/4% 60 feet/4% 40 feet/6%
Minimum
Curb
Radius
50 feet 20 feet 35 feet 25 feet 20 feet
Minimum
Intersection
Sight
Triangle
Distance3
300 feet 200 feet 200 feet 200 feet 150 feet
Notes:
1. Angles should be designed to 90° when possible.
2. Where the centerlines of local streets opening onto opposite
sides of an arterial street are within 150 feet of each other,
they will be made to coincide by curving the streets to form a
four-way intersection whenever possible.
3. This includes railroads. Refer to the detail for proper
alignments.
K. Roadway cross sections.
(1) Minimum and desirable widths of roadway surface, shoulders,
curbs, and the minimum and desirable thickness of base, subbase
material and surface courses will be in accordance with the
requirements specified in Table 6-1, Table 6-3, Figure 6-2 and
Figure 6-3.
§ 315-46 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-46
290:315
Type1
Material Local Private2 CommercialIndustrial
64-22, 0.0 to
0.3 million
ESALs, SRL L3
Base Course
Superpave
Asphalt
Mixture
Design, 25mm,
PG 64-22, 0.0
to 0.3 ESALs4
4in 3in 4.5in 4.5in
Binder Course
Superpave
Ashpalt
Mixture
Design, 25 mm,
PG 64-22, 0.3
to 3.0 million
ESALs
— — — 2in
Compacted
Stone Subbase
6in 6in 8in 8in
Notes:
1. Arterial and collector streets will be constructed to PennDOT
standards and approved by the Commission Engineer.
§ 315-46 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-46
290:316
2. Alternates as per PennDOT Publication 70M may be
considered for private streets serving less than or equal to
five lots and less than 100 vehicular trips per day.
3. Commercial and Industrial is 0.3 to 3.0 million ESALs, SRL M.
4. Commercial and Industrial is 0.3 to 3.0 million ESALs.
L. Structures.
(1) Bridges, culverts, walls, tunnels and other structures should be
designed in accordance with the current AASHTO publication
"Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges" and PennDOT
Design Manual, Part 4, "Structures."
(2) The design of all structures is subject to the review and approval by
the Borough Engineer.
(3) A minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet, plus an allowance of six
inches to accommodate future resurfacing, will be provided for all
new and reconstructed facilities on or over collector and local road
facilities.
(4) The minimum vertical clearance over state routes will be in
accordance with PennDOT standards.
(5) For additional vertical clearance requirements refer to PennDOT
Design Manual, Part 2, "Highway Design" and PennDOT Design
Manual, Part 4, "Structures."
(6) The minimum width criteria and minimum design load structural
capacities will be as indicated in the applicable design charts found
in Penn DOT Design Manual, Part 2. "Highway Design."
M. Special streets.
(1) Culs-de-sac.
(a) A cul-de-sac will not be permitted when a through street is
feasible. The feasibility of a through street will be based on the
physical features of the tract proposed for development, the
potential for extension of the street to adjoining lands,
restrictions imposed by other government regulations, and the
ability to design to meet all other requirements of this chapter.
When culs-de-sac are proposed the application will be
accompanied by a written analysis of the merits of the design
and the reasons that a through street would not be feasible.
Approval of cul-de-sac streets will be at the sole discretion of
the Borough Council upon recommendation by the Planning
Commission.
(b) Culs-de-sac will be prohibited where it is possible to provide
loop streets that provide better access for emergency vehicles,
§ 315-46 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-46
290:317
fewer restrictions on snow removal and improved pedestrian
access.
(c) A cul-de-sac street will not exceed 500 feet in length as
measured from the centerline intersection with the through
street to the center point of the turnaround.
(d) Cul-de-sac streets will have a paved, circular turnaround with a
minimum radius to the curb line of 45 feet and the minimum
radius of the right-of-way lines will be 50 feet.
(e) An interior island may be permitted in the cul-de-sac
turnaround in residential areas at the discretion of the
Borough Council upon recommendation by the Borough
Engineer.
(f) The centerline grade on a cul-de-sac street will not exceed 10%
and the grade of the diameter of the turnaround will not
exceed 4%.
(g) Temporary culs-de-sac may have circular, T-shaped, or
hammerhead-shaped turnarounds. Turnarounds will be
constructed completely within the right-of-way. Restoration of
paved areas within the right-of-way will be the responsibility of
the developer connecting to the temporary cul-de-sac.
(h) Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable
and is clearly demonstrated by the applicant to the Borough
Council the turnaround right-of-way will be placed adjacent to
the tract boundary with sufficient additional width provided
along the boundary line to permit extension of the street at full
width.
(2) Dead-end streets.
(a) Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as cul-de-sac
streets or designed for future access to adjoining properties.
(b) Any dead-end street for access to an adjoining property or
because of authorized phased development will be provided
with a temporary all-weather turnaround. The use of such
turnaround will be guaranteed to the public until such time the
street is extended.
(3) Half or partial streets. New half or partial streets are prohibited.
(4) Alleys.
(a) Alleys may not be used as the only means of access to a lot.
(b) Alleys in residential developments will have a minimum rightof-
way width of 20 feet and a minimum cartway width of 16
feet.
§ 315-46 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-46
290:318
(c) Alleys in nonresidential developments will have a minimum
right-of-way width of 25 feet and a minimum cartway width of
20 feet.
(d) Corners will have a radius adequate to accommodate any large
vehicles that may be expected to use the alley.
(e) Dead-end alleys will not be permitted without an all-weather
turnaround.
(f) Alleys should be designed in accordance with the street
standards in § 315-46 of this chapter.
(5) Private streets.
(a) All streets will be designed as if they will be offered for
dedication as public streets.
(b) Private streets will be approved at the discretion of the
Borough Council.
(c) Private streets will be prohibited unless design objectives of
the development warrant private ownership, the street does
not serve more than five lots, and the Borough is not accepting
dedication of the street.
(d) If a street is designated as private the following conditions
must be met:
[1] A private right-of-way agreement will be properly executed
between the landowner granting the access and all
affected parties abutting and adjoining said access and
will create a private right-of-way not less than 50 feet in
width that will run with the land and be available for the
use of all owners, present and future. This agreement will
be reviewed by the Borough Engineer and approved by the
Borough Council prior to final plan approval.
[2] The adjoining landowners or an association of property
owners must agree that the street(s) will not be dedicated
but will be maintained by the adjoining landowners or
association of property owners.
[3] The adjoining landowners or an association of property
owners must agree to maintain the private street in a mudfree
condition and to provide for its repair and for snow
removal and any other necessary maintenance.
[4] An agreement must be entered into by the adjoining
landowners or an association of property owners that will
be recorded with the Union County Recorder of Deeds as
part of the final plan and subsequently reflected in the
deeds of all future lot owners. This agreement will
§ 315-46 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-46
290:319
§ 315-47. Street construction standards.
establish the conditions under which the street will be
constructed and maintained as well as conditions
controlling the offer of dedication and provisions for funds
sufficient to bring the private street to the standards
required for public streets should dedication occur.
(e) Private streets will be designed and built to accommodate the
type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated and will
be constructed in accordance with the standards and criteria
established in §§ 315-45, 315-446, 315-48 and 315-50 of this
chapter.
(f) A notation will be included on the final plan and reflected in the
deeds of sold lots identifying the street right-of-way as
"private" and identifying the entity responsible for
maintenance.
(g) All gates on private streets will be located a minimum of 30
feet from the public right-of-way and will open away from
public rights-of-way. Local fire department personnel will have
ready access to locking mechanisms on any gate restricting
access.
(h) Private streets will be considered a required improvement and
must be constructed prior to final plan approval or, in lieu of
completion of improvements, the applicant must provide an
acceptable guarantee to be approved by the Borough Council,
Borough Engineer, and Borough Solicitor, in accordance with
Article VII of this chapter.
A. At a minimum, all street construction activities will be performed in
strict accordance with PennDOT Publication 408, including all
references, supplements, and revisions, with Table 6-3 of this chapter,
and with applicable Borough ordinances and requirements in order to
ensure proper serviceability.
B. Liquid fuels requirement. Any street or part thereof offered for
dedication, or intended to be offered for dedication to the Borough for
inclusion into the road system under this chapter, will comply with the
minimum requirements of PennDOT covering the allocation of liquid
fuel tax receipts and the standards outlined in this chapter.
C. All streets and related facilities will be staked out during construction
by a qualified individual in the construction, engineering or surveying
field to ensure that infrastructure is constructed in accordance with the
approved design drawings.
D. The applicant will be responsible for implementing all necessary plans
to control, mitigate, and eliminate any forms of pollution, disturbance,
§ 315-46 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-47
290:320
§ 315-48. Street improvements.
or destruction resulting from noise, odor, stormwater, and/or excessive
loads or repetitions of loads that may occur during construction.
E. The applicant will furnish the necessary guards, watchmen, warning
lights, and similar items necessary to maintain state highway and other
street traffic in accordance with PennDOT Publication 203
requirements. In general, the applicant will not be permitted to
interrupt traffic without specific arrangements for detouring traffic in
accordance with PennDOT requirements. When traffic cannot be
detoured, a minimum of 1/2 the roadway width will be open at all times
with traffic control.
A. Curbs and gutter.
(1) Curbs will be required along all public and private streets abutting
to any proposed subdivisions or land development.
(2) Curbing may be required by the Borough Council upon
recommendation by the Borough Engineer:
(a) For stormwater management.
(b) For road stabilization.
(c) To delineate parking areas.
(d) To direct runoff to drainage inlets.
(e) At intersections, corners, and tight radii.
(3) Curbs will be constructed in accordance with PennDOT Form 408
specifications as from time to time amended and/or replaced.
(4) Concrete curb will be 18 inches high, eight inches wide and have an
exposed face of six inches. In no case, however, shall new curb be
constructed with less than six inches of exposed face. Alternative
types of curb can be approved at the Borough Council upon
recommendation by the Borough Engineer.
(5) Terminal concrete curbs or terminal radii will be provided at the
start or cut-off locations as needed for streets to transition from
one pavement section to another.
(6) Curbing will be designed to provide a ramp for access at each
intersection, at the principal entrances to buildings which front on
parking lots, and at all crosswalks in accordance with Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards.
B. Shoulders.
§ 315-47 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-48
290:321
(1) Paved shoulders and drainage swales may be permitted by the
Borough Council upon recommendation by the Borough Engineer
when:
(a) Required by state or other law.
(b) Preferable due to soil or topographic conditions.
(c) Preferable for stormwater management.
(2) The depth of shoulders will be the combined depth of the surface
and base courses. Refer to Table 6-3 for the roadway pavement
depths.
C. Sidewalks and pathways.
(1) Sidewalks will be required for streets of any new subdivision or
land development.
(2) Subdivisions and land developments located adjacent to or within a
reasonable distance of an existing or future rails to trails, rails with
trails, greenway or other public trail system will provide access
from the proposed development to the greenway or trail system
through a network of pathways in the design and layout of the plan.
(3) Pedestrian-way easements 10 feet wide may be required by the
Borough Council through the center of blocks more than 600 feet
long to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds,
shopping, or other community facilities.
(4) Sidewalks will be located within and be parallel to the street rightof-
way; however, alternative locations will be considered to
preserve topographic features or to provide visual interest,
provided the applicant shows that the alternative location
maintains safe and convenient pedestrian circulation to the
satisfaction of the Borough Council.
(5) Sidewalks will be on both sides of the street in front of all
residential units.
(6) The minimum width of all sidewalks and pathways will be five feet.
Wider widths may be required near major pedestrian generators
and employment centers and to accommodate Americans with
Disability Act (ADA) requirements.
(7) There will be a minimum two-foot-wide planting strip of grass
between the curb or shoulder and the sidewalk. In instances where
safety is a concern, the Borough may require additional separation
between the cartway and sidewalks.
(8) The grades and paving of the sidewalks will be continuous across
driveways except in nonresidential and high-density developments
§ 315-48 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-48
290:322
and in certain other cases where heavy traffic volume dictates
special treatment.
(9) The sidewalk will be constructed of at least four inches of Class AA
concrete and a six-inch depth at intersections. Handicap and curb
cut ramps will include rebar or mesh reinforcement. All curbs and
sidewalks will be underlain by four inches of compacted crushed
stone or gravel. Technical specifications will be in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 408. Where sidewalks cross streets serving
commercial and industrial uses, the Borough may impose
additional requirements.
(10) Pathways may be constructed of other materials including pervious
materials with the approval of the Borough Engineer and provided
that the proposed materials and construction are appropriate to the
surrounding land use and to the expected volume of pedestrian
traffic.
(11) Sidewalks and pathways will be laterally pitched at a slope toward
the street not less than 1% and not greater than 2% to provide for
adequate surface drainage.
(12) At corners and pedestrian street-crossings, sidewalks will be
extended to the curb line with an adequate apron area for
anticipated pedestrian traffic curb cuts, and ramps.
(13) Sidewalks and pathways will not exceed a 5% grade.
D. Parking lot and street lighting.
(1) Parking lot lighting will be provided in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the Lewisburg Borough Zoning
Ordinance.39
(2) Street lighting will be provided at the following:
(a) The intersection of streets.
(b) A maximum of 150-foot intervals along streets offering
onstreet parking.
(c) The apex of the curve of any street having a radius of 300 feet
or less.
(d) Cul-de-sac bulbs.
(e) Terminal ends of center median islands having concrete
structure curbing, trees and/or other fixed objects not having
breakaway design for speeds of 25 MPH or greater.
(f) Defined pedestrian crossings.
39.Editor's Note: See Chapter 360, Zoning.
§ 315-48 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-48
290:323
§ 315-49. Street names.
(g) Other locations along the street as deemed necessary by the
Borough Council.
(3) At the discretion of the Borough Council upon recommendation by
the Planning Commission, lighting will consist of luminaries
meeting the approval of the International Dark-Sky Association or
be the Lewisburg standard, three-globe fixtures.
E. Street signs.
(1) The owner/developer will be responsible to obtain from the
Borough and install all necessary traffic control, regulatory, and
street-name signs and posts in accordance with the materials and
workmanship prescribed in PennDOT Publication 408 and all other
applicable federal, state, county and Borough requirements.
(2) At least two street name signs will be placed at each four-way
street intersection and one at each T-intersection. Signs will be
installed under light standards (where applicable) and be free from
visual obstruction.
(3) Private streets will be provided with street name signs in
accordance with this section.
F. Street trees.
(1) A tree with a minimum caliper of two inches will be planted every
30 feet of street on both sides of the street in an alternating
manner.
(2) Tree selection will be in accordance with the standards set forth by
the Lewisburg Borough Shade Tree Commission.
(3) Trees will be placed along right-of-way lines or setback from streets
in a sufficient manner to maintain sight distance and safety.
§ 315-48 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-49
290:324
§ 315-50. Lot access and driveways.
A. All streets will be named.
B. Continuations of existing streets will be known by the same name.
C. Names for new streets will not duplicate or closely resemble names of
existing streets, nor will suffixes such as "lane," "way," "drive," "court"
or "avenue" be deemed sufficient to differentiate street names that are
otherwise the same.
D. All new street names are subject to review and approval of the Union
County Emergency Management Agency and will be consistent with the
County Street Naming and Addressing Ordinance, policies, rules, and/
or regulations.
E. Notice from the Union County Emergency Management Agency that
the proposed new street names are acceptable will be submitted prior
to plan approval.
A. Lot access.
(1) Access to any lot, tract, parcel, subdivision, or development will be
provided in a manner that promotes safe and efficient ingress and
egress to a public street, limits the number of driveways, and
promotes common points of ingress and egress that are adequate
for existing and future growth.
(2) The Borough Council may disapprove any point of ingress or egress
to any lot, tract, parcel, or development from any street or highway
when the proposed ingress or egress would create unsafe
conditions, reduce the capacity of the adjoining street or highway
or result in substandard circulation and impaired vehicle
movement.
(3) In approving ingress and egress from any state road or highway,
the Borough Council may only approve those access points for
which a highway occupancy permit has been obtained from
PennDOT. The Borough Council may require the applicant to
reapply for a permit if the location of the PennDOT approved access
is in conflict with any provision of this chapter or if the Borough
feels the location of the access will hinder the safe and efficient
movement on any state road or highway or the proper development
of the site.
(4) Direct individual driveway access to SR 0015, SR 0045 and SR
0192 is highly discouraged and in most cases will be prohibited.
However on a case-by-case basis direct access may be allowed if, at
the sole discretion of the Borough Council, no other feasible access
is available, the proposed driveway complies with Table 6-4 of this
chapter, there is adequate sight distance in accordance with
§ 315-49 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-50
290:325
§ 315-50B(8) of this chapter and unsafe conditions are not
otherwise created.
(5) Lot access over the lands of others is strongly discouraged.
B. Driveways. Proposed driveways shall conform to any standards that
may exist with the Zoning Ordinance and the separately adopted
Borough driveway ordinance. Additionally, all driveways shall at a
minimum conform to the standards contained herein.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Driveways will be situated in such a manner that safe and
efficient access is provided onto a public or private street
taking into consideration current and anticipated future
growth.
(b) Driveways will not interfere with normal traffic movements nor
be inconsistent with the design, maintenance, and drainage of
the street.
(2) The Borough Council may require the joint or shared use of
driveways to provide ingress and egress when such design would
increase traffic safety by decreasing the potential for vehicular
conflicts. In such cases a shared driveway maintenance and use
agreement must be entered into by the respective property owners
and recorded with the subdivision or land development plan.
(3) In general all private driveway access will be to a public street;
however, private driveway access to private streets may be
permitted by Borough Council in the following circumstances:
(a) The private street meets the stipulations under § 315-46M(5)
of this chapter.
(b) The total number of lots involved include all existing and/or
proposed lots utilizing the private driveway for access.
(4) In general all private driveways will be confined to the lot served;
however, private driveway across the lands of another may be
permitted by Borough Council in the following circumstances:
(a) Not more than two lots are involved.
(b) A complete right-of-way or easement agreement is prepared in
a form acceptable to the Borough Council.
(c) The total number of lots involved include all existing and/or
proposed lots utilizing the private driveway for access.
(5) Borough Council upon the recommendation of the Borough
Engineer may require curbing when it is needed to control access
drainage of stormwater, and/or parking. The location and extent of
the curbing will be determined by the Borough Engineer.
§ 315-50 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-50
290:326
(6) Location number and positioning of driveways.
(a) Driveways will meet the requirements of Table 6-4 "Location
and Number of Driveways."
Table 6-4 Location and Number of Driveways
Street
Designation
Minimum
Distance
Between
Driveways
(feet)
Maximum
Driveways
Per Lot Minimum Setback
Intersections
(Feet)
Property
Lines
(Feet)
Limited
Access
Highway
or
Principal
Arterial
600 1 600 10
Minor
Arterial
400 1 400 10
Major
Collector
200 1 200 10
Local 100 1 100 10
(b) Driveways used for two-way traffic will be positioned at a right
angle (90°) to the street or as near thereto as sight conditions
permit. Where Borough Council upon the recommendation of
the Borough Engineer allows two driveways located on the
same lot and used for one-way traffic, each driveway may be
placed at an angle of less than a right angle, but not less than a
40° angle.
(c) Where Borough Council at the recommendation of the Borough
Engineer allows multiple driveways to access a single lot, will
be separated by at least 10 feet measured along the right-ofway
line and at least 20 feet measured along the shoulder,
ditch line or curb. When the distance separating said multiple
driveways is 50 feet or less, the area between the driveways
will be curbed.
(d) Borough Council, upon the recommendation of the Borough
Engineer, may require the driveway to be located directly
across a street from a street or other driveway or may require
the driveway be located at a particular point along a property if
§ 315-50 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-50
290:327
it is determined that left turns from the lot serviced by the
driveway will create a safety hazard.
(7) Driveways will have a throat width and curb return radii based on
the volume and type of traffic and in accordance with Figures 6-6,
6-7, 6-8, 6-9, 6-10 and 6-11 and Tables 6-5, 6-6 and 6-7.
(a) Minimum use driveway:
(b) Low volume driveway:
Not to scale
Not to scale
(c) Medium volume driveway:
§ 315-50 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-50
290:328
Not to scale
Not to scale
(d) High volume driveway:
(8) Driveway sight distance. Driveways will be located at a point within
the property frontage that provides at least the minimum sight
distance as prescribed below:
(a) Sight distances shall be in accordance with safe stopping sight
distance as computed in accordance with Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Title 67, Transportation, Chapter 441 as from
time to time reenacted, amended, and/or replaced.
(b) If sight distance requirements specified in this section cannot
be met, Borough Council upon the recommendation of the
Borough Engineer may:
[1] Prohibit left turns by exiting vehicles;
[2] Restrict turning movements to right turns in and out of a
driveway;
§ 315-50 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-50
290:329
[3] Require installation of a right turn acceleration or
deceleration lane;
[4] Require installation of a separate left turn standby lane;
[5] Alter the horizontal or vertical geometry of the roadway;
[6] Require the removal of the physical obstruction from the
line of sight; or
[7] Deny access to the highway.
(c) Items in § 315-50B(8)(b) above will be at the expense of the
applicant.
(9) Driveway construction standards. Driveways will be constructed in
the following manner:
(a) All driveway cartways shall be constructed of a suitable stone
base material, appropriately compacted and graded to provide
a permanent, sound, all-weather driving surface, reasonably
smooth and free from mud, dust, or standing water, and
designed to facilitate stormwater drainage patterns.
(b) Driveway slopes will be in accordance with Figure 6-12.
(c) All driveways will be constructed so as not to impair drainage
within the right-of-way, alter the stability of the improved area,
or change the drainage of adjacent areas.
(d) Where a drainage ditch or swale exists the applicant will install
adequate pipe under the driveway in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 408. Drainage pipe installed under
driveways will meet the design requirements of applicable
county and DEP approved Act 167 Stormwater Management
Plans, Lewisburg Borough Stormwater Management
Ordinance, and/or stormwater management provisions
contained in this chapter.
(e) The side slopes for driveway embankments within the right-ofway
will not be steeper than 10 to one.
§ 315-50 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-50
290:330
§ 315-51. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
Subdivisions and land developments will provide off-street parking and
loading areas designed to promote orderly and safe parking of vehicles and
deliveries in accordance with the Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance.
(10) Curb cuts. Curb cuts will be in accordance with Figure 6-13.
(11) Gated driveways. Driveways that are gated will have gates located
a minimum of 30 feet from the public right-of-way and will not open
outward. Fire department personnel will have ready access to
locking mechanisms on any gate restricting access.
A. General design.
(1) To the maximum extent practical, parking and loading areas will be
provided at the side or rear of buildings in order to eliminate the
visual impact of vast areas of pavement.
(2) Adequate provision will be made for ingress and egress to all
parking and loading spaces and areas.
(3) Customer parking and circulation will be separated from delivery
service drives and loading areas.
(4) Parking and loading areas will be located entirely on the lot being
served except where shared or off-site parking facilities are
developed to serve multiple adjacent lots in accordance with
§ 360-26C of the Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance.
(5) Off-street parking and loading areas will be designed so that
vehicles do not back or park over or into public walkways,
sidewalks, and rights-of-way.
(6) Curb radii or aisle treatments in parking areas will be four feet or
greater to promote efficient turning movements.
(7) All dead-end parking lots will be designed to provide sufficient
back-up at stalls.
(8) Access to off-street parking areas will be limited to a minimal
number of well-defined entrance and exit lanes that are separated
by dividers, planting islands, or in the case of a low volume
driveway, pavement markings. In no case will unrestricted access
§ 315-50 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-51
290:331
§ 315-52. Buffers, screening, and landscaping.
Buffers, screening, and landscaping will be provided in accordance with the
standards set forth in the Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance.40
§ 315-53. Sewage facilities.
along the length of a street upon which the parking abuts be
permitted.
(9) Painted lines, arrows, dividers, and signs will be provided to
delineate and control parking, loading areas and internal
circulation.
(10) Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or loading areas
will be mounted and shielded in such a manner to effectively
eliminate direct glare on adjacent properties or upon public
streets.
(11) All parking and loading areas will include a landscaped buffer and
screening in accordance with the requirements of the Lewisburg
Borough Zoning Ordinance.
B. Construction material. Parking and loading areas, service drives, and
exit and entrance lanes will be designed and constructed in accordance
with § 315-46 of this chapter. The Borough Council may, on a case-bycase
basis, permit parking areas for certain smaller land developments
considered to have minimum use and low volume entrances to be
surfaced with a dust free all-weather material such as compacted
limestone. In such cases the area within the street right-of-way or a
length of 15 feet, whichever is greater, of exit and entrance lanes will be
paved.
C. Parking facilities will be located within the distances specified in the
Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance as measured from the furthest
parking space, but in no case will the distance exceed any requirements
set forth by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry (L&I).
A. All subdivisions and land developments will be provided with sanitary
sewage facilities in accordance with the official Act 537 Municipal
Sewage Facilities Plan and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. Subdivisions and land developments will be connected to the Lewisburg
Area Joint Sewer Authority system unless the applicant can clearly
demonstrate that such connection is not feasible or the PA DEP
recognizes an alternative method of disposal. The Borough Council may
require the applicant to have a feasibility study prepared by a
40.Editor's Note: See Chapter 360, Zoning.
§ 315-51 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-53
290:332
§ 315-54. Water supply.
registered professional engineer to show that a connection is not
feasible.
C. The developer will submit all necessary plans and specifications for the
entire sanitary sewage disposal system, including the facilities related
to collection, conveyance and treatment. All plans for sanitary sewer
systems will be designed by a registered professional engineer in
accordance with the requirements of the PA DEP or other governing
rules and regulations.
D. The developer will obtain all required sewage planning approvals from
the Lewisburg Area Joint Sewer Authority and the PA DEP. Plan
applications will not be approved until all necessary sewage planning
approvals have been received.
E. The developer will obtain a letter from the Lewisburg Area Joint Sewer
Authority stating the following:
(1) The term of the reservation of capacity based on hydraulic load,
organic loads, and compliance with the influent parameters for
collection, conveyance and treatment.
(2) The capacity is for the entire development (partial capacity based
upon phases of development will not be accepted).
(3) Approval of the plans for design, construction standards,
installation, and financial guarantees.
F. Subdivisions and land developments proposing no development of
buildings or improvement of land for purposes requiring sewage
facilities need not provide sanitary sewage facilities if the Lewisburg
Area Joint Sewer Authority and PA DEP have approved a nonbuilding
waiver request.
(1) Where a waiver is approved by the Lewisburg Area Joint Sewer
Authority and PA DEP the Final Plan for recording will include the
standard nonbuilding notation.
(2) Even when sewage facilities are not required, the developer will
clearly demonstrate that public sewer disposal can be achieved for
the lot(s) in question.
G. Lot additions and consolidations need not provide sanitary sewage
facilities if the receiving tract(s) has an existing permitted method of
sewage disposal or if the Lewisburg Area Joint Sewer Authority and PA
DEP have approved a nonbuilding waiver request. Where a waiver is
approved by the PA DEP, the final plan for recording will include the
applicable notation required by the PA DEP.
A. All subdivisions and land developments will be provided with an
adequate and safe supply of water for all intended land uses, and said
§ 315-53 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-54
290:333
water supply will meet all applicable federal, state and local drinking
water standards or be capable of economical treatment to attain such
quality standards.
B. Subdivisions and land developments will be connected to an existing
public water supply unless the applicant can clearly demonstrate that
such connection is not feasible. The Borough Council may require a
feasibility study prepared by a registered professional engineer to show
that a connection is not feasible. The Borough Council may also require
the developer to demonstrate that a reliable, safe, and adequate water
supply exists to support the usage demands of the proposal without
detrimental effects to future users and water sources of adjacent land
uses. Such analysis would at a minimum contain information regarding
estimated water demand, source of supply and capacity, source
reliability and source quality. The Borough Council reserves the right to
require the applicant to drill a test well for the establishment of water
quality and quantity in that area.
C. Fire hydrants will be installed as an integral part of any water supply
system and the placement, design and construction of such will meet
the specifications of the local fire company, the public water supplier
and the Borough when applicable.
D. The developer will submit all necessary plans and specifications for the
entire water supply system including the facilities related to sources,
storage, treatment, and distribution. All plans for water supply systems
will be designed by a registered professional engineer and will conform
to current regulatory requirements.
E. The developer will obtain all required water supply approvals from the
water supplier, the PA DEP and/or the Susquehanna River Basin
Commission. Applications for plan approval will not be granted until the
developer has received all necessary water supply approvals.
F. Applicants will present evidence that the subdivision or land
development is to be supplied with water by a certified public utility, a
bona fide cooperative association of lot owners or a municipal
corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of public
convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission (PUC) or
an application for such certificate a cooperative agreement, or
commitment or agreement to serve the area, whichever is appropriate,
will be acceptable evidence. In addition applicants will be responsible
for obtaining applicable water extension permits from the PA DEP.
G. Where connection to public water supply is proposed the applicant will
provide a written statement from the public water supplier indicating
that sufficient supply to serve the proposed development is available
and such notice will:
(1) Be dated within 45 days of the plan application.
(2) Identify the term of the reservation of supply.
§ 315-54 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-54
290:334
§ 315-55. Other utilities.
§ 315-56. Stormwater management and drainage.
(3) Provide water supply for the entire development (partial supply
based upon phases of development will not be accepted).
(4) Include a statement from the public water supplier indicating
approval of the plans for design, construction standards,
installation, and financial guarantees.
A. Electric, telephone, television cable and other utilities, both main and
service lines, will be placed underground within easements or
dedicated public rights-of-way, but not under cartways unless approved
in writing by the Borough and utility provider.
B. All utilities will be installed in accordance with the prevailing standards
and practices of the utility or other companies and authorities providing
such services and the laws of thecommonwealth.
C. Underground utility installation will not be required for the following:
(1) For service to industrial development; and
(2) For a project where the local utility service provider determines
that the physical conditions render such underground installation
unfeasible.
D. Underground installation of the utility distribution and service lines will
be completed prior to street paving, storm drainage, and curbing and
sidewalk installation.
E. The Borough Council may require the installation of utilities prior to
final plan approval where the cost of installation, including the cost of
excavation for underground utilities will not be completely paid by the
utility company. In each case the Borough Council will also consider the
procedures for the applicable utility company involved with the
extension of services.
A. A Stormwater Management Plan prepared in accordance with the
Lewisburg Borough Stormwater Management Ordinance will be
required for each subdivision or land development plan, unless an
exemption to these requirements has been granted in accordance with
§ 315-56C of this chapter.
B. This chapter does not imply that areas subject to the stormwater
management requirements of this chapter will be free from flooding or
flood damages. The making of an administrative decision will not
constitute a representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the
Borough, or by any official or employee thereof, of the practicability or
safety of any proposed structure or use with respect to damage from
erosion, sedimentation, stormwater runoff or floods, and will not create
§ 315-54 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-56
290:335
liability upon or cause of action against, the Borough, its officials, or
employees.
C. Exemption.
(1) All or a portion of the mandatory design and installation of certain
stormwater management facilities may be exempted when the lot
improvements (buildings, driveway, regrading, etc.) on the
proposed plan document that the lot improvements will not result
in detrimental stormwater discharges within the lot(s) or upon
adjoining lands, roads, waterways, or other areas. Exemption may
be recommended to the Borough Council by the Borough Engineer
and Planning Commission provided all of the following criteria are
satisfied:
(a) All proposed lot improvements will increase the total
impervious area of the parent tract that existed at the date of
the adoption of the Stormwater Management Ordinance, July
19, 2005,41 by no more than 5,000 square feet.
(b) The proposed slope of the lot will not exceed 10% in the lot
improvement area and slopes in excess of 15% will not exist
within 50 feet of the lot improvement area.
(c) Streams, waterways, and ecologically sensitive areas do not
exist within 100 feet of the lot improvement area.
(d) All proposed lot improvements will be a minimum of 50 feet
from all lot lines, unless site conditions or other requirements
necessitate greater setback.
(e) Plan notes will document that the soils within the lot
improvement area are in the hydrologic soil group A, B, or C, as
published in the current edition of TR-55, Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds.
(f) Stormwater discharges will not endanger or potentially
damage the lot improvements, adjoining lands, or roads or
otherwise pose a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the
public.
(g) No unique or adverse lot conditions will exist which warrant
refusal of the exemption request.
(h) The exemption request will be submitted in writing with the
subdivision application and will address all the criteria cited
herein.
(2) Subdivision or land development plans containing any lots which
have received stormwater management design and installation
exemptions in accordance with these provisions will contain a
41.Editor's Note: See Chapter 290, Stormwater Management.
§ 315-56 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-56
290:336
§ 315-57. Soil erosion and sedimentation pollution control plan
requirements.
§ 315-58. Steep slopes.
§ 315-59. Floodplain management.
The requirements of this section are intended to protect property owners
from increased flood hazards resulting from inappropriate development
in the floodplain and to protect potential buyers from purchasing land
which may not be suitable for development. Plans will also comply with the
applicable Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) regulations.
prominent plan note explaining the exemption and the applicable
lot development restrictions. This note will also be incorporated
into the deeds as a restriction.
(3) Any lot receiving a stormwater management installation exemption
and subsequently found to be developed or under development
contrary to the approved subdivision or land development plan,
contrary to these exemption provisions, or exhibiting a stormwater
runoff problem will be subject to the following:
(a) Corrective action will be taken in the lot development to
eliminate the noncompliance.
(b) A revised subdivision or land development plan depicting
necessary stormwater management facilities will be submitted,
in accordance with standard plan processing procedures.
A. An erosion and sedimentation pollution control (E&SPC) plan is
required for all earth moving activities.
B. For all subdivisions with site improvements and for all land
developments the E&SPC Plan must be approved by the Union County
Conservation District.
A. Structures and grading of land will be located on portions of a
development site where the slope is less than 25%.
B. A limited amount of disturbance, up to 25% of the steep slope area with
grades between 25% and 35% may be approved if evidence of the safety
of any proposed disturbance has been documented. Such evidence of
the safety of any proposed disturbance will require a site investigation
and certification in writing — by a registered professional soils
engineer, engineering geologist, or civil engineer with demonstrated
competency and experience in soils engineering — that the proposed
activity will not create or exacerbate unsafe conditions.
A. The inclusion of the floodway within a lot in order to meet the minimum
lot area and/or yard requirements is allowed provided any such lot
contains sufficient area exclusive of the floodway for buildings and,
§ 315-56 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-59
290:337
§ 315-60. Wetlands.
when applicable, area exclusive of the 100-year floodplain for on-lot
sanitary sewage disposal systems and replacement areas.
B. For lots containing floodplain areas, the Borough Council may require
as a stipulation of plan approval that the applicant include the following
note on the plan and a similar reference in the deed:
(1) NOTE: Lot(s) No. _____ are completely or partially within the
regulatory floodplain and any development on such lots will occur
in accordance with all federal, state, and municipal floodplain
management regulations.
C. All public and private utilities and facilities will be designed and
constructed to preclude flood damage and will be floodproofed in
accordance with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
floodproofing guidelines. Documentation indicating compliance with
FEMA guidelines will be provided by a Professional Engineer or
Architect as follows: a flood elevation certificate for all building
construction; determination of structural adequacy against pressure,
velocity, uplift, sliding, overturning, and impact; and a statement of the
types of materials and safeguards incorporated to prevent leakage,
spillage, or contamination.
A. No subdivision or land development will involve uses, activities, or
improvements that would result in encroachment into, regrading of, or
placement of fill in wetlands in violation of state and/or federal
regulations.
B. Activities that will alter, diminish, or eliminate hydrologic conditions,
existing hydric soil conditions, or wetland plant species are prohibited.
C. If wetlands are to be altered by the proposed activity the Borough
Council will require prior to plan approval copies of appropriate
permits and approvals granted by state and/or federal regulatory
agencies.
D. The Borough Council may require as a stipulation of plan approval that
the applicant include the following note on the plan and a similar
reference in the deed for lots containing wetland areas:
(1) NOTE: Wetlands exist on Lot(s) No. _____. Wetlands are protected
under state and federal law and caution must be exercised to
ensure that any development proposed for Lot No. _____ does not
disturb the wetlands.
E. A jurisdictional wetland delineation by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers is strongly encouraged and may be required by the Borough
Engineer where wetlands exist and could be impacted by development
activities.
§ 315-59 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-60
290:338
§ 315-61. Solution prone carbonate geology and sinkholes.
F. Development activities are encouraged to avoid wetland impacts by
design with the natural environment. Wetlands should be used to
complement development by integrating stormwater management and
water quality management activities where practical.
A. Land developments and improvements in areas underlain by carbonate
geology will be designed and constructed to minimize any impacts
which may affect, increase, diminish, or change any natural drainage,
natural springs, water quality, geological stability or groundwater table.
B. In making a determination whether a land development or
improvement will affect or be affected by carbonate geologic hazards,
the Borough Council will consider the testimony of qualified experts
(e.g., professional geologist, hydrogeologist, or engineer with
documented expertise of carbonate geology) and such other reasonable
information as may be available. Upon recommendation by the Borough
Engineer, the Borough Council may require the submission of a
hydrogeologic report.
C. Land developments or improvements which pose a significant risk of
stimulating the formation of sinkholes or causing hydrologic connection
of contaminated surface water with subsurface aquifers will not be
approved.
D. No stormwater management basins will be placed in or over sinkholes,
closed depressions, lineaments in carbonate areas, fracture traces
caverns, ghost lakes, or disappearing streams.
E. Improvements necessary to safeguard against groundwater
contamination, structural instability for proposed development, or
construction activities as a result of the hydrological investigation, will
be a condition of final subdivision or land development plan approval.
F. Sinkholes.
(1) All sinkholes will be posted by permanent and clearly visible on-site
notices prohibiting any disposal of refuse, rubbish, hazardous
wastes, organic matter or soil into the sinkhole.
(2) All sinkholes will have a buffer as determined necessary for public
safety. The buffer size will vary based upon site conditions and an
analysis of drainage in the sinkhole area by a professional engineer
or other qualified individual with demonstrated competency in
geology or hydrogeology.
(3) Concrete liners, rockfill, or other acceptable capping procedures
may be permitted in the sinkhole with the approval of the Borough
Engineer.
§ 315-60 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-61
290:339
§ 315-62. Natural features.
(4) New sinkhole formation, as a result of construction activities or
natural causes, will be reported to the Borough Council and the PA
DEP. Emergency repairs may be required under the supervision of
the PA DEP or the Borough Engineer to prevent groundwater
contamination.
A. Habitats and natural features of special concern.
(1) Where the presence of natural features and habitats of special
concern (e.g., those areas listed in the natural areas inventory of
Union County, habitats of rare, threatened, or endangered species)
is known or suspected, or where required by the PA DEP or other
permitting agency, the applicant will notify the Pennsylvania
Department of Conservation and Natural Resources (PA DCNR) of
the proposed subdivision or land development and request a
determination concerning the presence of significant resources
from the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Index (PNDI).
(2) Where a proposed subdivision or land development includes an
identified natural feature and/or habitat of special concern, such as
rare, threatened, or endangered species which are regulated by
Borough, state or federal law, the applicant will provide evidence of
compliance with any applicable regulation.
(3) The Borough Council will impose conditions it deems reasonable
and appropriate in order to protect such habitats and to prevent
degradation of natural features.
B. Existing wooded areas.
(1) Subdivisions and land developments will be designed to avoid
unnecessary removal or destruction of trees and understory
vegetation, particularly in undeveloped tract areas.
(2) At least 25% of the number of trees that exist at the time of plan
approval will be maintained or replaced immediately following
construction. Replacement trees will be a mix of native species with
a minimum trunk caliper of two inches and a minimum height of six
feet. They will be planted at a density equivalent to that existing
before development.
(3) Development activities are encouraged to integrate wooded areas
into stormwater management design to promote natural infiltration
of runoff where practical.
(4) Priority will be given to the preservation of trees and vegetation in
100-year floodplains, wetlands, stream corridors and steep slopes.
(5) Any tree that may be noteworthy because of its species, age,
uniqueness, rarity, or status as a landmark due to historical or
§ 315-61 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-62
290:340
§ 315-63. Cultural and historic resources.
§ 315-64. Community and natural features impact analysis.
other cultural associations will be preserved unless removal is
deemed necessary as determined by a professional arborist,
forester or landscape architect, or if the tree is likely to endanger
the public or an adjoining property. Trees to be preserved will be
protected during construction and the critical root zones will be
clearly staked and protected by fencing to prevent damage.
C. Stream corridors. In order to prevent increased erosion, stream bank
instability, and nonpoint source and thermal pollution, the removal of
tree masses and vegetation will not be permitted within 50 feet of the
top bank of any watercourse. Invasive species, however, may be
removed if replaced with native vegetation.
A. Archaeological investigations. Where the presence of archaeological
features is known or suspected, or where required by the PA DEP or
other permitting agency, the applicant will notify the Pennsylvania
Historic and Museum Commission (PHMC) of the proposed subdivision
or land development and request a determination concerning the
presence of significant resources from the PHMC.
B. Historic resource demolition. No historic feature as defined in this
chapter will be infringed upon, demolished, or moved from its original
foundations without approval of the Borough Council. The applicant will
submit to the Council a letter from the PHMC with their review and
recommendation. In evaluating any request for demolition of a historic
feature the Council will take into account the recommendation of the
Lewisburg Historic Architectural Review Board; the significance of the
property; the condition of the feature and the potential for repair,
restoration, stabilization and reuse; the impact of the feature in relation
to the total project; and the hardship, if any, on the applicant.
A. Subdivisions and land development applications that involve the
creation of 25 or more dwelling units, generate 200 vehicle trips or
more per average weekday, or are considered a development of
regional significance may be required to include a community impact
and natural features analysis.
B. Community impact analysis. The community impact analysis will
analyze and evaluate the impact of the proposed subdivision or land
development on community facilities and will include, but not be limited
to, a detailed examination of the following:
(1) Water supply analysis, including the volume of water needed to
support the proposed use, source(s), source viability, source
quality, and impact of proposed use on surface water flows,
groundwater levels, and adjacent wells.
§ 315-62 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-64
290:341
(2) Sewage collection and treatment.
(3) Accessibility to and adequacy of emergency services (ambulance,
fire, and police).
(4) Surface, ground, and stormwater management, including potential
for contamination of surface and groundwater supplies.
(5) A visual impact assessment which will include:
(a) A zone of visibility map to determine the locations from which
the facility may be observed.
(b) Pictorial representations of key viewpoints as may be
appropriate, including but not limited to public roads, public
parks, public lands, historic districts and sites, and other
locations where the site is visible to large numbers of persons.
(c) An assessment of the visual impact of the facility as it relates to
appropriate screening.
(6) Air quality impacts, including a description of proposed emissions
and specific information related to impacts upon human health and
the environment.
(7) Other community facilities that may be impacted.
(8) A comparison of the estimated costs for services to the Borough
versus the estimated revenues to be generated from the
subdivision or land development.
(9) Proof that the appropriate providers of utility services, including
but not limited to electric, sewer, water, telephone and refuse
removal have certified that services will be provided to the site.
(10) A traffic engineering study in accordance with § 315-44 of this
chapter.
(11) A market analysis that will demonstrate a sufficient market exists
for the specific types of development proposed.
C. Natural features analysis. The natural features analysis will analyze and
evaluate the impact of the proposed subdivision or land development on
natural features on the subject tract and the surrounding area. This
analysis will include but not be limited to the following:
(1) An analysis of natural drainage patterns and water resources,
including streams, natural swales, ponds, lakes, wetlands,
floodplain areas, and permanent and seasonal high water table
areas.
(2) An analysis of the site geology that considers characteristics of
underlying rock formations, willow bedrock, aquifers, karst
§ 315-64 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-64
290:342
§ 315-65. Parks and open space preservation.
features and factors that may cause the rock formations to be
unstable.
(3) An analysis of soil types present on the site, including a delineation
of prime agricultural soils, hydric soils, unstable soils, soils most
susceptible to erosion, and evidence that the soil is suitable for the
intended uses.
(4) An analysis of topography.
(5) A Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Index (PNDI) search will be
conducted to identify and certify that no vegetation on the site is
classified as rare, threatened, or endangered. Applicants will also
identify vegetation listed as worthy of special protection in the
Union County Natural Areas Inventory.
(6) An analysis of impacts on wildlife and wildlife habitat and
certification that no species of wildlife or wildlife habitat on the site
is classified as rare, threatened, or endangered or is listed as
worthy of special protection in the Union County Natural Areas
Inventory.
D. The community impact and natural features analyses will contain
proposals to minimize any adverse impacts identified, including, where
appropriate, alternative solutions or proposals.
A. Voluntary provision. Applicants for approval of major subdivisions and
land developments are encouraged to the maximum extent practical to
include open space areas and facilities to meet the recreational needs
of residents, employees, and other users of the proposed development.
B. General standards of dedicated lands. Lands to be dedicated for public
use will meet the following minimum standards:
(1) Land area will be reasonably located so as to serve all residents of
the subdivision or land development.
(2) Land area intended for park and open space use will be accessible
from a public street or will adjoin and become part of an already
existing public park or open space area which is accessible to a
public street.
(3) No more than 25% of the park and open space land will contain
detention basins or other stormwater management facilities or be
located within a floodplain or wetland unless such area is part of a
linear trail or greenway along an existing watercourse.
(4) When public park and open space land exists adjacent to the tract
being subdivided or developed, the dedicated park and open space
land will be located to adjoin and enlarge said lands.
§ 315-64 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-65
290:343

ARTICLE VII
Improvements Guarantee
§ 315-66. General.
§ 315-67. Amount of improvements guarantee.
A. In lieu of the construction and completion of improvements required by
this chapter prior to final plan approval and recordation, the applicant
or developer will deposit a financial security acceptable to Borough
Council and follow the procedures contained herein.
B. If water mains and sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus
or facilities related thereto are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or a municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Borough, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof will be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and will not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section. The applicant or
developer will provide evidence that financial security in an amount
sufficient to secure the completion of all sewer and/or water facilities to
be dedicated to such public utility or municipal authority has been
provided and accepted by such entity.
A. The amount of financial security required will be 110% of the estimated
cost of completion of the required improvements. This estimate
submitted by an applicant or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by this
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. Borough
Council, upon the recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may
refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown.
B. If the applicant or developer and Borough Council are unable to agree
upon an estimate, then the estimate will be recalculated and recertified
by another professional engineer licensed as such in this
commonwealth and chosen mutually by Borough Council and the
applicant or developer. This estimate certified will be presumed fair and
reasonable and will be the final estimate. The fees for the services of
the engineer who develops the final estimate will be paid equally by the
Borough and the applicant or developer.
C. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one year period by using the estimating procedure in
§ 315-67D.
§ 315-66 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-67
290:345
§ 315-68. Acceptable forms of financial security.
The acceptable forms of financial security are as follows:
D. Borough Council may annually adjust the amount of the financial
security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements that have
been completed and the estimated cost for the completion of the
remaining improvements. Subsequent to such adjustment Borough
Council may require the developer to post additional security in order
to assure that the financial security equals 110% of the estimated cost
of completion of the remaining required improvements. The developer
will post any additional security in accordance with this chapter.
A. Surety performance bond. A security bond from a surety bonding
company authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. The bond will be payable to the Borough of Lewisburg
and will be in a form satisfactory to Borough Council.
B. Escrow account. A deposit of cash with the Borough held in escrow with
a federal or commonwealth chartered financial institution. In the case
of an escrow account, the applicant or developer will file with Borough
Council an agreement between the financial institution and the
applicant or developer guaranteeing the following:
(1) That the funds of the escrow account will be held in trust until
released by the Borough and may not be used or pledged by the
developer as security in any other matter during that period.
(2) In the case of a failure on the part of the developer to complete the
said improvements, the institution will immediately make the funds
available to the Borough for use in the completion of those
improvements.
(3) Withdrawals from the account to pay for completed improvements
will be pursuant to § 315-69.
C. Letter of credit. An irrevocable commercial letter of credit provided by
the applicant and/or developer from a federal or commonwealth
chartered financial institution. This letter will be deposited with the
Borough and will certify the following:
(1) The amount of credit.
(2) In the case of failure on the part of the developer to complete the
specified improvements within a time period specified in a written
agreement between the Borough and the developer, the creditor
will pay to the Borough such funds as are necessary to finance the
completion of those improvements, up to the limit of credit stated
in the letter.
§ 315-67 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-68
290:346
§ 315-69. Partial release of improvements guarantee.
As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the party
posting the financial security may request Borough Council to release or
authorize the release, from time to time, such portions of the financial
security as are necessary for payment to the contractor or contractors
performing the work. Any such requests will be made in writing addressed
to Borough Council, and Borough Council will have 45 days from receipt
of such request to allow the Borough Engineer to certify, in writing, that
a portion of the work upon the improvements has been completed in
accordance with the approved plan. Upon certification Borough Council
will authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of
an amount estimated by the Borough Engineer to be the value of the
improvements completed. If Borough Council fails to act within the 45 day
period. Borough Council will be deemed to have approved the release of
funds as requested. Borough Council may, prior to final release at the time
of completion and certification by the Borough Engineer, require retention
of 10% of the estimated cost of aforesaid improvements.
§ 315-70. Final improvements inspection and release from
guarantee.
(3) The letter of credit is irrevocable and may not be withdrawn, or
reduced in amount, until released or partially reduced by the
Borough.
D. Certified check. A certified check payable to the Borough drawn on a
federal or commonwealth chartered financial institution.
E. Other forms of security. Any other form of guarantee acceptable to
Borough Council.
A. Notice of completion. When the developer has completed all of the
agreed-upon improvements the developer will notify Borough Council
in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
improvements and will send a copy also to the Borough Engineer.
Borough Council will, within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct
the Borough Engineer to inspect all of the improvements. The Borough
Engineer will file a written report with Borough Council and Borough
Council or the Borough Engineer will promptly mail a copy of it to the
developer by certified or registered mail. The report will be mailed
within 30 days after receipt by the Borough Engineer of the
authorization from Borough Council, the report will be detailed and will
indicate approval or rejection of the improvements, either in whole or in
part. If the Borough Engineer does not approve the improvements, or
any portion of them, the report will contain a statement of reasons for
such nonapproval or rejection.
B. Borough Council will notify the developer within 15 days of receipt of
the Engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered mail, of the
decision to accept or not accept the improvements.
§ 315-68 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-70
290:347
C. If Borough Council fails to comply with the time limitation provisions
contained herein, all improvements will be deemed to have been
approved, and the developer will be released from all liability pursuant
to its performance guaranty bond or other security agreement.
D. If any portion of the improvements will not be approved or will be
rejected by Borough Council, the developer will proceed to complete
the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification as
outlined in this section will be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, will be construed to limit the developer's right
to contest or question by legal proceedings or otherwise, any
determination of Borough Council or the Borough Engineer.
§ 315-70 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-70
290:348
ARTICLE VIII
Oversight of Construction
§ 315-71. Indemnification and insurance.
§ 315-72. Construction of improvements.
During construction of improvements the applicant and/or developer will be
responsible for the following:
§ 315-73. Inspection of improvements during construction.
A. The applicant and/or developer will protect, defend, indemnify, and
save harmless the Borough and its officers, employees, appointees and
agents thereof from all claims, suits, actions, and proceedings of every
nature and description that may be on account of any injuries or
damages to persons including wrongful death, or on account of any
damages to public or private property due to any of the following
materials or appliances used in the work, improper materials or
workmanship, or any accident or any other act, negligence, or omission
of said applicant and/or developer or the developer's officers,
employees, appointees, and agents. The Borough will not in any way be
liable therefore during the period of the work progress and for a period
of 18 months following the acceptance of work.
B. Without limiting the developer's liability to indemnify the Borough, the
developer agrees to carry liability insurance contracts with a reliable
insurance company acceptable to the Borough, which include the
Borough as an additional insured, and cover the period of said
construction in the sum of $1,000,000 for injury to or death of person(s)
and in the sum of $300,000 for damage to or destruction of property.
A. Constructing all improvements in strict accordance with the approved
subdivision and land development plan and this chapter.
B. Implementing all necessary plans to control, mitigate, and eliminate
any forms of pollution, disturbance, or destruction resulting from noise,
odor, stormwater, and/or excessive loads or repetitions of loads that
may occur during construction.
C. Work zone traffic control. The applicant and/or developer will furnish
the necessary guards, watchmen warning lights and similar items
necessary to maintain state highway and other street traffic in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 203 requirements. When traffic
cannot be detoured, a minimum of 1/2 the roadway will be open at all
times with traffic control. In limited and unique circumstances, with the
approval of Borough Council and/or PennDOT, limited closure might be
warranted.
A. Borough Council and the applicant or developer will mutually agree
upon a schedule of inspections by the Borough Engineer and/or other
§ 315-71 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-73
290:349
§ 315-74. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
In the event that any improvements that may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final
plan, the Borough may enforce any corporate bond or other security by
appropriate legal and equitable remedies as provided for in Section 511 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, P.L. 805,
(53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.) as from time to time reenacted and amended. If
the proceeds of the improvements bond or other security are insufficient
to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Borough may, at its option,
install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land
development and may institute appropriate legal proceedings whether
resulting from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought
against the developer, or both. All monies drawn against the improvements
bond or other security will be used solely for the installation of the
improvements covered by such security and not for any other purpose.
necessary consultants during construction, which will be made part
of a developer's agreement executed between the Borough and the
applicant and/or developer. At a minimum, Borough Council will require
inspections at critical stages of construction determined by Borough
Council and the Borough Engineer and/or other consultants.
B. The applicant or developer will notify Borough Council of the
construction schedule at least 48 hours prior to commencement of the
work stages identified in § 315-73A.
C. The applicant and/or developer will correct any portion of the work that
does not comply with the approved plan and this chapter. No work may
proceed on any subsequent phase of the construction until necessary
corrections have been made.
D. Site improvements will not advance to subsequent stages of
construction until authorized to do so after the satisfactory inspection
of the previous stage.
§ 315-73 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-74
290:350
ARTICLE IX
Dedication of Improvements
§ 315-75. Dedication and acceptance of improvements.
The Borough will not be required to accept dedication of improvements.
Improvements offered to the Borough for public ownership that the
Borough chooses to accept will be accepted by adopting an ordinance,
resolution, deed, or other formal document of acceptance. Improvements
will be deemed private until the following items are satisfied:
§ 315-76. Improvements maintenance guarantee.
Where the Borough has accepted dedication of certain improvements, it
will require the applicant or developer to post financial security to secure
the structural integrity of the improvements and the functioning of the
improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as shown
on the final plan for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of
acceptance of dedication. The financial security will be of the same type as
otherwise required in this section and the amount of the financial security
will not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
§ 315-77. Improvements not dedicated or not accepted for
dedication.
All improvements constructed as required by this chapter that will not
be publicly dedicated or accepted for dedication will meet the following
requirements:
A. Borough Council and/or Borough Engineer conducts a final inspection
certifying that all improvements have been satisfactorily installed
according to the approved final plan.
B. All inspection fees are paid.
C. An appropriate improvements maintenance guarantee has been posted.
D. A deed of dedication is provided.
A. Ownership and maintenance responsibility/entity. A viable entity
responsible for ownership and maintenance of all nondedicated
improvements will be established by the developer and approved by
Borough Council. Ownership and maintenance responsibilities may be
assigned to either the developer or among the property owners or an
association of property owners within the subdivision or land
development through the use of a declaration and other documents
approved by Borough Council. Such documents will be in conformance
with the Uniform Planned Community Act of December 19, 1996, No.
180, (68 Pa. C.S.A. § 5101) as amended.
B. Improvements benefiting multiple lots. For all nondedicated
improvements that will not be owned and maintained by the developer
§ 315-75 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-77
290:351
and are situated on an individual lot or a series of contiguous lots but
serve multiple lots, units, or the entire subdivision or land development
(e.g., stormwater management ponds) the responsibility for ownership
and maintenance of such improvements will be borne by all lot owners
benefiting or served and not solely the lot owner on whose lot the
improvements are situated.
C. Ownership and maintenance agreement. A private agreement will be
prepared, properly executed, and recorded in the Union County
Recorder of Deeds Office with the final subdivision or land development
plan, will run with the land, and will clearly identify the individual or
entity responsible for the ownership and maintenance of nondedicated
improvements. The agreement will be reviewed and approved by
Borough Council and, at a minimum, will stipulate the following:
(1) That the owners, an association of property owners, successors and
assigns will keep all improvements in a safe and attractive manner,
and the owners will convey to the Borough easements and/or
rights-of-way to assure access for periodic inspections by the
Borough and maintenance if required.
(2) That if the owners, association of property owners, successors, and
assigns fail to maintain the improvements following due notice by
the Borough to correct problems, the Borough may perform the
necessary work or corrective action and the owners or association
of property owners will reimburse the Borough for these services
and any administrative costs. The Borough will have the authority
to assert a judgment lien against the said owners or association of
property owners for failure to make the reimbursement(s).
D. Deed reference. All deeds created for lots that contain nondedicated
improvements will make clear and specific reference as to the
following:
(1) Description of all improvements not dedicated.
(2) The individual(s) or entity responsible for ownership and
maintenance of the improvements in accordance with § 315-77A
through C of this chapter.
(3) The ownership and maintenance agreement as required by
§ 315-77C of this chapter.
(4) Terms and conditions of the required maintenance.
(5) Provision that no improvements will be eliminated or altered
without the written approval of Borough Council.
(6) Provision that in the event improvements are altered, eliminated,
or improperly maintained the Borough may prescribe necessary
corrective measures and a reasonable time period to perform such
work. If corrective action is not taken in the time period specified
§ 315-77 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-77
290:352
the Borough may cause the work to be performed and invoice the
ownership and maintenance entity, including the assertion of a
judgment lien against it.
(7) Provision that all improvements not offered for dedication may be
offered in the future if the improvements meet the minimum
standards of this and/or applicable Borough ordinances in effect at
the time the offer of dedication is made. If the improvements do not
conform to the minimum standards in effect, the improvements
must be improved to meet the standards prior to the offer for public
dedication with all costs to improve the improvements being borne
by the owner, association of property owners, or their successors
and assigns. The Borough will have no obligation to accept the
improvements in any case.
§ 315-77 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-77
290:353

ARTICLE X
Administration and Enforcement
§ 315-78. Fees.
§ 315-79. Past due or unpaid fees.
A. The Borough Council will establish by resolution the required
subdivision and land development plan application review fees to cover
costs incurred by the Borough for reviewing and processing
applications submitted and determining compliance under this chapter.
A copy of the most recent fee resolution will be available in the Borough
Office.
B. Review fees will cover but not be limited to the expenses and costs of
the following:
(1) Borough employees involved in the review and processing of
applications.
(2) Charges by the Borough's professional consultants, including but
not limited to expert witnesses, attorneys, engineers, planners, or
other required specialists for undertaking reviews, reports, field
trips, and recommendations, including attendance at necessary
meetings and public hearings for the preparation of any legal or
other documents required by the proposed plan and also for the
inspection of improvements installed by the applicant.
(3) Fees charged to the Borough to cover the cost of any review, report,
or recommendation for applications submitted to other appropriate
agencies.
(4) The cost of required advertising and/or public notices.
C. An initial application fee is due at the time of plan submission and a
plan will not be accepted without the applicable fee.
D. Additional review fees may be required to cover the costs of additional
services in excess of the initial fees collected.
E. All fees will be payable to the "Borough of Lewisburg."
F. Applicable review fees will be submitted at the time of plan application,
and engineering and/or consultant review or inspection fees will be
submitted immediately upon receiving an invoice for such fees.
G. An applicant may dispute the amount of review and inspection fees in
accordance with the procedures for fee dispute resolution contained in
Sections 503 (1) and 510 (g) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, P.L. 805, (53 P.S. § 10101, et seq.) as
from time to time reenacted and amended.
§ 315-78 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-79
290:355
§ 315-80. Waivers.
§ 315-81. Right to challenge and appeal.
Appeals from a decision or the absence of a decision under this chapter will
be based on the provisions of the relevant provisions of the Municipalities
Planning Code and other relevant statutes and rules.
A. Borough Council will not accept new applications for subdivision or
land development proposals from applicants with past due or unpaid
fees until all such payments in arrears are made in full including any
accrued interest.
B. Borough Council will not approve applications for subdivision or land
development submitted by applicants with past due or unpaid fees until
all such payments in arrears are made in full including any accrued
interest.
A. An applicant may request the grant of a waiver by Borough Council to
any provision(s) of this chapter.
B. The Planning Commission will review all waiver requests and will make
recommendations to the Borough Council on such requests. Unless
otherwise specified herein, the Borough Council will have the sole
authority to grant or deny a waiver request.
C. The Borough Council may grant a waiver of the requirements of one or
more provisions of this chapter, if the literal enforcement will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question, provided that such waiver will not be contrary to the public
interest and that the purpose and intent of the ordinance is observed.
D. In granting waivers. Borough Council may impose such conditions as
will, in its judgment, encourage innovative design and/or secure
substantially the objectives of the standards and requirements of this
chapter.
E. All requests for waivers will be in writing and will accompany and be
part of the application for development. The request will state in full the
grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the
request is based, the provision or provisions of the ordinance involved
and the minimum waiver necessary.
F. The applicant will note all waivers granted on the final plan.
G. Borough staff will not have the authority to grant waivers to this
chapter.
§ 315-79 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-82
290:356
§ 315-82. Records.
Borough Council will keep for the public record a written record of all
activity related to plans upon which action is taken, including all requests
for and action taken on waivers.
§ 315-83. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
the Borough and/or Borough Council may enter at reasonable times upon
any property under jurisdiction of this chapter to inspect the condition
of the properties, facilities, and improvements in regard to any aspect
regulated by this chapter.
§ 315-84. Ordinance violations.
§ 315-85. Previous violations.
§ 315-86. Preventive remedies.
A. Discovery of violation. Upon discovery of an alleged violation of this
chapter, the Borough will refuse to issue any permit or grant any
approval necessary to further improve or develop the property.
B. Written notice. The Borough will notify an applicant, developer, and/or
property owner of violations of this chapter in writing, by certified mail
"return receipt requested" or by handcarried delivery, immediately
upon being made aware of such violations. Notices of violation issued
by the Borough will state the facts pertaining to the violation, cite those
provisions of the ordinance in violation, specify a time within which the
violation will be corrected in order to prevent further enforcement
action, and indicate the applicant's right to an appeal.
C. Cease and desist. Any person, partnership, or corporation notified of a
violation of this chapter will immediately cease and desist all activity
related to the violation until the matter is resolved to Borough Council's
satisfaction.
A. Where an application is proposed for a tract of land, portions of which
have previously been subdivided or developed in violation of this
chapter, such application will include a description and plan detailing
all previous lots sold or transferred without proper approval.
B. Borough Council reserves the right to require that all lands subdivided
or developed without proper approval of Borough Council meet the
minimum standards of this chapter.
A. Authority to initiate court action. In addition to other remedies the
Borough may institute and maintain appropriate actions in law or
equity to restrain, correct, or abate violations, to prevent unlawful
construction; to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure, or premise. The description by metes and bounds in
§ 315-82 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-86
290:357
§ 315-87. Injunctions.
Borough Council will have the power and authority to seek legal redress
by filing an action for injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin the transfer, sale, or agreement to transfer or sell any unapproved
subdivision and/or to enjoin any type of construction or improvement by
an applicant or landowner when a violation of this chapter has been
determined, and to enjoin the Recorder of Deeds from the recordation of
any unapproved subdivision or land development plan or deed of sale made
in violation of this chapter.
§ 315-88. Enforcement remedies.
the instrument of transfer, or other documents used in the process of
selling or transferring, will not exempt the seller or transferor from
such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
B. As provided by Section 515 1(b) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, P.L. 805, (53 P.S. § 10515.1 (b). et seq.)
as from time to time reenacted and amended Borough Council may
refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval necessary to further
improve or develop any real property which has been developed or
which has resulted from a subdivision of real property in violation of
this chapter. This authority to deny such permit or approval will apply to
any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation, without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of
approval to any owner, current owner, vendee, or lessee for the
development of any such real property, Borough Council may require
compliance with the conditions that would have applied to the property
at the time the applicant acquired an interest in the real property.
A. Any person, partnership, or corporation who or which has violated any
provision of this chapter, will, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment
of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
§ 315-86 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-88
290:358
B. No judgment will commence or be imposed levied, or payable until the
date of determination by a District Judge.
C. If the defendant neither pays nor appeals the decision in a timely
manner, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure.
D. Each day that a violation continues will constitute a separate violation,
unless the District Judge or the Court of Common Pleas of Union
County, determining that there has been a violation, further determines
that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating the ordinance to have believed that there was no
such violation. In that event, there will be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of determination
of a violation by the District Judge or the said Court, and thereafter
each day that a violation continues will constitute a separate violation.
E. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter will be paid to "Borough of Lewisburg."
F. The Union County Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an
order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
G. Nothing contained in this section will be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity, other than the Borough of Lewisburg, the
right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 315-88 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 315-88
290:359
Chapter 324
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auditor — See Ch. 65, Art. I.
§ 315-88 LEWISBURG CODE § 315-88
324:360
ARTICLE I
Local ServicesTax
[Adopted 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 98642]
§ 324-1. Short title.
This Article I shall be known and may be cited as "The Borough of
Lewisburg Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 324-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Lewisburg.
BOROUGH OF LEWISBURG or BOROUGH — The area within the corporate
limits of the Borough of Lewisburg.
CALENDAR YEAR — January 1 to December 31, inclusive, of any year.
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee, partnership, association,
corporation or other business entity designated by the Borough of
Lewisburg to collect and administer the local services tax imposed and
levied by this article and also the emergency and municipal services tax and
the occupation privilege tax due during any calendar year prior to calendar
year 2008, whose compensation shall be established from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by an individual or his
personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or through
an agent, and whether in cash or in property, not including, however,
wages or compensation paid to persons on active military service, periodic
payments for sickness and disability other than regular wages received
during a period of sickness, disability or retirement or payments arising
under workmen's compensation acts, occupational disease acts and similar
legislation, or payments commonly recognized as old-age benefits,
retirement pay or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment or payments
commonly known as "public assistance," or unemployment compensation
payments by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse expenses
or payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and salary
42.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax, adopted 12-30-1974 by Ord. No. 74-7, as amended 1-18-1978 by Ord. No.
78-1, 12-16-1980 by Ord. No. 80-11, and 1-18-2005 by Ord. No. 962, and stated that it
shall become effective 30 days after its enactment for calendar year 2008 and on a
continuing annual basis for all calendar years thereafter, unless repealed, modified, or
amended by ordinance.
§ 324-1 TAXATION § 324-2
324:361
supplemental programs, including, but not limited to, programs covering
hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental unemployment
benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
institution, governmental body or unit, agency or any other entity employing
one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
basis, including a self-employed individual.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Borough of Lewisburg.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity after provision for all costs and expenses
incurred in the conduct thereof, determined either on a cash or accrual
basis in accordance with the accounting system used in such business,
profession, or other activity, but without deduction of taxes based on
income.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or performed within the corporate limits of the Borough of Lewisburg for
which compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary,
wages, commission or fees for the services rendered.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate imposed and levied by this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 324-3. Imposition and levy of tax.
An annual tax is hereby imposed, levied and assessed on each occupation
engaged in by individuals with a primary place of employment within the
Borough of Lewisburg during calendar year 2008 and each calendar year
thereafter. Each individual who engages in an occupation for any length
of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year, assessed on a
pro rata basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax
shall be used solely for the following purposes as the same may be allocated
by Borough Council from time to time: 1) emergency services, which shall
include emergency medical services, police services and/or fire services; 2)
road construction and/or maintenance; 3) reduction of property taxes; or 4)
property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and farmstead
exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85, Subchapter F
(relating to homestead property exclusion) or as hereafter amended. The
Borough shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the tax
for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any
kind or nature heretofore levied by the Borough of Lewisburg, except for
the occupation privilege tax, which was rescinded beginning with calendar
§ 324-2 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-3
324:362
year 2005, and the emergency and municipal services tax, which is hereby
rescinded beginning with calendar year 2008.
§ 324-4. Rate of tax.
Beginning with calendar year 2008, and continuing during each calendar
year thereafter, each occupation engaged in by individuals with a primary
place of employment within the Borough of Lewisburg shall be subject to a
tax in the amount of $52 per annum, said tax to be paid by the individual
so engaged. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each individual for each
calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within
which an individual may be employed.
§ 324-5. Exemption; refunds.
A. Exemption. Any individual whose total earned income and net profits
from all sources within the Borough is less than $12,000 during any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total, one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the tax
year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve component of
the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army Reserve,
United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve,
United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force
Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) An individual seeking to claim an exemption from the local services
tax shall annually file an exemption certificate with the Borough
and with the individual's employer affirming that the individual
reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits from
all sources within the Borough of less than $12,000 in the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate is filed. In the event the
Borough utilizes a Collector, it shall provide a copy of the
exemption certificate to that Collector. The exemption certificate
shall have attached to it a copy of all the individual's last pay stubs
or W-2 forms from employment within the Borough for the year
prior to the tax year for which the individual is requesting to be
§ 324-3 TAXATION § 324-5
324:363
exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate
and until otherwise instructed by the Borough or except as
required by Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the
tax from the individual during the calendar year or the remainder
of the calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies.
Employers shall ensure that the exemption certificate forms are
readily available to employees at all times and shall furnish each
new employee with a form at the time of hiring.
(2) With respect to an individual who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
individual or by the Borough that the individual has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the Borough
equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the
individual is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the individual of
earned income within the Borough in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the individual under Subsection B(3).
(3) If an individual who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the individual, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the individual due to the
exemption claimed by the individual under this subsection, plus the
per-payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of
tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in
that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of an individual subject to
withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the individual shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the Borough or the Collector may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility, or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough Manager, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the General Municipal
Law relating to refunds of overpayments (see 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8425 or as
hereafter amended) and interest on overpayments (see 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 8426 or as hereafter amended). Refunds made within 75 days of a
refund request or 75 days after the last day the employer is required to
remit the tax for the last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is
§ 324-5 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-5
324:364
§ 324-6. Duty of employers to collect.
later, shall not be subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for
amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do not exceed $1. The
Borough Manager or the Collector shall determine eligibility for exempt
persons and provide refunds.
A. Each employer within the Borough of Lewisburg, as well as those
employers situated outside the Borough of Lewisburg but who engage
in business within the Borough of Lewisburg, is hereby charged with
the duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by
him or performing for him within the Borough of Lewisburg and making
a return and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer
is hereby authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the Borough of
Lewisburg.
B. An individual subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro
rata share of the tax for each payroll period in which the individual is
engaged in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the
individual for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the
combined rate of the tax levied for the calendar year by the number of
payroll periods established by the employer for the calendar year. For
purposes of determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round
down the amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest
1/100 of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll period
basis for each payroll period in which the individual is engaged in an
occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the Borough.
C. No individual shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each individual for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which
an individual may be employed. The Borough or the Collector shall
provide a taxpayer with a receipt of payment upon request by the
taxpayer.
§ 324-5 TAXATION § 324-6
324:365
§ 324-7. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to an
employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer shall be
responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been
originally levied against the employer.
§ 324-8. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 324-9. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession with a primary place of
employment within the Borough of Lewisburg shall be required to comply
with this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector
on or before the 30th day following the end of each quarter of a calendar
year.
§ 324-10. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the Borough or the Collector if
the failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information
submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or places of
employment, the employee's principal office or where the employee is
principally employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for
payment of the local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount
withheld by the employer if the employer complies with the provisions
of Subsection B of § 324-5 of this article and this section and remits the
amount so withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services tax within 30
days after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
A. Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the
Borough of Lewisburg shall be subject to the payment of the tax on his
principal occupation, and his principal employer shall deduct the tax
and deliver to him evidence of deductions on a form to be furnished to
the employer by the Collector, which form shall be evidence of
deduction having been made and when presented to any other
employer shall be authority for such employer to not deduct the tax
from the employee's salary, wages or commissions but to include such
§ 324-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-10
324:366
§ 324-11. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the Borough of Lewisburg but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
Borough of Lewisburg do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and
subject themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated
under this article with the same force and effect as though they were
residents of the Borough of Lewisburg. Further, any individual engaged
in an occupation within the Borough of Lewisburg and an employee of a
nonresidential employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered
a self-employed individual, and in the event his tax is not paid, the Borough
or the Collector shall have the option of proceeding against either the
employer or employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 324-12. Administration of tax.
employee on his return by setting forth the name and address of the
employee and the name and account number of the employer who
deducted the tax.
B. Situs of tax; priority of claim.
(1) The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first
day the individual becomes subject to the tax during each payroll
period. In the event an individual is engaged in more than one
occupation, that is, concurrent employment, or an occupation
which requires the individual to work in more than one political
subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim to collect
the local services tax shall be in the following order:
(a) First, the political subdivision in which an individual maintains
his principal office or is principally employed;
(b) Second, the political subdivision in which the individual resides
and works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision; and
(c) Third, the political subdivision in which an individual is
employed and which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the
individual's home.
(2) In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that
calendar year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment
constitutes prima facie certification of payment to all other political
subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of Borough Council. It
shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of the
tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him
from each employer or self-employed individual, together with the date
the tax was received.
§ 324-10 TAXATION § 324-12
324:367
§ 324-13. Suits for collection of unpaid taxes.
§ 324-13.1. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts in his
custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject to the tax
who are in his employment, or fails or refuses to file any return required by
this article shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction
therefor in a summary proceeding, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 for each offense, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30
days for each offense. The action to enforce payment of the tax, interest and
penalty thereon, fine and costs as provided in this article may be instituted
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to Borough Council approval, to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions
for the examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this
article, the examination and correction of any return made in
compliance with this article and any payment alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall
have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Union County
as in other cases provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that the tax under this article or any part thereof remains
due or unpaid 30 days after the due dates hereinabove set forth in this
article, the Collector may sue for the recovery of any such tax due or
unpaid under this article, together with interest and penalty accruing
thereon. Nothing herein shall prevent the Borough of Lewisburg from
recovering any such tax due or unpaid, together with all interest and
penalty accruing thereon, the same as other debts of like amount are
recoverable.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of the tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
§ 324-12 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-13.1
324:368
against any person in charge of the business of any employer who failed or
refuses to pay the tax or to file a return required by this article.
§ 324-13.2. Interpretation; severability.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough of Lewisburg to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the Borough under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.\
B. If the tax imposed and levied under the provisions of this article or any
sentence, clause, paragraph, section or provision of this article is for
any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid by any court
of competent jurisdiction in general or as to any individual, such
unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any
of the remaining sentences, clauses, paragraphs, sections or provisions
of this article or affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax
or the validity of such tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as
herein provided.
§ 324-13.1 TAXATION § 324-13.2
324:369

ARTICLE II
Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 11-18-1986 by Ord. No. 819]
§ 324-14. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Business Privilege Tax Ordinance."
§ 324-15. Definitions. [Amended 1-20-1987 by Ord. No. 823]
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning. The masculine shall include the feminine, the
singular includes the plural, and vice versa.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania.
BUSINESS — Any activity carried on, engaged in or exercised for gain,
profit or otherwise in the Borough of Lewisburg, Union County,
Pennsylvania, including, but not limited to, the sale of merchandise or other
personalty and/or realty, the performance of services, and the rental of
personalty and/or realty.
CALENDAR YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
LICENSE YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
firm, corporation of any class, and/or any other entity. Whenever used
in any clause prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term "person" as
applied to associations shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers thereof, and if there are no officers, the
shareholders thereof.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR — The person, firm, or entity duly appointed by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Lewisburg to administer and collect the
within tax and shall include his or its deputies.
TAXPAYER — A person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31, inclusive.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business that
is conducted within the Borough of Lewisburg for less than 60 consecutive
days.
WHOLE OR GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — The whole or gross value
of revenue received in cash, credits or property of any kind or nature by
any person engaging in business in the Borough of Lewisburg, without
deduction on account of cost or expenses incurred in connection therewith.
WHOLESALE DEALER OR VENDOR — Any person who sells to dealers in
or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to no other persons.
§ 324-14 TAXATION § 324-16
324:371
§ 324-16. Registration and license.
§ 324-17. Imposition and rate of tax. [Amended 1-20-1987 by Ord.
No. 823]
There is hereby levied for the tax year 1987 and for each tax year thereafter,
a tax for general revenue purposes on the privilege of doing business within
the Borough, at the rate of 3/4 of a mill on each and every dollar of the
whole or gross volume of business transacted within the territorial limits of
the Borough (3/4 mill shall mean $0.75 per $1,000 of the whole or gross
volume of business); except that the rate of tax on each and every dollar
of the whole or gross volume of business transacted by wholesale dealers
or wholesale vendors within the territorial limits of the Borough shall be
1/2 of a mill (1/2 mill shall mean $0.50 per $1,000 of the whole or gross
volume of business). All non-wholesale business of such wholesale dealers
or wholesale vendors shall be taxed at the general rate of 3/4 of a mill.
§ 324-18. Computation of volume of business.
A. After the effective date of this article, any person desiring to conduct or
to engage in, or to continue to conduct or engage in, any business
within the Borough, whether or not he maintains a place of business
within the Borough, shall, on or before the 31st day of January of the
license year or prior to the commencement of business in such license
year, make application with the Tax Administrator for one registration
for each place of business within the Borough or, if such person has no
actual place of business within the Borough, make application for only
one registration. Such registration shall be made only once by the
completion of an application furnished by the Tax Administrator and the
payment of a fee of $10. Each application for registration shall be
signed by the applicant, if a natural person, and in the case of a
corporation by an officer or duly authorized local manager thereof or in
the case of an association or a partnership by a member or partner
thereof.
B. Each applicant shall receive a certificate of registration, or license,
from the Tax Administrator, which shall be assignable. Such certificate
shall be conspicuously posted at all times in the place of business for
which it is issued. In the case of loss, defacement or destruction of any
such certificate, the person to whom the certificate was issued shall
reapply to the Tax Administrator for a new certificate, for which a fee of
$10 shall be charged.
A. Every person subject to the payment of the business privilege tax
imposed by this article who has commenced his business at least one
full calendar year prior to the beginning of any tax year, shall compute
his annual estimated whole or gross volume of business upon the actual
amount of the whole or gross receipts received by or credited to him
during the preceding calendar year.
§ 324-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-18
324:372
§ 324-19. Persons, business and receipts exempted.
B. Every person subject to the payment of the business privilege tax
imposed by this article who has commenced or who commences his
business less than one calendar year prior to the beginning of the tax
year, shall compute his annual estimated whole or gross volume of
business for such tax year by taking the monthly average of whole or
gross receipts by him or credited to him during that period of the prior
calendar year during which he transacted or conducted business and
multiplying the same by 12.
C. Every person subject to the payment of the business privilege tax
imposed by this article who has commenced or commences his business
subsequent to the beginning of the tax year, shall compute his annual
whole or gross volume of business upon the actual whole or gross
amount of receipts received by or credited to him during such tax year.
D. Every person subject to the payment of the business privilege tax
imposed by this article who engages in a business which is temporary,
seasonal or itinerant by its nature, shall compute his annual estimated
whole or gross volume of business upon the actual amount of the whole
or gross receipts received by or credited to him during the period of the
tax year in which he engages in such temporary, seasonal or itinerant
business. All persons engaged in such temporary, seasonal or itinerant
businesses shall be required to make a deposit toward the tax hereby
imposed in an amount determined by the Tax Administrator prior to
their engaging in or conducting such business.
E. Every person who ceases to carry on a business during any tax year
after having paid the business privilege tax imposed by this article for
the entire year shall, upon making proper application to the Tax
Administrator, be entitled to receive a refund of the pro rata amount of
the tax paid based upon the period of time he was not in business
during the tax year. In the event that a person who discontinues
business during any tax year does so before payment of his tax becomes
due for such tax year, he shall be permitted to apportion his tax for such
tax year and shall pay an amount to be computed by multiplying his
whole or gross receipts for the preceding full calendar year by a
fraction whose numerator shall be the number of months such person
was in business during the tax year and whose denominator shall be 12.
F. The Tax Administrator is hereby authorized to accept payment under
protest of the amount of the business privilege tax claimed by the
Borough in any case where the taxpayer disputes the validity or amount
of the Borough's claim for tax. If it is thereafter judicially determined by
a court of competent jurisdiction that the Borough has been overpaid,
the amount of the overpayment shall be refunded to the taxpayer. The
provisions of this particular subsection shall be applicable to any and all
cases in which the facts are similar to those in a case actually litigated
in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 324-18 TAXATION § 324-19
324:373
§ 324-20. Determination of whole or gross volume of business.
The whole or gross volume of business upon which the business privilege
tax imposed by this article is computed shall include the gross consideration
credited to or received by the taxpayer which is attributed or allocable
to business conducted in the Borough, without deduction therefrom for or
on account of the costs of property sold, materials used, labor, service, or
other costs, interest or discount paid, or any other expense or cost of doing
business.
A. Persons and businesses. Persons employed for a wage or salary,
nonprofit corporations or associations organized for religious,
charitable or educational purposes, agencies of the United States or of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the business of any of its
political subdivisions or of any authority created or organized under
and pursuant to any act of assembly, are exempt from the provisions of
this article. The activities of an independent contractor shall not be
considered as employment for wage or salary.
B. State tax or license fee. No business privilege tax shall be assessed and
collected on a privilege, transaction, subject or occupation which is
subject to a State tax or license fee, and which tax or license fee has
been held by the Courts of Pennsylvania to be the basis for exemption
from the imposition of a business privilege tax by a municipality.
C. Utilities. No business privilege tax shall be assessed and collected on
the gross receipts from utility service of any person or company whose
rates of service are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission; or on any public utility service rendered by any
such Person or company or on any privilege or transaction involving the
rendering of any such public utility service.
D. State tax on tangible property. No business privilege tax shall be
assessed and collected on the privilege of employing such tangible
property as is subject to a state tax, except on sales of admission to
places of amusement or on sales or other transfers of title or possession
of property.
E. Exemption by law. Any other person exempt by law from the imposition
of a business privilege tax or any business upon which the power to levy
such tax is withheld by law, shall not be subject to the business privilege
tax imposed by this article.
A. Exclusions. The following shall not be included in the computation of
whole or gross volume of business:
(1) The dollar volume of business transacted by wholesale and retail
dealers derived from the resale of goods, wares and merchandise
taken by any dealer as trade-in or as part payment for other goods,
wares and merchandise, except to the extent that the resale price
exceeds the trade-in allowance.
§ 324-19 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-20
324:374
§ 324-21. Records of the whole or gross volume of business.
Each taxpayer shall keep full, complete and accurate books and records
of account of the business, as defined herein, conducted or rendered by
him in the Borough, including a full, complete and accurate account of the
(2) Refunds, credits, or allowances given by a taxpayer to a purchaser
on account of defects in goods, wares or merchandise sold, or on
account of goods, wares or merchandise returned.
(3) Any commissions paid by a broker to another broker on account of
a purchase or sales contract initiated, executed or cleared in
conjunction with such other broker.
(4) In the case of a financial business, the cost of securities and other
properties sold, exchanged, paid at maturity, or redeemed, and
moneys or credits received in repayment of advances, credits and
loans (not to exceed the principal amount of such advances, credits
or loans), and deposits.
(5) Bad debts, where the deduction is also taken in the same year for
federal income taxation purposes.
(6) Taxes collected as agent for the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and/or its political subdivisions.
B. Allocation. Where the whole or gross volume of business in its entirety
cannot be subjected to the business privilege tax imposed by this article
by reason of the provisions of the Constitution of the United States or
any other provision of law, the Tax Administrator with the approval of
the Borough shall establish rules and regulations and methods of
allocation and evaluation so that only that part of the whole or gross
volume of business which is properly attributable and allocable to
business conducted or rendered in the Borough shall be taxed
hereunder.
C. Apportionment. If any person is liable for the same tax on the same
subject imposed under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended, to the Borough and one or
more other political subdivisions of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
then and in that event the business privilege tax imposed by this article
shall be apportioned by such political subdivisions, but, in no event,
shall the combined taxes of both subdivisions exceed the maximum rate
of tax as fixed by the said Local Tax Enabling Act permitting the
imposition of such taxes.
D. Records. The taxpayer, to obtain the foregoing enumerated exclusions
and deductions, shall keep books and records of his business so as to
show clearly, accurately and separately the amount of such sales and
services as are excluded from the business privilege tax imposed by this
article and the amounts of such sales and services which he is entitled
to deduct from the gross volume of business as hereinbefore provided.
§ 324-20 TAXATION § 324-21
324:375
gross consideration or other thing of value credited to, received in, allocable
to, or attributed to business conducted or rendered in the Borough. Such
books, records and account must disclose in detail the gross receipts and
other data pertaining to the taxpayer's gross volume of business and must
be sufficiently complete to enable the Tax Administrator or his deputies
to verify all such transactions. The Tax Administrator or his deputies are
hereby authorized to examine, inspect and/or copy all books, papers and
records of any person or persons subject to or supposed to be subject to
the business privilege tax imposed by this article, and such taxpayer shall
produce the same for the inspection, review and/or copying of the Tax
Administrator or his deputies at such times and places as specified by the
Tax Administrator or his deputies.
§ 324-22. Returns.
A. Every return shall be made upon a form prescribed and/or furnished by
the Tax Administrator in which a taxpayer shall set forth his name, his
business, business address and such other information as may be
required by the Tax Administrator. Every person making a return shall
certify the correctness thereof by affidavit or verification. Each return
shall be documented by appropriate schedule to verify its accuracy.
B. Every person subject to the business privilege tax imposed by this
article who has commenced his business at least one full calendar year
prior to the beginning of any tax year, shall, on or before the 15th day of
April of said tax year, file with the Tax Administrator, together with the
payment of the tax due, a return setting forth the estimated whole or
gross volume of business for the tax year based on the actual whole or
gross volume of business transacted in the prior calendar year in
accordance with § 324-18A of this article.
C. Every person subject to the business privilege tax imposed by this
article who has commenced his business less than one full calendar
year prior to the beginning of any tax year, shall, on or before the 15th
day of April of said tax year, file with the Tax Administrator, together
with payment of the tax due, a return setting forth the estimated whole
or gross volume of business for the tax year calculated in accordance
with § 324-18B of this article.
D. Every person subject to the business privilege tax imposed by this
article who has commenced or commences business subsequent to the
beginning of any tax year, shall, on or before January 31st of the year
immediately following the tax year, file with the Tax Administrator,
together with payment of the tax due, a return containing the actual or
whole or gross amount of business transacted by him as calculated
under § 324-18C of this article.
E. Every person subject to the payment of the business privilege tax
imposed by this article who engages in a business which is temporary,
seasonal or itinerant by its nature, shall, within seven days from the
date he completes such business, file with the Tax Administrator,
§ 324-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-22
324:376
§ 324-23. Receipt of payment.
The Tax Administrator shall, upon receipt of payment by him of the business
privilege tax imposed by this article, give the person paying the same a
receipt therefor or some other acknowledgement of receipt as the Tax
Administrator may determine.
§ 324-24. Payment of tax and penalties for late payment.
The business privilege tax levied pursuant to this article shall be due and
payable on the date on which the taxpayer is required to file a return as set
forth hereinabove, and if the same is not paid on said date, any taxpayer
who shall fail to pay said tax shall be charged a penalty of 10% of the
amount of the tax due, plus interest of 18% per annum on the amount of
the tax due or 1.5% for each month or fractional part thereof, commencing
from the day when said tax was due until the day it is paid. The said penalty
and interest shall be added to and become a part of the tax due and shall be
collectible in the same manner as the tax.
§ 324-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall conduct, transact or engage in any of the businesses
subject to the business privilege tax imposed by this article without having
first secured a business privilege license, or any person who shall fail to
file a tax return as required by the provisions of this article, or any person
who shall refuse to produce books and records for inspection, review or
copying as may be required by the Tax Administrator or his deputies, or any
person who shall willfully file a false return, shall, upon conviction thereof
in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $300 for any one offense, plus costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period
not to exceed 90 days; provided, however, that each day's continuance of a
violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such. The fine and costs imposed by this
together with the payment of any tax due after credit for any advanced
payment made, a return containing the actual whole or gross amount
of business transacted by him as calculated under § 324-18D of this
article.
F. Any person going out of or ceasing to do business shall within 14 days
from the date of ceasing to do business, file with the Tax Administrator,
together with payment of the tax due, a return setting forth the actual
whole or gross volume of business constructed or transacted by such
person during that tax year in which said person ceased doing business.
If such tax has been previously paid based upon estimated gross
receipts, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of
any excess tax paid for the tax year in which the business was
terminated.
§ 324-22 TAXATION § 324-25
324:377
section shall be in addition to any penalty and interest imposed by § 324-24
of this article.
§ 324-26. Duties and powers of the Tax Administrator.
A. The Tax Administrator is charged with the duties of administering this
article and collecting and receiving the taxes, interest, fines and
penalties imposed by this article. It shall be his duty to keep a record
showing the amount received by him from each person paying the tax
and the date of such receipt. The Tax Administrator may delegate his
authority hereunder, with the approval and consent of the Borough
Council of the Borough, to a deputy or deputies.
B. The Tax Administrator is hereby empowered, with the approval and
consent of the Borough Council of the Borough, to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to
the administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions
for the examination and correction of returns, and payments alleged or
found to be incorrect, or as to which any overpayment is claimed, or
found to have occurred, and charged with enforcing the provisions of
this article and any rules and/or regulations promulgated pursuant
hereto.
C. In the event the person to be assessed neglects or refuses to make a
return, then in such case, the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed
deputies shall assess said person or persons on such an amount of
whole or gross volume of business as the Tax Administrator or his
deputies deem reasonable and appropriate. In all cases of assessment,
the Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall give the
parties assessed a notice in which shall be stated the amount of the
business privilege tax assessed against him.
D. The Tax Administrator or his deputies are hereby authorized to compel
the production of books, papers and records, and/or writings and
documents of every nature and kind, of any person or persons subject
or supposed to be subject to the tax imposed by this article, for his
review, inspection or copying, and the attendance of all persons before
him, whether as parties or witnesses, whom he believes to have
knowledge of such books, papers, records, documents, writings and/or
knowledge of the business transacted by any taxpayer within the
Borough.
E. The Tax Administrator or his deputies are hereby authorized to
examine, review, inspect or copy the books, papers, records and
documents of any person or persons subject or supposed to be subject
to the tax imposed by this article, in order to verify the accuracy of any
return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due. Every
such taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed and required to
give the Tax Administrator or his deputies the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
§ 324-25 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-26
324:378
§ 324-27. Confidential nature of returns, etc.
Any information gained by the Tax Administrator, his deputies or any other
official agent or employee of the Borough as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article, shall be confidential, except in accordance with proper judicial
order or as otherwise provided by law.
§ 324-28. Suit on collection and penalty.
§ 324-29. Savings and severability clauses.
F. The Tax Administrator shall, with the consent and approval of the
Borough Council of the Borough, establish rules, regulations and
methods of allocation and evaluation so that only that part of such
receipts received or credited during the tax year which are properly
attributable and allocable to the doing of business in the Borough shall
be taxed hereunder. The Tax Administrator may make such allocation
with due regard to the nature of the business concerned on the basis of
the division of the receipts according to the number of jurisdictions in
which it may be taxed, the ratio of the value of the property or assets of
the taxpayer owned and situated in the Borough to the total property or
assets of the taxpayer wherever owned and situated, or to any other
method or methods of calculation other than the foregoing, calculated
to effect a fair and proper allocation.
G. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator shall
have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas, as in other
cases.
A. The Tax Administrator or his duly appointed deputies shall have the
power in the name of the Borough to institute proceedings against any
and all persons who violate the provisions of this article.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due and suit is brought for the
recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor, shall, in addition,
be liable for the costs of collection and interest and penalties herein
imposed.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or
any business, or any portion of any business not within the taxing power
of the Borough under the Constitution of the United States and the laws
and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent power
or jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States
or of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
other provision of law, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair
§ 324-26 TAXATION § 324-29
324:379
§ 324-30. Effective date.
This article shall become effective 30 days after enactment or on January
1, 1987, whichever shall be later, and shall remain in effect and continue
thereafter from year to year on a calendar year basis unless amended or
repealed.
the right to impose the taxes, or the validity of the taxes so imposed
upon other persons as herein provided.
C. The provisions of this article are severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, the decision of the
court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this
article. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Borough Council
of the Borough that this article would have been adopted if such illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional provisions had not been included herein.
§ 324-29 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-30
324:380
ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Amended 1-20-1987 by Ord. No. 826]
§ 324-31. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania."
§ 324-32. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough of Lewisburg, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate
Tax Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 3101-D et seq.
§ 324-33. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning. The masculine includes the feminine, the
singular includes the plural, and vice versa.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania.
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust, or
banking institution which is organized under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
county or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deed of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§§ 324-32 and 324-38 hereof.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
§ 324-31 TAXATION § 324-33
324:381
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brother and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of the foregoing,
a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the foregoing.
Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be treated as if
they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and Slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operation of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Borough, including
without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees,
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance or land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 324-33 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-33
324:382
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate, or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assured, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate; provided, however, that where such documents shall set forth a
nominal consideration the "value" thereof shall be determined from the
price set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgement or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value
of which is not determinable under Subsection A or B above, of this
definition, the actual monetary worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
D.
§ 324-33 TAXATION § 324-33
324:383
§ 324-34. Imposition of tax; interest.
§ 324-35. Exempt parties.
The United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from
payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257 (53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.), so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer then the tax levied by the Borough under the
authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and
such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of
the Borough; provided, however, that the Borough and any other
political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under "The Local Tax Enabling Act."
D. Any tax imposed herein that is not paid by the date the tax is due shall
bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims
under the Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, No. 153 (53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.),
as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon
delinquent Commonwealth of Pennsylvania taxes as provided in Section
806 of the Act of April 9, 1929, P.L. 343, No. 176 (72 P.S. § 806), as
amended, known as the “Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate
permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
[Amended 7-18-2006 by Ord. No. 977]
§ 324-33 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-35
324:384
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a
transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 324-36. Excluded transactions.
A. The tax imposed by § 324-34 hereof shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or to any of its
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions, by gift,
dedication or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed of confirmation
in connection with condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance
by the condemning body of the property condemned to the owner
of record at the time of condemnation which reconveyance may
include property line adjustments, provided said reconveyance is
made within one year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
covenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
§ 324-35 TAXATION § 324-36
324:385
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy
of the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer of principal, agent or straw party:
(a) A transfer: (i) for no or nominal actual consideration between
principal and agent or straw party; or (ii) from or to an agent or
straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his
principal, no tax would be imposed under this article.
(b) Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was
acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his
principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property
is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the
grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: (i) the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
§ 324-36 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-36
324:386
§ 324-37. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 324-36 hereof, documents which make,
confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 324-38. Acquired company.
agriculture; and (ii) the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)], and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
§ 324-36 TAXATION § 324-38
324:387
§ 324-39. Credits against tax.
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition to the Recorder of Deeds of each
county in which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary
stamps and recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real
estate holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 324-38 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-40
324:388
§ 324-40. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 324-41. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 324-42. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 324-43. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording, shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983, P.L.
40, No. 21, the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Borough
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Borough.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission shall be paid to
the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 324-40 TAXATION § 324-43
324:389
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 324-44. Civil penalties.
§ 324-45. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Borough, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments, or interest therein, are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharge by
payment, or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor of the Borough
is authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common
Pleas of Union County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923 (53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.), its supplements and
amendments.
§ 324-46. Enforcement. [Amended 7-18-2006 by Ord. No. 977]
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be administered, collected and enforced under the
Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, known as the
"Local Tax Enabling Act," provided that if the correct amount of the tax
is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Borough of
Lewisburg, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971
(72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 324-43 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-46
324:390
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax,
interest and penalties.
§ 324-47. Regulations.
The Recorder of Deeds is charged with enforcement and collection of
the tax imposed under this article and is empowered to promulgate and
enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax.
The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
§ 324-48. Effective date.
This article shall become effective 30 days after enactment, and shall
remain in effect and continue thereafter from year to year on a calendar
year basis unless amended or repealed.
§ 324-46 TAXATION § 324-48
324:391

ARTICLE IV
Per Capita Tax
[Amended 5-15-1990 by Ord. No. 858]
§ 324-49. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Per Capita Tax Ordinance of the Borough
of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania."
§ 324-50. Authority.
A per capita tax for general revenue purposes is levied and assessed
pursuant to and under the authority of the The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act
of 1965, December 31, P.L. 1257, as amended (53 P.S. § 6901, et seq.).
§ 324-51. Imposition and exoneration of tax and exoneration
administration rules. [Amended 11-16-2004 by Ord. No. 959]
A. An annual per capita tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of
$10, or at such lesser rate as provided in Subsection B of this section, is
hereby levied and assessed upon each resident and inhabitant of the
Borough of Lewisburg who attains the age of 18 years on or before the
first day of the tax year, unless exonerated therefrom as provided in
Subsection C of this section.
B. It is the intent of this section that the entire burden of the per capita tax
imposed herein shall not exceed the limitations prescribed in the Local
Tax Enabling Act of 1965, December 31, P.L. 1257, as amended (53 P.S.
§ 6901, et seq.), so that if any other political subdivision has imposed or
shall hereafter impose the same tax, then the tax levied by the Borough
under the authority of the said Act shall during the time such
duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided,
be 1/2 of the rate and such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any
action on the part of the Borough; provided, however, that the Borough
and any political subdivision which imposes the same tax may agree
that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein
provided, they will impose respectively different rates, the total of
which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted under the said Act.
C. Exoneration from payment of the per capita tax shall apply to the
following:
(1) Resident students. A taxable resident or inhabitant of the Borough
who is a student attending, on a full-time basis, a school within or
outside the boundaries of the Borough is liable for the payment of
the per capita tax unless exoneration is granted under Subsection
C(8) of this Subsection C, provided that the student has completed
and presented an Exoneration of Tax Request Form, being the same
as or similar to Tax Form A prescribed by the Lewisburg Area
School District, to Borough Council through the Borough Tax
Collector.
§ 324-49 TAXATION § 324-51
324:393
(2) Nonresident Pennsylvania students. A student from another taxing
district in Pennsylvania, whose sole reason for being in the Borough
is to acquire an education, shall be exonerated from payment of the
per capita tax upon completion of the Statement of Nonresidence
and the submission of proof of compliance as provided in
Subsection D of this section.
(3) Nonresident out-of-state students. An out-of-state student enrolled
in a college or university, whose sole reason for being in the
Borough is to acquire an education, shall be exonerated from
payment of the per capita tax upon presentation of a validated
certificate of the Registrar at that college or university stating that
the student is considered a non-Pennsylvanian and also upon
completion of the Statement of Nonresidence as provided in
Subsection D of this section.
(4) Nonresident foreign country students. A college or university
student from a foreign country shall be exonerated from payment
of the per capita tax upon presentation of a currently valid
education visa or a validated certificate of the Registrar at that
college or university stating that the student is from a foreign
country, that the sole reason for coming to this country was to
acquire an education and that to the best of the Registrar's
knowledge the student plans to return to the country of origin upon
obtaining a degree and also upon completion of the Statement of
Nonresidence as provided in Subsection D of this section.
(5) Military personnel. A person does not acquire resident or
inhabitant status in the Borough if he/she is here solely by virtue of
military orders, and therefore, as a general rule, military personnel
are exonerated from payment of the per capita tax. A person in the
military, assigned to the Borough, must present proof of payment of
the per capita tax elsewhere as provided in Subsection D of this
section in order to be exonerated from payment of the per capita
tax. A military person may be deemed a taxable resident or
inhabitant of the Borough if he/she establishes the Borough as their
legal residence or domicile. Spouses of military personnel shall be
subject to the per capita tax the same as other residents or
inhabitants of the Borough pursuant to the Ruling of the Attorney
General of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in an Opinion dated
November 1, 1962. Residents or inhabitants of the Borough
assigned to another taxing district by military orders are
considered taxable residents or inhabitants of the Borough and,
therefore, must present proof of payment of the per capita tax
elsewhere as provided in Subsection D of this section in order to be
exonerated from payment of the per capita tax.
(6) Partial year residents. Residents or inhabitants who, in their first
year of residence in the Borough, present proof of payment of the
per capita tax based upon residency elsewhere, as provided in
Subsection D of this section, to the Borough Tax Collector shall be
§ 324-51 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-51
324:394
exonerated from payment of the per capita tax. Residents or
inhabitants who move out of the Borough during the tax year are
liable for full payment of the per capita tax.
(7) Death during the tax year. The surviving spouse, relatives and/or
estate of any taxable resident or inhabitant of the Borough who dies
during the tax year shall be exonerated from payment of any unpaid
per capita tax of the decedent.
(8) Residents who are financially unable to pay. The following table of
incomes is a guideline for Borough Council to consider in granting
exonerations from payment of the per capita tax to the Borough Tax
Collector. Income from all sources will be considered in
relationship to age, health, physical impairment and other
circumstances, which may render a hardship on the taxpayer.
(a) Single person: $10,000.
(b) Man and wife (or head of household and one dependent):
$15,000.
(c) Couple and one child (or head of household and two
dependents: $20,000.
(d) Couple and two children (or head of household and three
dependents: $25,000.
(e) Couple and three children (or head of household and four
dependents): $30,000.
(f) Couple and four or more children (or head of household and
five or more dependents): $35,000.
(9) Residents who have attained the age of 70 years or greater.
Residents or inhabitants of the Borough who have attained the age
of 70 years on or before December 31 of the tax year and whose
income is derived solely from Social Security shall be exonerated
from payment of the per capita tax by Borough Council upon
completion and presentation of the Exoneration of Tax Request
Form, being the same as or similar to Tax Form A prescribed by the
Lewisburg Area School District, to Borough Council through the
Borough Tax Collector. Residents or inhabitants of the Borough
who have attained the age of 80 years on or before December 31 of
the tax year shall be automatically exonerated from payment of the
per capita tax upon completion and presentation of the Exoneration
of Tax Request Form, being the same as or similar to Tax Form A
prescribed by the Lewisburg Area School District, or upon
verification of their age through official records of Union County or
a certified institution within Union County to Borough Council
through the Borough Tax Collector.
§ 324-51 TAXATION § 324-51
324:395
D. The following rules shall apply to the administration of the exoneration
from payment of the per capita tax:
(1) Statement of nonresidence. Any person seeking exoneration from
payment of the per capita tax on the basis of the lack of legal
residency within the Borough during the applicable tax year shall
furnish to Borough Council through the Borough Tax Collector on
the Exoneration of Tax Request Form, being the same as or similar
to Tax Form A prescribed by the Lewisburg Area School District, a
statement in writing, dated and signed, declaring that he/she owns
no real property in the Borough, has no children enrolled in the
Lewisburg Area School District and is not registered to vote in
Union County. The said statement shall also include the following
language above the signature: "I verify that the statements
contained herein are true and correct. I understand that false
statements herein are subject to the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 4904 relating to unsworn falsification to authorities."
(2) Proof of payment elsewhere. Where "proof of payment of per capita
tax elsewhere" is required in Subsection C of this section, such
proof shall be established by providing a receipted tax bill from the
taxing district in which legal residence is claimed showing that the
per capita tax for which exoneration is sought has been paid in the
taxing district in which legal residence is claimed. Taxable
residents or inhabitants of the Borough who submit proof of
payment elsewhere shall be exonerated from payment of the per
capita tax only in the first taxable year in which they become
taxable residents or inhabitants of the Borough. Taxable residents
or inhabitants who move out of the Borough anytime during the
school year are liable for payment of the per capita tax.
(3) Proof of compliance. Every resident or inhabitant of the Borough,
upon attaining 18 years of age, and every person 18 years of age or
older becoming a resident or inhabitant of the Borough, shall,
within 12 months after the happening thereof, notify the Union
County Assessor of his/her becoming of age or becoming a resident
or inhabitant of the Borough. Where proof of compliance is
required in Subsection C of this section, such proof shall be
established by either submitting to Borough Council an affidavit
from the Assessor of the Pennsylvania County in which legal
residence is claimed stating that the person is on the current tax
rolls in that County or proof of payment of the per capita tax as
provided in Subsection D(2) of this Subsection D.
(4) Uncollectability. The Borough Tax Collector when seeking
exoneration from payment of the per capita tax on grounds of
uncollectability shall be required to sign an oath swearing that all
explicit and implied powers of the office of Tax Collector have been
exercised in an effort to collect the per capita tax.
§ 324-51 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-51
324:396
§ 324-52. Collection of tax.
The per capita tax shall be collected by the duly elected or appointed Tax
Collector of the Borough of Lewisburg in the manner prescribed by the
Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as amended and supplemented. The said
Tax Collector shall exercise all of the powers and shall have all the duties
provided for in the Local Tax Collection Law.
§ 324-53. Enforcement.
The tax imposed by this article shall be recoverable as other debts of like
character are recovered.
§ 324-54. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons who shall violate this article shall upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Judge, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default
of payment of such fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period not to exceed
30 days, or both.
§ 324-55. Effective date.
This article shall become effective January 1, 1991, and shall remain in
effect and continue in force thereafter from year to year on a calendar year
basis without annual reenactment unless amended or repealed.
(5) Filing dates of forms and requests for exoneration. All requests for
exoneration must be presented by the Borough Tax Collector to
Borough Council for its consideration by no later than October 20
of the applicable tax year.
§ 324-51 TAXATION § 324-55
324:397

ARTICLE V
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Amended 10-21-2003 by Res. No. 03-08]
§ 324-56. Adoption of local taxpayers bill of rights.
A. The rules and regulations attached hereto as Schedule 1 and
incorporated herein,43 are hereby approved and adopted.
B. The disclosure statement, substantially in the form set forth in Schedule
2 attached hereto and incorporated herein,44 is hereby approved and
adopted.
C. The form of petition for appeal and refund, substantially in the form set
forth in Schedule 3 attached hereto and incorporated herein,45 is
hereby approved and adopted.
D. The form of taxpayer notice, substantially in the form set forth in
Schedule 4 attached hereto and incorporated herein,46 is hereby
approved and adopted.
E. The form of request for extension of time to provide information,
substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 5 attached hereto and
incorporated herein,47 is hereby approved and adopted.
F. The form of initial refund claim form substantially in the form set forth
in Schedule 6 attached hereto and incorporated herein,48 is hereby
approved and adopted.
G. The Governing Body hereby determines that administrative appeal
procedures relating to petitions for appeal and refund submitted by
taxpayers in connection with the assessment, determination or refund
of an eligible tax under the LTBR shall be undertaken by the Lewisburg
Borough Council in Executive Session.
H. The administrative appeal procedures set forth in the rules and
regulations and substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 7
attached hereto and incorporated herein,49 are hereby approved and
adopted.
I. This resolution shall be applicable to eligible taxes as of January 1,
2004.
43.Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
44.Editor's Note: Schedule 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
45.Editor's Note: Schedule 3 is included at the end of this chapter.
46.Editor's Note: Schedule 4 is included at the end of this chapter.
47.Editor's Note: Schedule 5 is included at the end of this chapter.
48.Editor's Note: Schedule 6 is included at the end of this chapter.
49.Editor's Note: Schedule 7 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 324-56 TAXATION § 324-56
324:399

ARTICLE VI
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 7-20-2004 by Ord. No. 955]
§ 324-57. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Earned Income Tax Ordinance."
§ 324-58. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Lewisburg.
BUSINESS — Any enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking
of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his/her permanent home
and to which he/she has the intention of returning whenever he is absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place
of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention
of making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him/
her to adopt some other permanent home. In the case of businesses or
associations, the domicile is that place considered as the center of business
affairs and the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, including salaries, wages,
commissions, bonuses and incentive payments whether based on profits
or otherwise, fees, tips and similar remuneration for services rendered,
whether in cash or in property, such as:
Items of remuneration received, directly or through an agent, in cash
or in property, based on payroll periods or piecework, for services
rendered as an employee or casual employee, agent or officer of an
individual, partnership, business or nonprofit corporation, or
government agency. These items include salaries, wages, commissions,
bonuses, stock options, incentive payments, fees, tips, dismissal,
termination or severance payments, early retirement incentive
payments and other additional compensation contingent upon
retirement, including payments in excess of the scheduled or customary
salaries provided for those who are not terminating service, rewards,
A.
§ 324-57 TAXATION § 324-58
324:401
vacation and holiday pay, paid leaves of absence, payments for unused
vacation or sick leave, tax assumed by the employer, signing bonuses,
amounts received under employee benefit plans and deferred
compensation arrangements.
Scholarships, stipends, grants and fellowships, if services are rendered
in connection therewith. When used in this subsection, the following
words have the following meanings, unless the context indicates
otherwise:
FELLOWSHIP STIPEND OR FELLOWSHIP AWARD — A fixed sum
of money paid periodically for services or to defray expenses to a
graduate student who is enrolled in a graduate degree program at
a university.
(1)
GRANT-IN-AID — Financial support given by a public agency or
private institution to an individual to further the individual's
education.
(2)
POSTDOCTORAL RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP STIPEND OR
POSTDOCTORAL RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP AWARD — A fixed
sum of money paid periodically for service or to defray expenses
of an individual who has obtained a doctoral degree at a university
and in conducting research at a research facility.
(3)
(4) SCHOLARSHIP — A grant-in-aid to a student.
B.
Other forms of remuneration characterized as taxable compensation
by the Tax Reform Code of 1971, as amended, and its implementing
regulations, as amended, and any future amendments to said Code and/
or its implementing regulations.
C.
Compensation does not include (i) periodic payments for sickness and
disability other than the regular wages received during a period of
sickness or disability; or (ii) disability, retirement or other payments
arising under workmen's compensation acts, occupation diseases acts
and similar legislation by any government; or (iii) payments commonly
recognized as old age or retirement benefits paid to persons retired
after reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment; or
(iv) payments commonly known as public assistance, or unemployment
compensation payments by any governmental agency; or (v) payments
to reimburse actual expenses; or (vi) payments made by employers or
labor unions for employee benefit programs covering hospitalization,
sickness, disability or death, supplemental employment benefits or
strike benefits, subject to certain conditions identified in the Tax
Reform Code of 1971, as amended, and its implementing regulations;
or (vii) any compensation received by United States servicemen serving
in a combat zone; or (viii) payments received by a foster parent for inhome
care of foster children from any agency of the Commonwealth
or a political subdivision thereof, or an organization tax exempt from
Federal tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, which is licensed by the Commonwealth or a political subdivision
D.
§ 324-58 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-58
324:402
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, institution,
governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity employing one or
more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER OR OFFICER — Person, public employee or private
agency designated by governing body to collect and administer the tax on
earned income and net profits.
NET PROFITS —
thereof as a placement agency; or (ix) payments made by employers or
labor unions for employee benefit programs covering Social Security
or retirement; or (x) personal use of an employer's owned or leased
property or of employer-provided services.
The net income from the operation of a business, profession or other
activity, except corporations, after provision for all costs and expenses
incurred in the conduct thereof, be determined either on a cash or
accrual basis in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles and practices, as defined in the Tax Reform Code of 1971,
as amended, its implementing regulations, and any subsequent
amendments to said Code and/or regulations. Net profits do not include
income which is not paid for services provided and which is in the
nature of earnings from an investment.
A.
To constitute net profits, all of the following must apply:
The gross profits shall be derived from one of the following:
The marketing of a product or service to customers on a
commercial basis or from securities employed as working
capital in the business operations.
(a)
Accounts and notes receivable from sales of products or
services in the ordinary course of the business operations.
(b)
Assets which serve an operational function in the ordinary
course of business operations.
(c)
(1)
The marketing activity shall be conducted with the manifest
objective of achieving profitable operations.
(2)
The marking objective shall be conducted with regularity and
continuity and may not be limited or exclusive.
(3)
B.
In computing net profits, a deduction will not be allowed for any item
of cost, expense or liability derived or incurred in connection with, or
attributable to any of the following:
The ownership or disposition of assets that are held for investment
purposes or otherwise serve an investment function.
(1)
The trading in securities for personal purposes and not for the
accounts of customers.
(2)
C.
§ 324-58 TAXATION § 324-58
324:403
The sale, discontinuation or abandonment of a business or segment
thereof.
(3)
Any tax imposed on, or measured by, gross or net earned or
unearned income.
(4)
An isolated or nonrecurring transaction which is not a normal or
routine business activity.
(5)
Choosing to form a partnership or other entity or to associate with
others, receiving and reporting income or gain as the income of the
partnership, entity or associates or dividing the same among its
partners, beneficial owners or associates or the trading in securities for
the benefit of shareholders, partners, members or associates does not
of itself make the income of the partnership, entity or associates net
profits.
D.
For purposes of this section, only the following participants in the
stock, securities, options, derivatives, futures or commodities market
are engaged in marketing of a product or service to customers:
Those who maintain or provide a market place or facilities for
bringing together purchases and sellers of these financial
investment products.
(1)
Those who are licensed to act as their customer's agents and
charge a negotiated commission for executing transactions and do
not take title to the particular portion they buy or sell.
(2)
Those who devote managerial attention to the financial investment
products holdings of others, or who employ other persons to assist
them in that management, in the capacity of a licensed investment
advisor.
(3)
Licensed dealers, including financial investment product
specialists and market makers, if the conditions in the following
subparagraphs are met:
The dealer maintains an inventory of financial investment
products with the objective of reselling his inventories at a
profit to customers or operates as a specialist or market maker.
(a)
The dealer makes market by quoting the bid and ask prices
at which he is willing to buy and sell the financial investment
products and by buying directly from or selling directly to
customers.
(b)
The dealer's profits is determined in whole or in part by a
markup based on cost.
(c)
The dealer elects to inventory securities held for resale to
customers or uses the mark-to-market system of accounting.
(d)
(4)
E.
§ 324-58 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-58
324:404
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside the taxing district.
PERSON OR INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity domiciled
in the taxing district.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXING DISTRICT — The Borough of Lewisburg, Union County,
Pennsylvania.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or any other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits, or to pay
a tax thereon.
§ 324-59. Imposition of tax.
A tax for general revenue purposes is hereby reimposed in the amount
of 1% on earned income received and to net profits earned by residents
and nonresidents of the Borough, beginning on the first day of January,
2004, and continuing for each taxable year thereafter. Except as otherwise
provided in Section 14 of the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S. § 6914), as
amended, allowing for crediting or deductions for duplication of taxes, in
the event the school district in which the Borough is situate shall impose, or
continue to impose, an earned income tax under the authority of the Act on
residents or businesses domiciled within the Borough during the same year
or part of year, then the tax herein imposed shall be subject to the sharing
provision from the day such duplication becomes effective.
§ 324-60. Declaration and payment of tax.
Underwriters who facilitate initial sales of financial investment
products by acting either as licensed dealers in a principal capacity
or as brokers in an agency capacity.
(5)
When a person operates as an investor or trader with respect to a
portion of that person's activities and as a market establishment,
broker, investment counselor or dealer with respect to the rest, this
section applies only to the operations as a market establishment,
broker, investment counselor or dealer. For taxpayers engaged in the
business, profession or activity of farming, the term shall not include:
Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or
investment instruments of the farming business.
(1)
(2) Any gain on the sale of farm machinery.
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes.
(3)
(4) Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
F.
§ 324-58 TAXATION § 324-60
324:405
A. Net profits.
(1) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, on or before April 15 of the
current year, make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or
approved by the officer, a declaration of his estimated net profits
during the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of
the current year, and pay to the officer in four quarterly
installments, as nearly equal as possible, the tax due thereon as
follows: the first installment at the time of filing the declaration and
the other installments on or before June 15 of the current year,
September 15 of the current year and January 15 of the succeeding
year, respectively.
(2) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of
the current year, shall make and file the declaration hereinabove
required on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year or December 31 of the current year, whichever of
these dates next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and pay to the officer in installments, as
nearly equal as possible, the tax due thereon, on or before the
quarterly payment dates which remain after the filing of the
declaration.
(3) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15, of the succeeding year,
make and file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by
the officer a final return and reconciliation showing the amount of
net profits earned during the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, the total
amount of tax due thereon and the total amount of tax paid thereon.
At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the
officer the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund
or credit in the case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may, in lieu of
paying the fourth quarterly installment of his estimated tax, elect to
make and file with the officer on or before January 31 of the
succeeding year, the final return as hereinabove required.
(4) The officer is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the
making and filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits,
and for the payments of the estimated tax in cases where a
taxpayer who has filed the declaration hereinabove required,
anticipated additional net profits not previously declared or finds
that he has overestimated his anticipated net profits.
(5) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of
the current year, shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file his final return as hereinabove required and pay the
tax due.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return. Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15, of the succeeding year, make and file with the
§ 324-60 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-60
324:406
§ 324-61. Collection at source.
officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer a final
return showing the amount of earned income received during the
period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year. Such final return shall also
show the total amount of tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid
thereon, and the amount of tax thereon that has been withheld
pursuant to the provisions relating to the collection at source and
the balance of tax due. At the time of filing the final return, the
taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or shall make demand
for refund or credit in the case of overpayment.
(2) Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
and who received any earned income not subject to the provisions
relating to collection at source, shall make and file with the officer
on a form prescribed or approved by the officer a quarterly return
on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of the current year,
October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding
year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned income not
subject to withholding by him during the three month periods
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together with such other
information as the officer may require. Every taxpayer making such
returns, shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the officer the
amount of tax shown as due thereon.
C. Death of taxpayer. In the event of the death of a taxpayer during a
taxable period, his personal representative shall file his return on or
before the 15th day of April of the year following the date of death and
on or before such date shall pay any tax due from such deceased
taxpayer under this article or demand refund in the case of
overpayment.
D. Guardian of taxpayer. Should a guardian of the estate be appointed for a
taxpayer such guardian shall be imputed with the same duties and
responsibilities as the taxpayer would have regarding the reporting and
paying of taxes under this article.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough who employs one or more
persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission
or other compensation, who has not previously registered, shall, within
15 days after becoming an employer, register with the officer, his/her
name and address and such other information as the officer may
require.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough who employs one or more
§ 324-60 TAXATION § 324-61
324:407
persons, other than domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission
or other compensation shall deduct at the time of payment thereof,
the tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his/her
employment, and shall, on or before April 30 of the current year, July
31 of the current year, October 31 of the current year and January
31 of the succeeding year, file a return and pay to the officer the
amount of taxes deducted during the preceding three month period
ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year,
September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the current
year, respectively. Unless otherwise agreed upon between the officer
and the employer, such return shall show the name and Social Security
number of each such employee, the earned income of such employee
during such preceding three month period, the tax deducted therefrom,
the political subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee, the
complete address of each and every employee subject to withholding,
the total earned income of all such employees during such preceding
three month period, and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with
the return. Any employer who for two of the preceding four quarterly
periods has failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part thereof, or has
failed to pay over the proper amount of tax to the taxing authority, may
be required by the officer to file his return and pay the tax monthly. In
such cases, payments of tax shall be made to the officer on or before
the last day of the month succeeding the month for which the tax was
withheld.
C. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the officer:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of tax paid to
the officer for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year.
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and Social Security number,
the amount of earned income paid to the employee during said
period, the amount of tax deducted, the political subdivisions
imposing the tax upon such employee and the amount of tax paid to
the officer. Every employer shall furnish two copies of the
individual return to the employee for whom it is filed.
D. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the
current year, shall within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file the returns and withholding statements hereinabove required and
pay the tax due.
E. Except as otherwise provided herein, every employer who willfully or
negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by this
section shall be liable for payment of the taxes which he/she/it was
§ 324-61 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-61
324:408
§ 324-62. Powers and duties of officer.
required to withhold to the extent that such taxes have not been
recovered from the employee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold earned income
taxes or for the payment of such withheld tax money to a political
subdivision other than the Borough if such failure to withhold or such
incorrect transmittal of withheld taxes arises from incorrect
information as to the employee's place of residence submitted by the
employee, nor shall an employer be liable for failure to withhold earned
income taxes, or to make reports of wages, salaries, commissions or
other compensation of his/her/its employees, unless the official
continuing register of all earned income taxes levied under the
authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as amended, maintained and
supplemented annually by the Department of Community and Economic
Development, lists the Borough's levying of the earned income tax.
F. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of tax or from complying with the requirements of this article
relating to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. The Borough Council, by resolution, shall appoint the officer.
B. It shall be the duty of the officer to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his/her/its duty to
keep a record showing the amount received by him/her/it from each
person or business paying the tax and date of such receipt.
C. Each officer, before entering upon his/her/its official duties, shall give
and acknowledge a bond to the Borough. If the Borough shall, by
ordinance or resolution, designate any bond previously given by the
officer as adequate, such bond shall be sufficient to satisfy the
requirements of this subsection. Each such bond shall be joint and
several with one or more corporate sureties which shall be surety
companies authorized to do business in this Commonwealth and duly
licensed by the Insurance Commissioner of this Commonwealth. Each
bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful discharge by the officer, his/
her/its clerks, assistants, appointees of all trusts confided in him/her/it
by virtue of his/her/its office, upon the faithful execution of all duties
required of him/her/it by virtue of his/her/its office, upon the just and
faithful accounting or payment over, according to law, of all monies and
balances thereof paid to, received or held by him/her/it by virtue of his/
her/its office and upon the delivery to his/her/its successor or
successors in office of all books, papers, documents or other official
things held in right of his/her/its office. Each such bond shall be taken in
the name of the Borough, and shall be for the use of the Borough
appointing the officer, and for the use of such other person or persons
for whom money shall be collected or received, or as his, her or its
interest shall otherwise appear, in case of a breach of any of the
conditions thereof by the acts or neglect of the principal of the bond.
§ 324-61 TAXATION § 324-62
324:409
The Borough, or any person, may sue upon the said bond in his, her or
its own name for his, her or its own use. Each such bond shall contain
the name or names of the surety company or companies bound thereon.
The Borough shall fix the amount of the bond at an amount equal to the
maximum amount of taxes which may be in the possession of the officer
at any given time. The Borough may at any time, upon cause shown and
due notice to the officer, and his/her/its surety or sureties, require or
allow the substitution or the addition of a surety company acceptable to
the Borough for the purpose of making the bond sufficient in amount,
without releasing the surety or sureties first approved from any accrued
liability or previous action on such bond. The Borough shall designate
the custodian of the bond required to be given by the officer.
D. The officer charged with the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this article is hereby empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter
pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of
declarations and returns, and of payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which any overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds in case of overpayment, for any period of
time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the
sum involved, and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration
of this article. No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable
unless it has been approved, by ordinance or resolution, by Borough
Council. A copy of such rules and regulations currently in force shall be
available for public inspection.
E. The officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer, earned
income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary business
expenses to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
F. The officer and agent designated by him/her/it are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any declaration
or return, or if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due. Every employer and every taxpayer and every person whom the
officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer, is hereby
directed and required to give to the officer, or to any agent designated
by him/her/it, the means, facilities and opportunities for such
examination and investigation as hereby authorized. The officer shall
have such power to subpoena books, records and papers of the
employer or taxpayer as may be found in authority of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
G. Any information gained by the officer, his/her/its agents, or by any other
official or agent of the Borough as a result of any declarations, returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article, shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
§ 324-62 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-62
324:410
§ 324-63. Suit for collection of tax.
§ 324-64. Interest and penalties.
accordance with a proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by
law.
H. The officer is authorized to establish different filing, reporting and
payment dates for taxpayers whose fiscal years do not coincide with the
calendar year.
A. The officer may sue in the name of the Borough for the recovery of taxes
due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
instituted within three years after such tax is due, or within three years
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him/her/it under
the provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return
in the possession of the officer, reveals a fraudulent evasion of
taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more and no fraud, suit shall be instituted within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the officer,
or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by this article, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit Borough Council from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by the
Act.
C. The officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund, provided such
suit is instituted within two years after making such refund, except that
the suit may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of
the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof
during which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected.
Where suit is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable
§ 324-62 TAXATION § 324-64
324:411
§ 324-65. Fines and penalties for violations.
therefor shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the
interest and penalties herein imposed.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, the Borough may, by
ordinance or resolution, establish a one-time period during which
interest or interest and penalties that would otherwise be imposed for
the nonreporting or underreporting of earned income taxes previously
imposed and due shall be waived in total or in part if the taxpayer
voluntarily files delinquent returns and pays the taxes in full during the
period so established. If the Borough establishes such one-time period,
it shall also adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this
subsection.
C. The provisions of Subsection B shall not affect or terminate any
petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings pending
under the provisions of this article, or prevent the commencement or
further prosecution of any proceedings by the proper authorities for
violations of this article. No proceedings shall, however, be commenced
on the basis of delinquent returns filed pursuant to Subsection B if the
returns are determined to be substantially true and correct and the
taxes are paid in full within the prescribed time.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to deduct or withhold the tax from his/her/its employees, any
person who refuses to permit the officer or any agent designated by
him/her/it to examine his/her/its books, records and papers, and any
person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of his/her/its net profits or earned income in
order to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed
by this article, shall, upon conviction thereof in summary proceeding
before a District Justice or the Court of Common Pleas of Union County,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each offense, plus
costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of payment of said fine
and costs to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who divulges any information which is confidential under
the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding before a District Justice or the Court of Common
Pleas of Union County, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500
for each offense, plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of
said fines and costs to be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30
days.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
§ 324-64 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-65
324:412
§ 324-66. Adoption.
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257 (53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.), as amended.
§ 324-67. Effect and continuation.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of Borough Council that this article
shall replace in its entirety all prior ordinances enacted, resolutions
adopted, motions approved, or other actions taken by Borough Council
levying an earned income tax, and/or in any manner affecting the specific
terms or provisions of said earned income tax as levied, the provisions of
which shall remain in full force and effect for each year thereafter, without
annual reenactment unless the rate of tax is subsequently changed.
§ 324-68. Effective date.
This article shall become effective on the first day of January 2004, and the
tax shall continue in force on a calendar year or a taxpayer fiscal year basis,
without annual reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is subsequently
changed. Changes in rate become effective on the date specified in the
amending ordinance.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him/her/it from making such declaration or return.
§ 324-65 TAXATION § 324-68
324:413
Chapter 328
TICKETING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 125.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 152.
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
182.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 235.
Solid waste — See Ch. 280.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
Trees — See Ch. 332.
§ 324-68 LEWISBURG CODE § 324-68
324:414
ARTICLE I
Quality of Life Ticketing
[Adopted 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 1041]
§ 328-1. General provisions.
§ 328-2. Definitions.
The following words used in this article shall mean as follows:
OWNER — Any person, agent, manager or operator having a legal or
equitable interest in real property or who holds title to the real property
pursuant to a recorded deed or who otherwise has control of the real
property, including, but not limited to, the guardian of the estate of any such
person or the executor or administrator of the estate of such person.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other entity or
association acting as a unit.
VIOLATOR — An owner in violation of any provision of the chapters of the
Code of the Borough or Lewisburg subject to this article as provided in
§ 328-3 hereof.
§ 328-3. Enforcement.
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as the Quality of Life
Ticketing Ordinance of the Borough of Lewisburg.
B. The purpose of this article is to provide for a mechanism for the
issuance of tickets, rather than issuing citations or filing private
criminal complaints for violations, thereby permitting the violator who
believes he/she may have committed a violation to pay the ticket, rather
than causing the issuance of a citation or the filing of a private criminal
complaint, thereby involving the criminal justice system. Resolution of a
violation in this manner is in the best interests of the residents of the
Borough and promotes the safety and welfare of its residents because it
permits the Borough to maintain and enforce its ordinances and laws
and permits a violator to resolve the violation in an expeditious manner
without unduly burdening the violator or the resources of the Borough
by requiring the issuance of a citation or the filing of a private criminal
complaint, thereby involving the criminal justice system, but it does not
deprive the violator of the right to dispute a ticket and pursue his/her
right to procedural and substantive due process of law.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department or the Borough's code enforcement officer,
its manager or any other officer thereof so designated.
B. While Borough Council may from time to time by resolution change
those chapters of the Code of the Borough of Lewisburg subject to this
article, at the time of the enactment of this article the following
§ 328-1 TAXATION § 328-3
324:415
§ 328-4. Violation ticket disposition.
A violator in receipt of a violation ticket shall have 10 days within which
time to pay the amount of the ticket. In the event the ticket is not paid
within 10 days, such failure to pay shall result in the issuance of a citation
or the filing of a private criminal complaint for the violation as enumerated
on the ticket and as provided in the chapters of the Code of the Borough of
Lewisburg subject to this article.
chapters are hereby deemed to be subject to this article and the
ticketing process set forth herein:
(1) Chapter 125 entitled Burning, Open.
(2) Chapter 152 regarding the Codes of the Borough, including the
Electrical, Fire Prevention, Plumbing, Building and Property
Maintenance Codes.
(3) Chapter 182 entitled Grass, Weeds and Other Vegetation.
(4) Chapter 235 entitled Peddling and Soliciting.
(5) Chapter 280 entitled Solid Waste.
(6) Chapter 300 entitled Streets and Sidewalks.
(7) Chapter 332 entitled Trees.
C. A violation of any of the provisions of the chapters of the Code of the
Borough of Lewisburg subject to this article may be cause for a
violation ticket, which also may be in the form of a notice of violation, to
be issued to the violator.
D. A violation ticket (or notice of violation) shall be served upon the
violator by any of the following means:
(1) Handing it to the violator;
(2) Handing it to an adult resident of the real property where the
violation exists or occurred;
(3) Leaving or affixing it to the real property where the violation exists
or occurred; or
(4) Mailing it to the violator's address of record by first class mail with
a certificate of mailing.
E. Each day after the issuance of a violation ticket that a violation
continues or is permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense for
which a separate fine may be imposed.
F. If the Borough has corrected, or caused the correction of, a violation,
the cost thereof shall be charged to the violator and collected by
whatever means is available to the Borough.
§ 328-3 LEWISBURG CODE § 328-5
324:416
§ 328-5. Fines and penalties.
A. For the first violation of this article within a twelve-month period, the
fine for the issued ticket shall be $25.
B. For the second violation of this article within a twelve-month period, the
fine for the issued ticket shall be $50.
C. For the third violation of this article within a twelve-month period, the
fine for the issued ticket shall be $100.
D. For the fourth and all subsequent violations of this article within a
twelve-month period, the fine for the issued ticket shall be $300.
§ 328-5 TAXATION § 328-5
324:417
Chapter 332
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
182.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
Zoning — See Ch. 360.
§ 332-1. Definitions.
§ 332-2. Establishment and composition of commission. [Amended
11-16-2004 by Ord. No. 960]
A Shade Tree Commission is hereby established in and for the Borough
of Lewisburg. The Commission shall be composed of five members who
shall be residents of the Borough, shall be appointed by Borough Council to
staggered terms so that one term expires every year, and shall serve without
compensation. Borough Council shall appoint one member for a term of one
year, one member for a term of two years, one member for a term of three
years, one member for a term of four years and one member for a term of
five years. On the expiration of the term of any commissioner, a successor
shall be appointed by Borough Council to serve for a term of five years.
Vacancies in the office of commissioner shall be filled by Borough Council
for the unexpired term.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings hereby ascribed to them, except in those instances where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough
Lewisburg.
PERMIT — Any permit in writing as issued by the Secretary of the
Shade Tree Commission.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — The highways, streets, sidewalks, and alleys open
to the public within the Borough of Lewisburg.
SECRETARY — The Borough Secretary, in her capacity as Secretary of
the Shade Tree Commission.
SHADE TREE — Any tree, shrub, or other woody plant on any public
highway in the Borough or that part of any tree, shrub, or other woody
plant which extends within the lines of any public highway.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine.
§ 328-5 LEWISBURG CODE § 332-3
324:418
§ 332-3. Powers of Commission.
The Commission shall have exclusive custody and control of the shade trees
in the Borough and is authorized to plant, remove, maintain, and protect
shade trees in or along the public highways. In addition, the Commission
shall perform all the duties and may exercise all of the powers conferred by
law upon Borough Shade Tree Commissions as set forth in the Act of 1966,
Feb. 1, P.L. (1965) __, No. 581 (P.S. § 47721 et seq.).
§ 332-4. Report of Commission.
The Commission shall annually report in full to the Borough Council its
transactions and expenses for the last fiscal year of the Borough.
§ 332-5. Notices of Commission.
Whenever the Commission proposes to plant, transplant, or remove shade
trees in or along any public highway, notice of the time and place of the
meeting at which such work is to be considered shall be given in one
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough once a week for two weeks
immediately preceding the time of the meeting. The notice shall specify in
detail the public highways or portions thereof in or along which shade trees
are proposed to be so planted, replanted, or removed.
§ 332-6. Payment by owners; maintenance by Borough. [Amended
8-16-1978 by Ord. No. 78-13]
The cost of planting, transplanting, or removing any shade tree in and
along the public highways, of the necessary and suitable guards, curbing, or
grading for the protection thereof, and of the replacing of any pavement or
sidewalk necessarily disturbed in the execution of such work shall be paid
by the owner of the real estate abutting which the work is done. The amount
each owner is to pay shall be ascertained and certified by the Commission to
the Borough Council and to the Borough Treasurer. The cost and expenses
of caring for such trees after having been planted shall be paid by the
Borough. The needed amount for such care shall each year be certified
by the Commission to the Borough Council and shall be drawn against, as
required by the Commission, in the same manner as money appropriated for
Borough purposes.
§ 332-7. Removal of dead or diseased shade trees. [Amended
1-20-1987 by Ord. No. 824]
The Commission may upon notice require the owners of real estate to cut
and remove diseased shade trees located upon or along their property,
which threaten to injure or destroy persons, property, or other shade trees
in the Borough. The notice shall give the owner at least 20 days in which
to comply, and shall include instructions on how the shade tree is to be cut
and removed. The cost of cutting and removing any dead or diseased shade
tree shall be borne by the owner of the real estate. Upon failure or refusal
of any such owner to comply with such notice, the Commission may cause
§ 332-3 TAXATION § 332-7
324:419
the work to be done by the Borough and levy and collect the cost thereof
from the owner.
§ 332-8. Planting regulations. [Amended 11-21-2000 by Ord. No.
923]
All shade trees planted in and along any of the public highways shall be set
so as to form as nearly as possible a straight and uniform line with the other
shade trees growing upon the same highway. The said shade trees shall be
planted or set from 25 feet to 30 feet apart where practicable and shall
be sound, straight and symmetrical. It is recommended that shade trees
of two inches caliper free of defect, wounds, disease and insect infestation
be planted, that these trees not have limbs lower than five feet and that
they have a straight trunk to at least eight feet at the time of planting. All
shade trees shall be of the species approved for planting in the Borough by
the Commission for that site. Where practicable, every such tree shall be
planted in a pit four feet square filled with good topsoil otherwise enriched
and shall have an adequate open space of ground outside the trunk of said
tree.
§ 332-9. Trimming requirements. [Amended 8-16-1978 by Ord. No.
78-13; 1-20-1987 by Ord. No. 824; 11-21-2000 by Ord. No. 923]
§ 332-10. Protection of shade trees.
A. All shade trees shall be kept trimmed by the owner of the real estate
abutting the public highway in or along which the shade tree is located:
(1) So as not to interfere with the proper lighting of public highways by
street lights or interfere with traffic control devices.
(2) So that the minimum clearance between any overhanging portion
thereof shall be 15 feet above any public highway and nine feet
above all sidewalks; provided, that the Commission shall have the
authority to designate a higher clearance on any public highway
where heavy traffic or other conditions make it expedient.
(3) So as to eliminate or avoid any real or potential hazard to persons
or property in, upon or along the public highway from falling dead
or diseased branches or portions thereof.
B. Trimming shall be done according to the American National Standards
Institute ANSI A3000 Pruning Standards 1995, a copy of which shall be
available in the Borough Office. No topping or heading cuts shall be
made and nor more than 1/4 of the foliage on a shade tree shall be
removed each year.
A. In connection with any construction or the performance of any work
whatsoever in the Borough in the vicinity of any shade tree, before any
work shall be commenced, guards shall be placed at all shade trees
§ 332-7 LEWISBURG CODE § 332-10
324:420
§ 332-11. Removal of wires.
Whenever, in order to plant, remove, maintain, or protect shade trees in
or along any public highway or having branches extending over any public
highway, it shall be deemed necessary to remove or cut off any wire running
in, on, along, or through such public highway, the owner of such wire shall
temporarily remove the same or cut off the flow of current therefrom within
24 hours after service of written notice from the Commission to do so.
§ 332-12. Permits required.
No person shall without first having obtained a permit therefore:
§ 332-13. Issuance of permits.
The application for any permit required under this chapter shall be made
in writing to the Secretary. It shall specify the particular kind of work or
operation the applicant desires to perform thereunder and shall state the
exact location and the species of any tree affected. It shall be the duty of
the Secretary to submit any such application promptly to the Commission
which might be affected by such work so as to effectually prevent injury
to them.
B. No person shall pour salt, oil, or any other substance or place any
material in the Borough in such a manner that might result in injury to
any shade tree.
C. Every person having any wire charged with electricity running in, on,
along, or through a public highway shall securely fasten such wire or
place an adequate shield thereon, so that such wire shall not come into
contact with any shade tree injuring it.
A. Plant any shade tree in or along any public highway or which extends
over or within the lines of any public highway, such permit to designate
where such tree is to be planted. The Commission may refuse a permit
to plant any species of tree which in its opinion is not suited to the
location.
B. Cut down, break, climb with spurs, injure in any manner or remove any
shade tree; or cut or interfere in any way with the main roots of any
shade tree; or place any rope, guy wire, cable, sign, poster, or any other
fixture on any shade tree or guard for any shade tree; or injure, misuse,
or remove any device placed to protect any shade tree except in case of
immediate necessity for the protection of life and property.
C. Place or maintain any cement or nonporous substance or material
which shall impede the passage of water and air to the roots of any
shade tree.
D. Attach any electric wire, insulator, or any device for the holding of an
electric wire to any shade tree.
§ 332-10 TAXATION § 332-13
324:421
for approval or disapproval. The permit shall be effective for such length
of time as the Commission shall in each case determine, and such time
shall be indicated on the permit. Any such permit may be revoked at any
time upon proof satisfactory to the Commission that any of the terms or
conditions upon which such permit was issued are or have been violated.
The Commission, in its discretion, may, as a condition precedent to the
issuance of the permit, require the applicant to file a bond satisfactory to
the Commission or to deposit security satisfactory to it to guarantee that
the applicant will comply with the terms and conditions upon which such
permit is issued.
§ 332-14. Enforcement. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Commission in conjunction with the
Mayor and the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department of the Borough.
§ 332-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-20-1987 by Ord.
No. 833]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 345
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conduct — See Ch. 142.
Driveways — See Ch. 158.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 230.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 300.
§ 332-13 LEWISBURG CODE § 332-15
324:422
ARTICLE I
General Regulations50
§ 345-1. Definitions; word usage; interpretation. [Amended
3-20-1990 by Ord. No. 856]
§ 345-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 345-3. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162 No. 81), as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway",
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, and all Wednesday
afternoons and Sundays.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
D. Although the streets in the Borough run generally in a north-south and
a west-east direction, for the purpose of this chapter, Third Street and
the streets running parallel or generally parallel to Third Street shall be
deemed to run in a north-south direction, and Market Street and the
streets parallel or generally parallel to Market Street shall be deemed
to run in an east-west direction.
50.Editor's Note: At the time of the revision of July 21, 1998, the spelling of "St. Catherine
Street" changed to "St. Catharine Street," at the request of the Borough. All prior
enactments adopted as "St. Catherine Street." However, for purposes of historical
accuracy the Borough has requested the spelling be changed to "St. Catharine Street."
§ 345-1 TAXATION § 345-4
324:423
§ 345-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 345-5. Experimental regulations.
The Borough Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate places
upon and along the highways in the Borough where for a period of not
more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be effective as if they had been specified in this chapter.
No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such
regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove,
destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority
of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and in
case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with
costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for
the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of
permanent changes in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and
parking.
§ 345-6. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department in the same manner as
permanent regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle
or tractor in violation of any such regulations, or who shall move,
remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted
or made to give notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in
this chapter for a violation of such nature, and, in case of a violation for
which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this
chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of
prosecution. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
A. The Borough Manager or Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional
Police Department shall have authority to close any street or specific
§ 345-4 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-6
324:424
§ 345-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
part of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station
police officers at each end of the closed portion, while construction or
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such closed portion. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1014]
B. The Borough Manager or Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional
Police Department shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic
area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is under
way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing
that vehicle to stop, or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other
device, not to proceed. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street;
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Mayor, Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department, Manager or other designated employee of
the Borough which shall be issued without fee. Application for the
permit shall be made at least one week in advance of the day on which
the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in any case where a statedesignated
highway is proposed to be used, application shall be made
at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The permit shall
state the place where and the date when the assemblage is to be held,
the hour when the assemblage may convene and the hour by which it
shall have been completely dispersed. It shall be unlawful for any
person to hold or to participate in any assemblage unless the permit has
been granted, or at any time or place other than that authorized by the
permit. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Mayor, Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley
§ 345-6 TAXATION § 345-7
324:425
§ 345-8. Authority of police officers. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1014]
The police officers of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department are
hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways of the Borough and
at intersections thereof.
§ 345-9. Authorization for use of speed-timing devices.
Regional Police Department, Manager or other designated employee
of the Borough which shall be issued without fee. Application for the
permit shall be made at least two weeks in advance of the day when
the procession is proposed to be held, but in any case where a statedesignated
highway is proposed to be used, application shall be made
at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The permit shall
specify the date on which the procession is to be held, the route to be
followed by the procession, the hour when and place where participants
may commence to assemble and form before the procession is under
way, the time when the procession may commence to move along its
route, and the time by which the end of the procession shall have
reached the end of the route of the procession and the procession shall
have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to
participate in any procession unless the permit shall have been granted,
or under any conditions as to time or route or otherwise than those
stated in the permit. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department is hereby authorized to
use all mechanical or electrical speed-timing devices for the
determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are approved or will be
approved by the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in accordance with 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368. [Amended
4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
B. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Borough, be they Borough, county or state highways, and does also
hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to "local authorities" under
the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 101 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 345-7 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-9
324:426
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 345-10. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
§ 345-11. Maximum speed limits established in parks.
§ 345-12. Traffic signals at certain locations.
A. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between
Maximum
Speed Limit
(mph)
All Borough streets not under
Commonwealth jurisdiction
Entire length 25
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. A speed limit is established on all streets and roadways in the public
parks maintained and operated by the Borough as follows:
Street Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
St. Anthony Street Park Entire length 5
St. Mary Street Park Entire length 5
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Intersection Type of Signal
Market Street and Fourth Street Control
Market Street and Second Street Control
§ 345-10 TAXATION § 345-12
324:427
§ 345-13. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
§ 345-14. One-way streets established. [Amended 1-17-1989 by Ord.
No. 844]
Intersection Type of Signal
Market Street and Seventh Street Control
Market Street and Third Street Control
N. Derr Drive (US 15) and Buffalo
Road
Control
N. Derr Drive (US 15) and Market
Street
Control
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling on Facing
Market and Third
Street
Market Street East and West
Market and Third
Street
Third Street North and South
Market and N. Derr
Drive
N. Derr Drive North
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Barton Street University Ave. S. Third Street East
Brown Street
[Added
5-9-2006 by
Ord. No. 975]
Mill Street S. Third Street South
Cherry Alley
[Amended
11-19-2013 by
Ord. No. 1024]
Raspberry Avenue N. Second
Street
East
§ 345-12 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-14
324:428
§ 345-15. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Cherry Alley
[Added
8-16-2005 by
Ord. No. 967;
repealed
11-19-2013 by
Ord. No. 1024]
Dale Alley Market Street St. Louis
Street
South
Linn Alley Entire length North
N. Fifth Street Market Street St. John Street North
N. Fourth Street St. Anthony Street Market Street South
Pine Alley S. Fifth Street S. Second
Street
East
St. George
Street
North of triangular
barrier west of S.
Third Street
West
St. George
Street
South of triangular
barrier west of S.
Third Street
East
S. Sixth Street Market Street St. George
Street
South
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling
on
Not to
Make Into When
Type of Vehicle
Applicable to
St. George
Street
Left University
Ave.
Any time All vehicles,
including
bicycles
St. Louis
Street
Left U.S. Route
15
Any time All vehicles,
including
bicycles
§ 345-14 TAXATION § 345-15
324:429
§ 345-16. Right turns only permitted at certain intersections.
§ 345-17. U-Turns prohibited at certain locations.
§ 345-18. Through highways established.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at
any time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles Traveling
on Direction of Travel Times
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
Derr Drive (U.S. Rt.
15)
Entire length Both
Market Street Entire length Both
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by Section 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, as
the case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through
highway until he has followed all applicable requirements of that
section of the law:
Highway Between
Buffalo Road St. Anthony Street and Borough
line
Market Street Entire length
§ 345-15 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-18
324:430
§ 345-19. Stop intersections established. [Amended 1-17-1989 by
Ord. No. 844; 2-18-1992 by Ord. No. 880; 12-15-1992 by Ord. No.
883; 7-21-1998 by Ord. No. 909; 6-15-1999 by Ord. No. 916;
11-16-1999 by Ord. No. 919; 12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 926;
12-18-2001 by Ord. No. 935; 4-16-2002 by Ord. No. 939; 9-17-2002
by Ord. No. 943; 9-21-2004 by Ord. No. 957]
Highway Between
N. Third Street St. Anthony Street and Market
Street
St. Anthony Street Fourth Street to Buffalo Creek
Bridge
St. George Street West of Third Street and East of
Seventh Street
S. Third Street Brown Street and Market Street
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 345-18) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting of through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code, and shall not proceed into or across the second-named or
intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Apple Tree Alley Pine Alley North
Barton Street Brown Street East
Barton Street Third Street East and west
Beck Street Fourth Street West
Brown Street St. George Street North
Brown Street S. Third Street South
Buffalo Road St. Anthony Street East
Cherry Alley N. Derr Drive (T.R. 15) West
Cherry Alley Raspberry Alley East
Cherry Alley Third Street East and west
Chestnut Tree Alley St. John Street North and south
§ 345-18 TAXATION § 345-19
324:431
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Currant Alley Cherry Alley South
Dale Alley St. Louis Street South
Eighth Street Market Street North and south
Eighth Street N. Derr Drive (T.R. 15) North
Eighth Street St. Louis Street North and south
Eighth Street St. Catharine Street South
Eleventh Street Buffalo Road North
Eleventh Street St. Anthony Street North and south
Eleventh Street St. Mary Street South
Eleventh Street St. Paul Street North and south
Fifteenth Street Buffalo Road North
Fifteenth Street St. Mary Street South
Fifteenth Street St. Paul Street North and south
Fifth Street Buffalo Road North and south
Fifth Street Market Street North
Fifth Street St. Louis Street North and south
Fifth Street St. Mary Street North and south
Fourth Street N. Derr Drive (T.R. 15) North
Fourth Street St. Anthony Street South
Fourth Street St. George Street South
Fourth Street St. Louis Street North and south
Fourth Street St. Mary Street South
Front Street Market Street North and south
Front Street St. Anthony Street North
Front Street St. Catharine Street North and south
Front Street St. Louis Street North and south
Hufnagle Boulevard St. Anthony Street South
Ikeler Street Matlack Avenue East and west
Ikeler Street N. Derr Drive (T.R. 15) East
Ikeler Street Shikelimo Lane East and west
Linn Street Brown Street West
Logan Avenue Ikeler Street South
Logan Avenue Pennsylvania Street North and south
Loomis Street University Avenue East
Loomis Street Walker Street West
§ 345-19 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-19
324:432
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Maclay Avenue Buffalo Road South
Maclay Avenue Ikeler Street North and south
Maclay Avenue Pennsylvania Street North and south
Malcolm Street Brown Street East and West
Malcolm Street University Avenue West
Maple Street Logan Avenue East
Matlack Avenue Buffalo Road South
Matlack Avenue Ikeler Street North and south
Matlack Avenue Pennsylvania Street North and south
Meadow Lane Fairground Road West
Meadow Lane Terrace Drive North
Mill Street Brown Street West
No Name Alley Buffalo Road South
North Fifth Street
[Added 7-21-2009
by Ord. No. 994]
St. Anthony Street North and south
North Front Street
[Added 6-17-2008
by Ord. No. 988]
St. John Street North and south
North Fourth Street Beck Street North
North Fourth Street Beck Street South
North Fourth Street
[Added 6-21-2005
by Ord. No. 964]
St. John Street South
North Third Street St. Anthony Street East and west
North Third Street
[Added 6-21-2005
by Ord. No. 964]
St. John Street North
North Third Street
[Added 6-21-2005
by Ord. No. 964]
St. John Street South
North Third Street St. Mary Street North and south
North Water Street
[Added 3-19-2013
by Ord. No. 1019]
St. John Street North
North Water Street
[Added 3-19-2013
by Ord. No. 1019]
St. John Street South
§ 345-19 TAXATION § 345-19
324:433
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Peach Tree Alley St. Anthony Street North and south
Peach Tree Alley St. John Street North and south
Pear Tree Alley St. Louis Street South
Pennsylvania Street Maclay Avenue East and west
Pennsylvania Street N. Derr Drive (T.R. 15) East
Pine Alley Apple Tree Alley East
Pine Alley Second Street East
Pine Alley Strawberry Alley East
Pine Street St. Louis Street North
Plum Tree Alley St. John Street North and south
Raspberry Alley St. John Street North and south
St. Anthony Street Fifth Street West
St. Anthony Street Fourth Street East and West
St. Catharine Street Fifth Street West
St. Catharine Street Fourth Street East and west
St. Catharine Street Front Street East and west
St. Catharine Street Second Street East and west
St. Catharine Street Seventh Street East and west
St. Catharine Street Sixth Street East and west
St. Catharine Street Third Street East and west
St. George Street Brown Street East
St. George Street Second Street West
St. George Street Seventh Street West
St. George Street
[Added 4-21-2009
by Ord. No. 992]
South Sixth Street East and west
St. George Street Third Street West
St. George Street University Avenue East
St. John Street Fifth Street West
St. John Street Fourth Street East and west
St. John Street Front Street East and west
St. John Street Second Street East and west
St. John Street Third Street East and west
St. John Street Water Street East
St. Lawrence Street St. Mary Street South
§ 345-19 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-19
324:434
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
St. Lawrence Street St. Paul Street North
St. Louis Street Eighth Street East and west
St. Louis Street Fifth Street East and west
St. Louis Street Fourth Street East and west
St. Louis Street Front Street East and west
St. Louis Street N. Derr Drive (T.R. 15) West
St. Louis Street Second Street East and west
St. Louis Street Seventh Street East and west
St. Louis Street Sixth Street East and west
St. Louis Street Third Street East and west
St. Mary Street Fifth Street East and west
St. Mary Street Fourth Street East and west
St. Mary Street Front Street East and west
St. Mary Street N. Derr Drive (T.R. 15) West
St. Mary Street Second Street East and west
St. Mary Street Seventh Street East and west
St. Mary Street Third Street East and west
St. Mary Street Water Street East
St. Paul Street Fairground Road East and west
St. Paul Street Fifteenth Street East and west
St. Paul Street N. Eleventh Street East and west
St. Paul Street Sixteenth Street East and west
St. Paul Street Tenth Street East
Second Street St. Anthony Street North
Second Street St. Catharine Street North and south
Second Street St. George Street South
Second Street St. John Street North and south
Second Street St. Louis Street North and south
Second Street St. Mary Street North and south
Seventh Street Buffalo Road North
Seventh Street Moore Avenue South
Seventh Street N. Derr Drive (T.R. 15) North and south
Seventh Street St. Louis Street North and south
Seventh Street St. Mary Street North and south
Shikelimo Lane Buffalo Road South
§ 345-19 TAXATION § 345-19
324:435
§ 345-20. Yield intersections established.
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Shikelimo Lane Ikeler Street North and south
Shikelimo Lane Maple Street North
Shikelimo Lane Pennsylvania Street North and south
Sixteenth Street Buffalo Road North
Sixteenth Street St. Paul Street North and south
Sixth Street Market Street South
Sixth Street St. Catharine Street South
Sixth Street St. George Street South
Sixth Street St. Louis Street South
South Seventh Street St. George Street North and south
South Third Street
[Added 1-20-2015
by Ord. No. 1032]
St. Catherine Street North and south
South Third Street St. George Street North and south
Spruce Street St. Louis Street North
T-472 Walker Street North
Tenth Street Buffalo Road North
Tenth Street St. Paul Street North
Terrace Drive Fifteenth Street East and west
Terrace Drive St. Paul Street North
Third Street Beck Street North
Third Street St. Anthony Street North and south
Third Street St. Louis Street North and south
Twelfth Street Buffalo Road North
Twelfth Street St. Paul Street South
University Avenue Loomis Street South
University Avenue Third Street North
Walker Street Loomis Street East
Walker Street Seventh Street West
Water Street Market Street North and south
Water Street St. Anthony Street North
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 345-19 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-20
324:436
§ 345-21. Crosswalks. [Amended 2-18-2003 by Ord. No. 947]
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 345-18) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(c) of
the Vehicle Code, and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Market Street U.S. Rt. 15 Westbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following nonintersectional, midblock pedestrian crosswalks are
established at the locations indicated, and official pedestrian crossing
signs shall be erected on the sidewalks on each side of such crosswalk
advising pedestrians of the existence of the crosswalk, and also official
warning signs shall be erected on the sidewalks on each side of such
crosswalk an adequate distance before the crosswalk warning drivers
of vehicles approaching the crosswalk of its existence.
Through Street Between Streets
Market Street Third Street and Fourth Street
B. Every driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian
crossing the street within any nonintersectional marked crosswalk or
within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection as required by
Section 3542(a) of the Vehicle Code, and shall not proceed into or
across the crosswalk until the pedestrian is no longer within the
crosswalk; provided, however, that no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a
curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle
which is so close as to constitute a hazard.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
and costs.
§ 345-20 TAXATION § 345-21
324:437

ARTICLE III
Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle and Load
§ 345-22. Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and
bridges.
§ 345-23. Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and
bridges.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a
gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge
or street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between
Maximum Gross
Weight
(tons)
Eleventh Street Buffalo Road and St.
Mary Street
10
St. Anthony Street Derr Alley and
Eleventh Street
10
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(a) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code,
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150
for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs.
A. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between
Restriction
(tons)
Fifteenth Street
Bridge
Terrace Drive and St.
Mary Street
Single axle — 8
Fifteenth Street
Bridge
Terrace Drive and St.
Mary Street
Double axle — 12
Fifteenth Street
Bridge
Terrace Drive and St.
Mary Street
Semis — 16
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902(a) and Section 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle
Code, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 and
costs.
§ 345-22 TAXATION § 345-24
324:439
§ 345-24. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Street Between
Bison Alley [Added 1-16-2018
by Ord. No. 1050]
Buffalo Road and North Fourth
Street
(1) Provided: nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from
driving an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of
streets, or from driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a
truck or other commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or
pickups from premises located along that street or part of a street.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 345-24 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-24
324:440
ARTICLE IV
Parking Regulations
§ 345-25. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 345-26. Angle parking required on portions of certain streets.
§ 345-27. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.
[Amended 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 838; 1-17-1989 by Ord. No. 844;
11-15-2011 by Ord. No. 1006]
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets:
Street Side Between
Market Street Both Second Street and Fourth Street
S. Sixth Street East Market Street and Pine Alley
St. George Street South Fifth Street and Sixth Street
B. On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at
the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
A. Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Barton Street Both Third Street and University
Avenue
Barton Street South Third Street and Brown Street
Brown Street West St. George Street and Conrail
r.o.w.
Bucknell University
entrances
Bucknell University
Women's College
building entrances
Derr Drive North Entire length
Derr Drive South Entire length
Fifth Street West Market Street and Buffalo Road
Fifth Street West Market Street and St. Catharine
Street
§ 345-25 TAXATION § 345-27
324:441
Street Side Between
Fourth Street East St. Catharine Street and St.
George Street
Fourth Street West Market Street and St. Catharine
Street
Front Street East Market Street and St. Anthony
Street
Front Street East Market Street and St. George
Street
Loomis Street North Walker Street to University Ave.
Loomis Street South University Ave. and a point 60
feet west thereof
Market Street North Sixth Street to N. Derr Dr. (U.S.
Rt. 15)
Market Street South N. Derr Drive (U.S. Rt. 15) and
Eighth Street
Matlack Avenue West Ikeler Street and Buffalo Road
North Fifteenth Street
[Added 10-17-2006
by Ord. No. 979]
Both St. Mary Street and a point 60
feet north thereof
North Water Street
[Added 7-19-2005 by
Ord. No. 966]
West St. Anthony Street and a point
164 feet south of St. Anthony
Street
St. Anthony Street North Third Street and Fourth Street
St. Anthony Street South Fourth Street and Borough line
at Buffalo Creek
St. Anthony Street South Fifth Street and Raspberry Alley
St. Catharine Street
[Added 3-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 1057]
South Pine Street and South Seventh
Street
St. George Street
[Added 7-19-2005 by
Ord. No. 966]
South North Front Street and a point
154 feet west of North Front
Street
St. John Street North Water Street and Chestnut Tree
Alley
St. John Street North Third Street and Fifth Street
St. Louis Street South Eighth Street to Water Street
St. Mary Street South Fifth Street to Water Street
Second Street East St. John Street and St. Anthony
Street
§ 345-27 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-27
324:442
Street Side Between
Second Street West Market Street and St. John
Street
Second Street West Market Street and St. George
Street
Seventh Street East Market Street and St. Mary
Street
Seventh Street West Market Street and Moore
Boulevard
Sixth Street East Market Street and Cherry Alley
St. Catharine South Fourth Street and Blackberry
Alley
Third Street East Barton Street and Brown Street
University Avenue East Loomis Street to Malcolm Street
University Avenue West Loomis Street to St. George
Street
Walker Street North Loomis Street to Seventh Street
Water Street East Market Street and St. Louis
Street
Water Street East St. John Street and St. Mary
Street
Water Street West Market Street and St. John
Street
Water Street West St. Mary Street and St. Anthony
Street
B. Parking on unimproved surfaces.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel or approximately parallel to the
street line and beyond on which buildings or fences may not be
erected.
CORNER LOT — A residential property located at the intersection
or confluence of two or more streets such that public street rightsof-
way are directly adjacent to at least two contiguous sides of the
lot.
DRIVEWAY — The primary improved or unimproved parking
surface which provides egress and ingress from a garage, carport
or off-street parking area to an adjacent street or alley.
FRONT YARD — The area from the front face of a residential
structure to the front property line or street right-of-way line or,
§ 345-27 TAXATION § 345-27
324:443
when a structure does not exist, the area from the front building
line to the front property line or street right-of-way.
IMPROVED PARKING SURFACE — An area used for the parking
or storage of vehicles that is overlaid or otherwise paved with
concrete, asphalt, paving stones, compacted gravel and/or stone,
or other hard surfaced durable material approved by the building
official.
REAR YARD — The area from the rear face of a residential
structure to the rear property line.
SIDE YARD — The area from the side of a residential structure to
the side property line.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn or moved upon a street,
highway, waterway or airway and shall include any automobile,
bus, truck, tractor, motor home, farm machinery, motorcycle,
scooter, moped, all-terrain vehicle, boat, aircraft, recreational
vehicle, golf cart, go-cart, trailer, fifth-wheel trailer, camper,
camper shell, wheeled towing frame, semi-tractor trailer, truck
bed mounted on chassis, and mobile home. This definition does
not include nonmotorized bicycles, small engine lawn mowers and
devices of similar scale.
(2) Regulations.
(a) Parking on unimproved surfaces restricted. No person shall,
upon a residential single-family, duplex, townhouse or other
dwelling lot or tract:
[1] Cause, permit or allow the parking or storage of any
vehicle in the front yard upon any surface other than an
improved parking surface; or
[2] Cause, permit or allow the parking or storage of any
vehicle upon the side yard or rear yard of a corner lot upon
any surface other than an improved parking surface,
unless otherwise concealed from view from all public
street rights-of-way by:
[a] A solid, opaque, screening fence or wall at least six
feet in height;
[b] Vegetation consisting of a solid hedgerow of
evergreen shrubs, or trees and shrubs, providing full
screening from the ground to a minimum height of six
feet;
[c] Any combination of the above that effectively conceals
the vehicle from view and accomplishes the required
screening height; or
§ 345-27 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-27
324:444
§ 345-28. Parking prohibited in certain locations on certain days
and hours. [Amended 1-17-1989 by Ord. No. 844; 5-16-1989 by Ord.
[d] Any other form of compatible and appropriate
screening approved by the building official.
(b) Driveways and improved parking surfaces shall be permitted
and constructed or installed only in accordance with and as
provided in the Borough's Zoning Ordinance51 or any other
applicable Borough ordinance.
(c) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for parking or
storing vehicles on an unimproved surface or in an
unconcealed or unscreened manner if such vehicles are parked
in the rear yard and the rear yard is not a corner lot or directly
adjacent to a public street right-of-way other than an alley.
(3) Borough Council, or any officer or employee, including Buffalo
Valley Regional Police Department police officer, of the Borough
designated thereby for this purpose, is hereby authorized to give
notice, either by personal service or by the United States mail, to
the owner of any property whereon a vehicle is parked or stored in
violation of the provisions of § 345-27B(2) of this article, directing
and requiring such owner to remove the said vehicle in order to
conform to the requirements of § 345-27B(2) of this article within
10 days after receipt of such notice and to also pay an
administrative charge in the amount of $40. Whenever, in the
judgment of the designated official, it shall appear to be
impracticable to give the aforesaid notice, either because the
owner cannot readily be found or because a search for the owner
would entail unreasonable delay, Borough Council, or any officer or
employee, including Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department
police officer, of the Borough designated thereby for this purpose,
may give such notice by posting conspicuously on the property
whereon a vehicle is parked or stored in violation of the provisions
of § 345-27B(2) of this article a notice to conform to the
requirements of § 345-27B(2) of this article within 10 days after the
posting of the said notice and to also pay an administrative charge
in the amount of $40. If any owner shall neglect, fail or refuse to
comply with the aforesaid notice and/or to pay the aforesaid
administrative charge within the required period of time, such
owner shall be in violation of the provisions of § 345-27B(2) of this
article and shall be cited and prosecuted by the Borough, or any
officer or employee, including Buffalo Valley Regional Police
Department police officer, of the Borough designated thereby for
this purpose, as provided in the first sentence of § 345-34 of this
article. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
51.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 345-27 TAXATION § 345-28
324:445
No. 849; 7-16-1991 by Ord. No. 876; 3-15-1994 by Ord. No. 891;
5-15-2001 by Ord. No. 931; 10-15-2002 by Ord. No. 944]
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
A. General prohibitions.
Street Side Between Days Hours
Market Street Both Entire length Every day Midnight to
7:00 a.m.
Loomis Street
[Amended
7-15-2008 by
Ord. No. 989]
South Walker Street
and a point
60 feet west
of University
Avenue
Every day Midnight to
5:00 a.m.
St. Louis South S. Eighth
Street and
Dale Alley
Monday
through
Friday
7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Spruce Street West Entire length Monday
through
Friday
8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
B. Street maintenance. For purposes of allowing the cleaning of Borough
streets, maintenance of boulevard street light system, snow removal
and general maintenance, parking shall be prohibited on the days, and
between the hours indicated, on the following named streets:
Mondays — 7:00 a.m. — 12 noon
Brown Street Entire length
Front Street Entire length
Second Street Entire length
St. George Street Brown to Front
Water Street Entire length
Tuesdays — 7:00 a.m. — 9:00 a.m.
[Added 2-15-2011 by Ord. No.
1001]
Third Street Market Street to St. John Street
Tuesdays — 7:00 a.m. — 12:00 noon
Fifth Street Entire length
Fourth Street Entire length
Loomis Street Entire length
Third Street Entire length except Market
Street to St. John Street
University Avenue Entire length
§ 345-28 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-28
324:446
Walker Street Entire length
Wednesdays — 7:00 a.m. — 12:00
noon
Eighth Street Entire length
Pine Street Entire length
St. Catharine Seventh to Spruce
Seventh Street Derr to Moore
Sixth Street Cherry Alley to St. George
Street
Spruce Street Entire length
Thursdays — 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon
Barton Street Entire length
Malcolm Street University to Brown
Mill Street Entire length
St. Catharine Front to Seventh Street
St. George Seventh to Brown
St. Louis Entire length
Fridays — 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon
Beck Street Entire length
Buffalo Road Matlack to St. Anthony
Eleventh Street Buffalo to St. Mary
Fifteenth Street Entire length
Ikeler Street Entire length
Logan Avenue Maple to Ikeler
Maclay Avenue Entire length
Maple Street Entire length
Matlack Avenue Entire length
Pennsylvania Street Entire length
St. Anthony Street Fifth to River Bridge
St. Anthony Street St. Lawrence to Borough line
St. John Street Entire length
St. Lawrence Street Entire length
St. Mary Street Derr To Water
St. Paul Street Entire length
Seventh Street Derr to Buffalo Road
Shikelimo Lane Maple to Buffalo
§ 345-28 TAXATION § 345-28
324:447
§ 345-29. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles
prohibited in certain locations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked,
on any of the following streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a
passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or passenger
car attached to a trailer of any kind):
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 345-30. Parking time limited in certain locations on certain days
and hours.
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
(Reserved)
§ 345-31. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited.
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked,
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Sixteenth Street Buffalo to St. Paul
Tenth Street Buffalo to St. Paul
Terrace Drive Entire length
Twelfth Street Entire length
Fridays — midnight to 7:00 a.m.
Third Street [Repealed 2-15-2011 by Ord. No. 1001]
C. Removal of vehicles. The Borough may remove any vehicle parked in a
prohibited location at a prohibited time in violation of this section by
towing it or having it towed at the expense of the vehicle's owner. The
Borough's removal of such vehicle shall not preclude penalization of the
owner thereof as provided in § 345-34 of this article.
D. St. Mary street park parking lot. Parking shall be prohibited in the
parking lot of the St. Mary Street Park located between St. Mary Street
and North Fifteenth Street every day from dusk to dawn.
§ 345-28 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-31
324:448
Street Side Location Purpose
Market Street (for
buses traveling west)
North N. Fifth Street
and Conrail r.o.w.
Buses
Market Street (for
buses traveling east)
South S. Fifth Street
and Conrail r.o.w.
Buses
Market Street North 8 spaces East of
Fourth Street
Handicap
Market Street North 12 spaces East of
Third Street
Handicap
N. Fifth Street
[Added 11-15-2005
by Ord. No. 969]
East First 2 spaces
north of Market
Street
30-minute
commercial
loading/unloading
N. Fourth Street
[Added 11-15-2005
by Ord. No. 969;
amended 6-15-2010
by Ord. No. 997]
West First 2 spaces
south of Cherry
Alley
30-minute
commercial
loading/unloading
N. Third Street
[Added 11-15-2005
by Ord. No. 969]
East First 2 spaces
north of Market
Street
30-minute
commercial
loading/unloading
N. Third Street
[Added 12-19-2017
by Ord. No. 1049]
West First space south
of Cherry Alley
30-minute
commercial
loading/unloading
S. Fifth Street
[Repealed
2-21-2012 by Ord.
No. 1011]
South Seventh Street
[Added 12-16-2008
by Ord. No. 990]
East First 2 spaces
south of St.
George Street
30-minute
commercial
loading/unloading
S. Third Street
[Added 11-15-2005
by Ord. No. 969]
West First 2 spaces
south of Market
Street
30-minute
commercial
loading/unloading
§ 345-32. Standing or parking on roadway for loading or unloading.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked
at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing or parking for the
purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted
Monday through Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m.
and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., and for no longer than
necessary for the loading or unloading.
§ 345-31 TAXATION § 345-32
324:449
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 345-33. Residential permit parking.
A. Findings and purpose: The Borough finds that:
(1) Certain residential areas in the Borough are subjected to commuter
vehicle parkings, therefore depriving the residents of those areas
of spaces in which to park their own vehicles;
(2) Those residential streets are also subjected to a high degree of
commuter traffic which substantially reduces the quality of the
ambient air level; and
(3) The establishment of a parking permit program for certain affected
areas should facilitate efficient movement of traffic by providing for
parking preference during certain hours of the day and days of the
week. Therefore, the Borough considers it to be in the interest of
the people of the Borough to provide for the establishment of a
residential permit parking program to insure primary access to
available parking spaces by neighborhood residents and also to
provide a cleaner ambient air level.
B. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, words and terms listed in
this subsection, as follows, shall have the following meanings:
COMMUTER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a residential area
by a person not a resident of that residential area;
PROPRIETOR — A person who owns or leases real estate within a
residential area of which he is not a resident, but who owns or manages
a business enterprise or professional office maintained at that address;
for the purpose of this section, a proprietor shall be entitled to one
parking permit for that business or professional office address;
RESIDENT — A person who owns or leases real property within a
residential area and who maintains either a voting residence, or bona
fide occupancy, or both, at that address;
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A contiguous area containing public highways
or parts of public highways primarily abutted by residential property or
residential and non-business property (such as schools, parks, places of
worship, hospitals and nursing homes).
C. Criteria: The residential areas designated in Subsection D of this
section are those deemed impacted and hence eligible for residential
parking on the basis of the following criteria:
(1) During any period between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays, the number of
vehicles parked (or standing), legally or illegally, on the streets in
the area is equal to 70% or more of the legal, on-street parking
§ 345-32 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-33
324:450
capacity of the area. For the purpose of this criterion, a legal
parking space shall be 20 linear feet.
(2) During the same period as specified in Subsection C(1), directly
above, 10% or more of the vehicles parked (or standing) on the
streets in the area are not registered in the name of a person
residing in the area. For the purpose of this criterion, the latest
available information from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles and
Licensing of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
regarding registration of motor vehicles shall be used.
(3) Provided: in determining that a specific area identified as impacted
and eligible for residential permit parking is designated as a
residential permit parking area, the following factors are taken into
consideration:
(a) The local and metropolitan needs with respect to clean air and
environment;
(b) The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in the
Borough;
(c) The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal parking
and related health and safety hazards;
(d) The proximity of public transportation to the residential area;
(e) The desire and need of the residents for residential permit
parking and their willingness to bear the administrative costs
in connection with it; and
(f) The need for parking in excess of the residential permit
parking program in proximity to establishments located in the
residential permit parking area and used by the general public
for religious, health or educational purposes.
D. Designation of residential permit parking areas:
(1) The following are designated as residential permit parking areas:
Area Bounded by and Including
(Reserved)
(2) Signs shall be erected along the streets in each residential permit
parking area, indicating the days, hours, locations and conditions
under which parking shall be by permit only.
E. Application for permit: Application for a residential parking permit shall
be made to the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police
Department by the person desiring the permit, who shall be only the
owner or the driver of a motor vehicle who resides on or is a proprietor
of property immediately adjacent to a street or other location within a
residential parking permit area. A separate application shall be
§ 345-33 TAXATION § 345-33
324:451
required for each motor vehicle, and each application shall be
accompanied by a $10 permit fee, which shall be for the use of the
Borough, to be applied to the cost of administering the residential
permit parking program. Each application shall contain the following
information: the name of the owner or the driver, as the case may be,
of the motor vehicle; the address of the resident or the proprietor, as
the case may be; the make, model and registration number of the motor
vehicle; and the driver number as taken from the applicant's current
driver's license. At the discretion of the Police Chief of the Buffalo
Valley Regional Police Department, the applicant shall be required, at
the time of making application, to present his driver's license and the
vehicle registration card. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
F. Issuance of permit: Upon receipt of the application and the permit fee,
and determination by him that the information upon the application
shows that the applicant is entitled to a residential parking permit, the
Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department shall issue
to the applicant a residential parking permit, which shall be valid for
the remainder of the calendar year. The permit shall display the serial
and registration numbers of the motor vehicles, the residential parking
area number, and the expiration date. The permit shall be renewable
annually before the expiration date, upon making application for
renewal and payment of the $10 permit fee. It shall be unlawful and a
violation of this section for any person to display other than the current
and valid permit while standing or parking in a residential permit
parking area at any time when those permits are to be displayed.
[Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
G. Temporary and exemption parking permits: Temporary parking permits
may be issued by the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police
Department, upon payment of a fee of $2, to bona fide visitors of
residents of a designated residential permit parking area, and
exemption parking permits may be issued, without payment of a fee, to
handicapped persons. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
H. Responsibility of permit holder:
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
holder of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or
park a motor vehicle operated by him in any designated residential
parking area during those times when parking of motor vehicles is
permitted in that area. While a vehicle for which a residential
parking permit has been issued is so parked, that permit shall be
displayed so as to be clearly visible through the windshield of the
vehicle. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve
to the holder a parking space within a designated residential
permit parking area.
(2) A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder to stand
or park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time when
stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set
§ 345-33 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-33
324:452
§ 345-34. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-19-1988 by Ord. No.
837; 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 853; 3-21-1995 by Ord. No. 898;
8-17-2004 by Ord. No. 956; 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs of prosecution, for each
offense and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be imprisoned for
a period not to exceed 30 days. Provided, it shall be the duty of the police
officers of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department and of parking
enforcement personnel of the Borough to report to the appropriate official
all violations of any provision of this article indicating, in each case: the
section violated; the license number of the vehicle involved in the violation;
the location where the violation took place; and any other facts that might
be necessary in order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances
attending the violation. The police officer or other person making the report
shall also attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that
the vehicle was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall contain
instructions to the owner or operator of the vehicle that if he/she will report
to the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department and pay the sum of $15
aside for other specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit
exempt its holder from the observance of any traffic or parking
regulation other than residential permit parking regulation or
restriction.
(3) No person other than the permit holder whose name appears on the
permit shall use a residential parking permit or display it on a
vehicle operated; any such use or display by a person other than
the permit holder shall constitute a violation of this section by the
permit holder and by the person who so used or displayed the
parking permit.
(4) It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person falsely to
represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to
furnish false information in an application to the Police Chief of the
Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department in order to obtain a
residential parking permit. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1014]
(a) Revocation of permits: The Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department shall have authority to revoke the
residential parking permit of any permit holder found to be in
violation of any provision of this section. Upon written
notification to him of the revocation, the permit holder shall
surrender the permit to the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department. Failure to do so, when so
requested, shall constitute a violation of this section. Provided:
any person receiving such a notice may, within 10 days after
the date of the notice, appeal to Council for a hearing on the
revocation, and the decision of Council shall be final.
§ 345-33 TAXATION § 345-34
324:453
within 48 hours after the time of the notice, or if he/she will place the
sum of $15, enclosed within the envelope provided, in any of the special
parking fine boxes installed at various locations within the Borough, that
act will save the violator from additional penalties and/or prosecution. Upon
the failure of any owner or operator to pay the sum of $15 within the said
period of 48 hours, the owner or operator shall, after the said forty-eighthour
period, pay as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation
the sum of $30, together with the cost of postage and certified or registered
mail should a notice of such violation be forwarded to the said owner or
operator by United States Mail. The failure of such owner or operator to
make such penalty payment within the time and at the place so specified
for such violation shall render such owner or operator, who shall be cited
within 30 days of the violation, subject to the fine and costs prescribed in
the first sentence of this section.
§ 345-34 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-34
324:454
ARTICLE V
On-Street Metered Parking
§ 345-35. Parking meter zones established. [Amended 5-16-1989 by
Ord. No. 849; 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 973; 7-15-2008 by Ord. No.
989; 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 1035; 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 1040;
5-16-2017 by Ord. No. 1046]
Parking meter zones are established upon and along certain streets in the
Borough, as follows:
Street Side Between
Rate/
Minutes
Maximum
Parking
Time
(hours)
Market
Street
South Seventh Street
and Front Street
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
North Sixth Street and
Front Street
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
N. Fifth
Street
East Market Street
and Cherry Alley
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
N. Fourth
Street
East/West Market Street
and Cherry Alley
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
N. Second
Street
East Market Street
and St. John
Street
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
§ 345-35 TAXATION § 345-35
324:455
Street Side Between
Rate/
Minutes
Maximum
Parking
Time
(hours)
N. Third
Street
East/West Market Street
and St. John
Street
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
S. Fifth
Street
East Market Street
and Pine Alley
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
S. Fourth
Street
East Market Street
and Pine Alley
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
S. Second
Street
East Market Street
and Pine Alley
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
S. Sixth
Street
East Market Street
and Pine Alley
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
S. Third
Street
East Market Street
and St. Louis
Street
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
West Pine Alley and St.
Louis Street
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
§ 345-35 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-35
324:456
Street Side Between
Rate/
Minutes
Maximum
Parking
Time
(hours)
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
S. Third
Street
West Market Street
and Pine Alley
Token/45 3
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
§ 345-36. Days and hours meters in operation and time limits apply.
[Amended 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 973]
Parking meters shall be operated, by the deposit of a coin or token in the
meter, as prescribed by § 345-39, and the parking rates for specified lengths
of time, as well as the maximum parking times prescribed in § 345-35, shall
apply at all times between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday in the parking meter
zones listed in § 345-35; provided, however, that the requirements of this
chapter as to parking time limit and as to deposit of coins in meters shall
not apply on the following legal holidays: New Year's Day, Good Friday,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas.
§ 345-37. Placement and characteristics of parking meters.
Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established by § 345-35
of this chapter shall be placed upon the curb or sidewalk, and immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces described in § 345-38 of this
chapter. Each parking meter shall be placed or set so as to show that the
parking space adjacent to that meter is or is not legally occupied. Each
parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking
time established by the Borough, and when the adjacent space is occupied
by a vehicle, the parking meter shall indicate on and by its dial and pointer
the duration of the period of legal parking, and, on the expiration of that
period, shall indicate time expired.
§ 345-38. Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk
or roadway adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of delineating
the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every vehicle parked
at any parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or markings
so placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be unlawful and a violation
of this chapter for any person to park a vehicle across any such line or
§ 345-35 TAXATION § 345-38
324:457
marking, or to park a vehicle in such a position that that vehicle is not
wholly within the area designated by those lines or markings.
§ 345-39. Coin or token deposit in meter; overtime parking
unlawful. [Amended 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 855]
Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any space adjacent to a parking meter,
at any time in the period of limited parking as prescribed by § 345-36 of
this chapter, the driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space,
shall immediately deposit, or cause to be deposited, in that parking meter,
one or more proper coins of the United States of America or tokens, as
specified in the legend on the parking meter. Upon the deposit of the coins
or tokens, and placing the meter in operation, the parking space may be
lawfully occupied by the vehicle for the time indicated on the meter. If any
vehicle shall remain in any such parking space for such length of time that
the meter shall indicate by proper signal that the lawful parking time has
expired, that vehicle shall be considered as having been parked overtime,
and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall be a violation of this chapter.
Every hour that a vehicle remains parked at a meter showing a violation
shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
§ 345-40. Unlawful to deposit substitute for coins in meter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this chapter any slug or other substitute for a coin
or token of the United States of America.
§ 345-41. Unlawful to deposit coin in meter to extend parking time
beyond legal limit. [Amended 5-16-1989 by Ord. No. 849]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deposit or
cause to be deposited, in any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this chapter, any coin for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking
time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time of 15 minutes in any
fifteen-minute parking meter zone, or two hours in any two hour parking
meter zone.
§ 345-42. Unlawful to remain parked at meter showing violation.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this chapter, for any person to permit
a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this chapter, when that meter displays a signal indicating that the
vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed
for that parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins was deposited
in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
§ 345-43. Unlawful to tamper with meter. [Amended 4-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 1014]
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this chapter, for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of
§ 345-38 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-43
324:458
any parking meter installed under the provisions of this chapter. Provided:
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department under the direction of the Mayor or Borough
Council.
§ 345-44. Ticketing of vehicles parked unlawfully. [Amended
7-19-1988 by Ord. No. 837; 3-21-1995 by Ord. No. 898; 1-17-2006 by
Ord. No. 973; 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
§ 345-45. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-19-1988 by Ord. No.
837; 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 583; 3-21-1995 by Ord. No. 898]
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Buffalo Valley Regional
Police Department and parking enforcement personnel of the Borough,
acting in accordance with the directions of the Police Chief of the
Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked in
violation of any provision of this article;
(2) The date and hour of the violation;
(3) The license number of the vehicle; and
(4) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
B. The police officer or other person making the report shall place on or
attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle that
the vehicle was parked in violation of this article and instructing the
owner or driver that if he/she will place the sum of $8, enclosed within
the envelope provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes installed
at various locations within the Borough or report to the Borough
Building and pay, for the use of the Borough, the sum of $8 within 48
hours after the time of the notice, or the sum of $15 after the said fortyeight-
hour period has elapsed as a penalty, that act will save the violator
from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs prescribed in
§ 345-45A of this article. [Amended 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 1038]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article, with the exception
of § 345-43, and who fails to pay the penalty set forth in § 345-44B of
this article, shall be cited within 30 days of the violation and upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $20 and not more than $600,
plus costs of prosecution, for each offense and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
B. Any person who violates any provision of § 345-43 of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs of
§ 345-43 TAXATION § 345-45
324:459
§ 345-46. Exceptions.
prosecution, for each offense, and, in default of payment of fine and
costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
A. By resolution, Council may temporarily suspend the provisions of this
chapter by requiring coin deposit in meters and establishing a
maximum parking time at meters.
B. The Borough shall have authority to establish no-parking or specialpurpose
parking zones within any parking meter zone, and to remove
parking meters from those areas as previously installed there, and the
provisions of this chapter shall not apply in those areas where noparking
or special-purpose parking is in effect.
§ 345-45 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-46
324:460
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Metered Parking
§ 345-47. Parking lots established. [Amended 5-16-1989 by Ord. No.
849; 8-17-2004 by Ord. No. 956; 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 973;
7-15-2008 by Ord. No. 989]
The following parking lots, which shall be metered as determined from time
to time by Borough Council and whose days and hours of operation when
metered shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, are established within
the Borough:
Lot Location
Rate/
Minutes
Maximum
Parking Time
(hours)
#1 Between S. 3rd and S. 4th Streets
South of Pine Alley
Token/45
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
8
#2 Between Market and St. Louis Streets
West of 5th Street
Token/45
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
8
#4 Between Market and St. Mary Streets
East of 7th Street
Token/45
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
8
#5 Between Market and St. Mary Streets
West of 5th Street
Token/45
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
8
#6 Between Market and St. John Streets
Between N. 2nd and N. 3rd Streets
Token/45
$0.05/9
$0.10/18
$0.25/45
8
§ 345-47 TAXATION § 345-48
324:461
§ 345-48. Placement and characteristics of parking meters.
Parking meters installed in the parking lots shall be placed immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces that shall be marked off and
maintained in the lots. For each parking meter there shall be a clear
indication, through use of a directional arrow, or an identification as to
number with the parking space, to show which individual parking space it
serves. Each parking meter shall indicate by a proper legend the parking
rate and the maximum parking time established by § 345-47 of this chapter,
and, when the parking space is occupied and the parking meter put into
operation by the insertion of one or more coins or tokens, the parking meter
shall indicate on and by its dial and pointer the duration of legal parking,
and, upon the expiration of that period, shall indicate illegal parking or
overparking.
§ 345-49. Reserved parking spaces for handicapped may be
provided.
Council, at its discretion, may provide, at convenient and suitable locations
in any one or more of the metered parking lots, reserved parking spaces
for handicapped, and shall designate those spaces by appropriate signs. It
shall be unlawful, and a violation of this chapter, for any person to park in
any such reserved parking space, any vehicle unless that vehicle bears or
displays either: a "handicapped registration plate," a "handicapped parking
placard," a "disabled veteran registration plate," or a "disabled veteran
placard."
§ 345-50. Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the surface of the
metered parking lots, adjacent to each parking meter, for the purpose of
delineating the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every
vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked wholly within
the lines or markings so placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be
unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person:
§ 345-51. Manner of parking at meters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any metered parking
lot:
A. To park a vehicle across any such line or marking; or
B. To park a vehicle in such a position that the vehicle shall not be within
the area so delineated by the lines or markings;
C. To park a vehicle elsewhere in any such lot than in an individual parking
space adjacent to a parking meter.
A. Otherwise than with the front of the parked vehicle nearest to the
parking meter applicable to that vehicle; or
§ 345-48 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-51
324:462
§ 345-52. Coin or token deposit in meter; overtime parking
unlawful.
Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any metered parking lot, at any time
when the lot is open for use and the meters are to be in operation, the driver
of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall immediately deposit,
or cause to be deposited, in the proper parking meter, one or more proper
coins of the United States of America, or tokens, as specified in the legend
on the parking meter. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins, or token, and
placing the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied
by the vehicle for the time indicated on the meter. If any vehicle remains
in any such parking space for such length of time that the meter indicates
that the lawful parking time has expired, that vehicle shall be considered
as being parked overtime, and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall be a
violation of this chapter. Provided: every hour that a vehicle remains parked
at a meter showing a violation shall constitute a separate violation of this
chapter.
§ 345-53. Unlawful to deposit substitute for coins in meter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this chapter any slug or other substitute for a coin
of the United States of America, or a token not issued by the Borough of
Lewisburg.
§ 345-54. Unlawful to remain parked at a meter showing violation.
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this chapter, for any person to permit
a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this chapter, when that meter displays a signal indicating that the
vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed
for that parking space, or the time for which a coin(s) or token(s) was/were
deposited in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
§ 345-55. Unlawful to tamper with meter. [Amended 4-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 1014]
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this chapter, for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of
any parking meter installed under the provisions of this chapter. Provided:
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers or employees of the Borough or police officers of the
Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department under the direction of the Mayor
or Borough Council.
B. With any part of the vehicle touching the meter post or head or the
raised base or barrier on which meters are erected.
§ 345-51 TAXATION § 345-56
324:463
§ 345-56. Metered parking lots for certain types of vehicles only.
The metered parking lots established by this article shall be for the use
of passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park any other type of vehicle in any of those
lots.
§ 345-57. Ticketing of vehicles parked unlawfully. [Amended
5-16-1989 by Ord. No. 849; 3-21-1995 by Ord. No. 898; 5-21-1996 by
Ord. No. 904; 1-17-2006 by Ord. No. 973; 4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1014]
A. In off-street metered parking lots:
(1) It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department and parking enforcement personnel of
the Borough to report to the appropriate official all violations of any
provision of this article in off-street metered parking lots
indicating, in each case:
(a) The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked
in violation of any provision of this article;
(b) The date and hour of the violation;
(c) The license number of the vehicle; and
(d) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a
thorough understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation.
(2) The police officer or other person making the report shall also
attach or place upon every such vehicle a notice to the owner or
operator of the vehicle stating that the vehicle was parked in
violation of this article and instructing the owner or operator of the
vehicle that if he/she will place the sum of $8, enclosed within the
envelope provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes installed
at various locations within the Borough or report to the Borough
Building and pay, for the use of the Borough, the sum of $8 within
48 hours after the time of the notice, or the sum of $15 after the
said forty-eight-hour period has elapsed as a penalty, that act will
save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine
and costs prescribed in § 345-58A of this article. [Amended
12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 1038]
B. In off-street unmetered parking lots:
(1) It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department and parking enforcement personnel of
the Borough to report to the appropriate official all violations of any
§ 345-56 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-57
324:464
§ 345-58. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-20-1988 by Ord.
No. 838; 5-16-1989 by Ord. No. 849; 3-21-1995 by Ord. No. 898;
5-21-1996 by Ord. No. 904]
provision of this article in off-street unmetered parking lots
indicating, in each case:
(a) The section violated;
(b) The date and hour of the violation;
(c) The license number of the vehicle involved in the violation;
(d) The location where the violation took place; and
(e) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a
thorough understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation.
(2) The police officer or other person making the report shall also
attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice to the owner or
operator of the vehicle stating that the vehicle was parked in
violation of this article, and instructing the owner or operator of the
vehicle that if he/she will place the sum of $15, enclosed within the
envelope provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes installed
at various locations within the Borough, or report to the office of
the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department
and pay, for the use of the Borough, the sum of $15 within 48 hours
after the time of the notice, that act will save the violator from
additional penalties and/or prosecution. Upon the failure of any
owner or operator to pay the sum of $15 within the said period of
48 hours, the owner or operator shall, after the said forty-eighthour
period, pay as a penalty for an in full satisfaction of such
violation the sum of $30, together with the costs of postage and
certified or registered mail should a notice of such violation be
forwarded to the said owner or operator by United States mail. The
failure of such owner or operator to make such penalty payment
within the time and at the place so specified for such violation shall
render such owner or operator, who shall be cited within 30 days of
the violation, subject to the fine and costs prescribed in § 345-58A
of this article.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article, with the exception
of § 345-55, and who fails to pay the penalty set forth in either
§ 345-57A(1) or B(2) of this article, shall be cited within 30 days of the
violation and upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a
District Justice, be sentenced to pay the amount of the aforesaid penalty
and to also pay a fine of not less than $20 and not more than $600, plus
costs of prosecution, for each offense and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
§ 345-57 TAXATION § 345-58
324:465
§ 345-59. Parking lot permit parking. [Amended 5-16-1989 by Ord.
No. 849; 4-16-1996 by Ord. No. 902; 5-21-1996 by Ord. No. 904;
11-20-2001 by Ord. No. 934]
B. Any person who violates any provision of § 345-55 of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District
Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs of
prosecution, for each offense, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days for each
offense.
A. Establishment of program; types of permits. [Amended 4-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 1012]
(1) Establishment. There is hereby established a parking permit
program, consisting of the three types of parking permits described
in Subsection A(2) of this subsection, for the following off-street
municipal parking lots:
(a) Municipal Parking Lot No. 1, located between South Third
Street and South Fourth Street along White Pine Alley,
consisting entirely of 48 metered parking spaces.
(b) Municipal Parking Lot No. 2, known as the “Hufnagle Parking
Lot,” located between Market Street and St. Louis Street west
of South Fifth Street, consisting entirely of 45 metered parking
spaces. [Amended 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 1035]
(c) Municipal Parking Lot No. 6, located between North Second
Street and North Third Street along Cherry Alley, consisting
entirely of 37 reserved parking spaces.
(2) Types of parking permits. The following two types of parking
permits, as described herein, may be issued: [Amended
7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 1035]
(a) Meter permit. This permit is for use in either Municipal
Parking Lot No. 1 or Municipal Parking Lot No. 2 but does not
guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof a metered parking
space in the said lots.
(b) Reserve Permit Lot No. 6. This permit is for use only in
Municipal Parking Lot No. 6 and guarantees to the holder
thereof a reserved parking space, but not a particular parking
space, in the said lot.
B. Application for permits. Application for one of the types of parking
permits described in Subsection A(1) of this section for a period of one
to 12 months, as shall be determined from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council, shall be made to the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department, or his designee, by the person desiring the
permit, who shall be a registered owner or licensed driver of a motor
§ 345-58 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-59
324:466
vehicle. Each application shall be accompanied by a permit fee to
be paid in advance. The said fee shall be established from time to
time by resolution of Borough Council and shall be for the use of the
Borough to defer the cost of administering the parking permit program.
Each application shall contain the following information: the name,
address and telephone number of the applicant; the name, address and
telephone number of the applicant’s employer; the make, model and
license plate number of the motor vehicle or vehicles to which the
permit shall apply; and the driver number as taken from the applicant’s
current driver’s license. At the discretion of the Police Chief of the
Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department, or his designee, the
applicant shall be required, at the time of making application, to
present a current driver’s license and vehicle registration card. The
maximum number of applications to be made in any period shall be
limited to the number of available parking spaces in the aforesaid lots
or such lesser number as set forth in Subsection A(1) of this section
or as shall otherwise be determined from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council. [Amended 9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 998; 4-17-2012
by Ord. No. 1012; 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
C. Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application and the applicable
permit fee, and after determination by the Police Chief of the Buffalo
Valley Regional Police Department, or his designee, that the
information contained in the application shows that the applicant is
entitled to a parking permit, the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley
Regional Police Department, or his designee, shall issue to the
applicant one of the types of parking permits described in Subsection
A(1) of this section, which shall be valid for the period of time from one
to 12 months for which the application is made as shall be determined
from time to time by resolution of Borough Council. The permit shall
display an assigned application number and/or such other information
as required by the Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police
Department, or his designee, and also display the expiration date of the
permit or, in the alternative, a color code or other code for determining
such expiration date. The permit shall be renewable monthly,
semiannually, annually or for such period of time as shall be determined
from time to time by resolution of Borough Council before the
expiration date, on a first-come-first-served basis, upon making
application for renewal and payment of the applicable permit fee. It
shall be unlawful and a violation of this Section for any person to
display a permit or similar placard other than a current and valid permit
while standing or parking a motor vehicle in the aforesaid lots at any
time when such permit is required to be displayed. [Amended
9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 998; 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1012;
4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
D. Responsibility of permit holder.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the
holder of a parking permit shall be permitted to stand or park a
§ 345-59 TAXATION § 345-59
324:467
motor vehicle operated by him or her in the aforesaid lots during
those times when parking of motor vehicles is permitted in such
lots. While a vehicle for which a parking permit has been issued is
so parked, that permit shall be displayed so as to be clearly visible
through the windshield of the vehicle. [Amended 4-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 1012]
(2) A parking permit shall not authorize its holder to stand or park a
motor vehicle in any place where, or at any time when, stopping,
standing or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set aside for
other specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit exempt its
holder from the observance of any traffic or parking regulation
other than such regulation or restriction which is in conflict with
the provisions of this section.
(3) It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person to falsely
represent himself or herself as eligible for a parking permit or to
furnish false information in an application to the Police Chief of the
Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department, or his designee, in order
to obtain a parking permit for one of the aforesaid lots. [Amended
4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
E. Revocation of permits. The Police Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional
Police Department, or his designee, shall have authority to revoke the
parking permit of any permit holder found to be in violation of any
provision of this section. Upon written notification to him or her of such
revocation, the permit holder shall surrender the permit to the Police
Chief of the Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department, or his designee.
Failure to do so, when so requested, shall constitute a violation of this
section; provided, however, that any person receiving such a notice
may, within 10 days after the date of the notice, appeal to Borough
Council for a hearing on the revocation, and the decision of Borough
Council shall be final. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
F. Ticketing of vehicles parked unlawfully. Vehicles parked in violation of
this section shall be ticketed as set forth in § 345-57 of this article.
G. Removal of vehicles parked unlawfully. The Borough may remove any
vehicle parked in an off-street unmetered parking lot in violation of this
section by towing it or having it towed at the expense of the vehicle's
owner. Nothing herein shall preclude the ticketing of unlawfully parked
vehicles as provided in Subsection F of this section or the penalization
of the owner thereof as provided in § 345-58A of this article.
§ 345-59 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-59
324:468
ARTICLE VII
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 345-60. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a-22) of the Vehicle
Code, and gives authority to the Borough of Lewisburg to remove and
impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow away zone and in
violation of parking regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been
abandoned (as defined by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a
manner as to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others, may be towed
under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 345-61. Authority to remove and impound.
The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order
the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 345-60 of this article. Provided: no such vehicle shall
be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of
this article, or the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 345-62. Tow away zones. [Amended 7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 941]
All parking shall be prohibited in tow away zones. Signs shall be posted in
all tow away zones to notify the public that their vehicles may be towed
for violation of this section. Those specific parking spaces located in the
Borough Building parking lot which are designated by a sign as being
reserved for police vehicle parking only are hereby established as tow away
zones. Borough Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate
additional parking lots and/or streets, or parts thereof, as tow away zones.
Street Parking Lot Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 345-63. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage. [Amended 7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 941]
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this chapter shall be done
only by "approved storage garages" that shall be designated from time
to time by Borough Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to
Borough Council that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an
amount satisfactory to Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify owners
of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in
the custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of towing or storage.
The approved storage garage shall submit to Borough Council its schedule
of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this chapter, and,
when the schedule is approved by Borough Council, those charges shall
be adhered to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of
charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is
§ 345-60 TAXATION § 345-63
324:469
removed or impounded under this chapter by any approved storage garage.
Borough Council shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any
garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle
removed or impounded under this chapter.
§ 345-64. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 345-65. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a $25 fee of which $10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 345-66. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or
the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place
of storage of the vehicle.
§ 345-67. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 345-68. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 101 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 345-69. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with Section 7311 of the
Vehicle Code, by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the
vehicle has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred
to a licensed Salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper
reports and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 75 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq., as amended).
§ 345-63 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-69
324:470
ARTICLE VIII
Snow and Ice Emergency
§ 345-70. Declaration of emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 345-72 of this
article, the Mayor or Manager, in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice
emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information
on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Borough through
radio, newspaper or other available media, and information on the
termination of the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 345-71. Parking prohibited and driving motor vehicles restricted
during emergency.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 345-72. Routes designated.
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Side Between
Brown Street Both S. Third Street to Borough line
Buffalo Road Both N. Fourth Street to U.S. Route 15
Fourth Street East Market Street to St. Anthony
Street
Front Street Both Market Street to St. Anthony
Street
Front Street Both Market Street to St. George Street
Loomis Street Both University Avenue to Walker Street
Market Street Both Susquehanna River Bridge to U.S.
Route 15
St. Anthony Street Both Buffalo Creek Bridge to Fourth
Street
St. Louis Street Both Water Street to U.S. Route 15
Seventh Street Both Market Street to Borough line
Seventh Street Both Market Street to U.S. Route 15
Sixth Street East Market Street to St. George Street
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 345-72 of this
article; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
§ 345-70 TAXATION § 345-72
324:471
Street Side Between
Third Street Both Market Street to Brown Street
Third Street Both Market Street to St. Anthony
Street
University Avenue Both Third Street to Loomis Street
Water Street Both Market Street to St. Anthony
Street
Walker Street Both Loomis Street to Borough line
Water Street Both Market Street to St. Louis Street
§ 345-73. Violations and penalties.
A. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 345-70 of this article, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and
costs.
B. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 345-70 of this article, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route, without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 345-72 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-73
324:472
ARTICLE IX
Pedestrian Regulations
§ 345-74. Pedestrians to obey traffic-control signs.
At all locations in the Borough where official traffic-control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestriancontrol
signals installed under § 345-75 of this article, shall obey the
directions of those traffic-control signals, as follows:
§ 345-75. Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
§ 345-76. Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked
crosswalks restricted. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1014]
Except when authorized by a Buffalo Valley Regional Police Department
police officer or other appropriately attired person authorized to direct,
control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross
the roadway at any of the following streets, at the intersection with that
street indicated.
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk;
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway;
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway;
A. At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
(1) N. Derr Drive (U.S. 15) and Market Street (U.S. 45)
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal shall
obey the directions of that signal, as follows:
(1) When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't
Walk" signal is showing.
(2) When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone.
C. Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a "Don't Walk" signal,
as indicated above, shall be guilty of a summary offense and a violation
of this article.
§ 345-74 TAXATION § 345-76
324:473
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
§ 345-77. Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk.
§ 345-78. Violations and penalties.
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$5 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
(1) To cross any roadway in a business district within the Borough
except in a crosswalk;
(2) To cross the roadway, in any of the following portions of streets in
the Borough, except in a crosswalk:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. Provided that nothing in this section shall permit any pedestrian to
cross in a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited by
§ 345-75 of this article.
§ 345-76 LEWISBURG CODE § 345-78
324:474
Chapter 360
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 76.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 120.
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 152.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 179.
Historic district — See Ch. 186.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 290.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
315.
Trees — See Ch. 332.
§ 345-78 TAXATION § 345-78
324:475

ARTICLE I
Title, Application and Purpose
§ 360-1. Title and short title.
§ 360-2. Application.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure, land or parts thereof
shall be used or occupied, erected, constructed or assembled, moved,
enlarged or structurally altered unless in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter or superseded by the Uniform Construction Code or applicable
state or federal building code standard.
§ 360-3. Purpose.
This Zoning Ordinance, including the provisions, requirements and districts
as hereinafter set forth, is based upon and intended to give effect to the
policies and objectives set forth in the Lewisburg Borough Comprehensive
Plan, and is intended to promote health, safety and the general welfare by
achieving, among others, the following purposes for development:
A. Title. This chapter establishes regulations and restrictions for the
location and use of lots, land, buildings and other structures, the height,
number of stories and bulk of buildings and structures, the density of
population, requirements for design and architectural standards, offstreet
parking and similar accessory regulations, in the Borough of
Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania, and for said purposes dividing
the municipality into districts and prescribing certain uniform
regulations for each district and providing for administrative
enforcement and amendment of its provisions in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
B. Short Title. This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the
Lewisburg Borough Zoning Ordinance of 2011.
A. To promote, protect and facilitate the proper density of population,
emergency management preparedness and operations, the provisions
of adequate light and air, access to direct sunlight, police protection,
vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, recreational facilities, public grounds, and the provision of a
safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial,
agricultural and/or industrial use.
B. To promote, protect and facilitate the preservation of the natural
features of the Borough, including wetlands, aquifers and floodplains.
C. To prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in
travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire, flood,
panic or other dangers.
D. To preserve the historic architectural character of the building stock of
the Borough of Lewisburg.
§ 360-1 TAXATION § 360-3
324:477
§ 360-4. Minimum standards.
The provisions of this chapter, in their interpretation and application, shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and/or general welfare of the residents and
inhabitants of the Borough of Lewisburg.
§ 360-5. Community development objectives.
The basis for this chapter is the Lewisburg Borough Comprehensive Plan,
as adopted and/or amended by the Borough Council, and issues arising
during the meetings during the revision of this chapter. The community
development objectives enumerated to achieve local desired goals and
objectives are:
E. To provide for the use of land within the Borough of Lewisburg for
residential housing of various dwelling types.
F. To accommodate growth, both residential and commercial, in those
areas suitable for development and/or redevelopment.
G. To lessen congestion on the roads and highways.
H. To avoid population densities in excess of the natural and/or physical
capacity of the various sections of the Borough of Lewisburg.
I. To encourage the most appropriate use of land, based upon the
suitability of the proposed development site, to accommodate a
proposed use.
J. To conserve the value of land and buildings.
A. General objectives.
(1) Plan for change in the Borough of Lewisburg in a manner that will
protect, preserve, enhance and balance the economic, social,
cultural and aesthetic values desirable of an urban center in a rural
setting.
(2) Ensure safe, orderly and efficient growth and/or development
consistent with the preservation of sensitive uses and areas within
the Borough through land use controls.
(3) Clarify, review and update existing zoning and subdivision
ordinances to evaluate their need and to create greater
understanding and compliance by the residents of the Borough.
(4) Promote greater intermunicipal cooperation in planning.
(5) Promote realistic opportunities for commercial and residential
development/redevelopment consistent with zoning, building and
housing ordinances.
(6) Promote municipal fiscal responsibility.
§ 360-3 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-5
324:478
(7) Promote the retention of traditional architectural styles in
residential and nonresidential reuse and conversions.
(8) Promote the integration of various community characteristics,
including the historic structures, the streetscape and land uses.
B. Housing objectives.
(1) Continue to provide and support suitable areas for a variety of
housing choices in type, scale and size (single-family dwellings,
double dwellings, multifamily dwellings and townhouses).
(2) Continue to provide and encourage areas for higher density
development, where appropriate.
(3) Continue to provide low-density housing opportunities where they
are appropriate.
(4) Continue to preserve historic properties by private or public
means.
(5) Facilitate cooperation with other municipalities and agencies in
Union County whenever possible in order to address major issues
related to housing.
(6) Promote the retention of traditional residential architectural styles
in residential rehabilitation and conversion activities, and in the
redevelopment of residential districts.
C. Industrial and commercial objectives.
(1) Promote the redevelopment and reuse of light-industrial uses
within the areas that already contain such uses.
(2) Promote and support pedestrian-oriented commercial development
and redevelopment in existing downtown area.
(3) Promote and support vehicle-oriented commercial development
and redevelopment in existing highway-commercial area.
(4) Ensure the preservation of a healthy downtown commercial
district.
D. Transportation objectives.
(1) Encourage and promote cooperation with surrounding
municipalities, as well as the commonwealth, in the development of
transportation planning, including pedestrian and bicycle
transportation, for the greater Lewisburg area.
(2) Promote the downtown business area through improved signage on
Route 15.
(3) Encourage the Commonwealth to undertake a regional traffic
systems study to identify any necessary improvements to
§ 360-5 TAXATION § 360-5
324:479
hazardous intersections and the congestion created by Routes 15
and 45.
(4) Examine on-street parking designs and uncoordinated traffic
signals that may hinder traffic flow.
(5) Encourage a circulation system designed to permit ease and safety
of pedestrian movement.
(6) Ensure that roads and highways comply with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation standards.
(7) Ensure that transportation projects are not detrimental to the
environment.
E. Environmental objectives.
(1) Preserve the unique character of the Borough of Lewisburg by
continuing to concentrate commercial, industrial and residential
development in areas in which it already exists.
(2) Discourage development on environmentally sensitive lands
including, but not limited to, irreplaceable wetlands and
floodplains.
(3) Provide for compatible uses in floodplain areas (open space, parks
and recreation, etc.).
(4) Improve stormwater management planning and control.
(5) Initiate energy use practices that promote beneficial results
regarding conservation, efficiency and renewable and sustainable
energies.
(6) Continue to support and improve current recycling efforts.
F. Recreation and open space objectives.
(1) Continue to provide an adequate amount of recreational area for
the residents of the Borough of Lewisburg.
(2) Continue to preserve an appropriate portion of the Borough as
open space accessible to the general public.
(3) Ensure that recreational and open space areas are not detrimental
to the environment or a nuisance to Borough residents.
§ 360-5 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-5
324:480
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 360-6. Definitions and word usage.
A. Tense, gender and number. Words used in the present tense include the
future; words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and
the neuter; and words used in the plural include the singular.
B. General terms. The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory; the
word "may" is permissive. The words "used for" include "designed for,"
"arranged for," "intended for," "maintained for" or "occupied for." The
word "building" includes "structure" and shall be construed as if
followed by the phrase "or part thereof." The words "person or persons"
include "individual," "profit or nonprofit organization," "partnership,"
"company," "incorporated association" or other similar entities.
C. Terms, phrases and words not defined. When terms, phrases, or words
are not specifically defined, they shall have their ordinarily accepted
dictionary meanings or the meaning that the context may imply.
D. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases and words are
defined as follows:
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property or a cessation of
the use of the property by the owner or lessee without any evidence of
the rights to the property being transferred to another owner or of an
attempt to resume the use of the property by the lessee or owner.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure which is subordinate to and
detached from a principal building located on the same lot and whose
use is customarily incidental to the principal building or use. Accessory
structures include but are not limited to garages, storage sheds,
detached decks, swimming pools, cabanas, gazebos, and freestanding
satellite dishes over 18 inches in diameter and similar antennae
typically for residential reception.
ACCESSORY USE — A use of land or a building or portion thereof
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building
and located on the same lot with the principal use.
ADULT BOOK STORE — An establishment that offers for sale, rent,
lease, view on property or loan books, magazines, pictures,
photographs, drawin gs, sculptures, films or video, sound recordings
or any other printed or visual representations which are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET — Any public or private
establishment serving food or beverages or licensed to serve alcoholic
beverages, which features topless dancers, strippers or similar
entertainers.
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:481
ADULT MASSAGE PARLORS — Any place of business where any
person, partnership, firm, association or corporation engages in or
carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any method of
pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping,
pounding, vibrating or stimulating parts of the body relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, with the hands
or with the aid of any mechanical apparatus or electrical apparatus or
appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol,
oil or other such items.
ADULT THEATER — An enclosed building used to present motion
picture, video or similar media distinguished or characterized by a
major emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation
by patrons therein.
ADULT USE OR FACILITY — Any establishment having 10% or more of
its displayed stock or 20% of the occupied area or 25% or more of its
sales in trade or service distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas. Such uses or facilities include but are not
limited to any of the following: adult book stores, adult motion picture
theaters, adult entertainment cabaret, adult video cassette rental and
sales outlet, adult massage parlors or other adult uses.
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping or maintenance of plants
and vegetables for sale or personal use, including forage and sod crops;
grains and seed crops; fruits of all kinds including grapes and berries;
vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or
lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "agriculture" excludes the
production, keeping or maintenance of livestock, poultry, dairy, swine,
goat and other grazing animals.
AIR RIGHTS — The right to use space above ground level.
AISLE — Traveled way by which vehicles enter and depart parking
spaces, usually between rows of parking spaces within a parking lot.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare providing a secondary means of public
access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic
circulation.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or
in the existing facilities of a building or structure, or any enlargement
thereof, whether by extension on any side or by an increase in height,
or the moving of such building from one location or position to another.
ANIMAL BOARDING, COMMERCIAL — A facility for the boarding of
animals, the breeding of dogs and/or cats or the boarding, grooming,
sale or training of dogs and/or cats for which a fee is charged.
ANIMAL BOARDING, NONCOMMERCIAL — Any establishment where
dogs and/or cats are kept within or adjoining a private residence for
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:482
the noncommercial purpose of hunting or exhibition in shows or field
trials or obedience training. Surplus offspring bred at such kennels to
enhance or perpetuate any given breed, recognized by the American
Kennel Club, may be sold at such kennels and shall not be considered
a commercial activity for the purpose of this chapter. All animals kept
or maintained in said kennel must be owned by the individual or family
residing upon the lot upon which the kennel is located.
ANIMAL OR VETERINARY HOSPITAL — A building in which small
domestic animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is
limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use.
ANTENNA — Any device used for the transmission or reception of
radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio
service, or any other wireless communications signals, including,
without limitation, omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or
panel antennas owned or operated by any person or entity licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such device,
which is attached to a wireless support structure. This definition shall
not include the following: private residence-mounted satellite dishes;
television antennas; amateur radio equipment, including without
limitation ham or citizens band radio antennas; and support structures
for antennas or any related equipment that is mounted to the ground or
at ground-level.[Amended 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1044]
APPLICANT — A person submitting an application for development.
AQUIFER — A geologic formation that contains a supply of water.
AQUIFER PROTECTION AREA — A designated area of land identified
in an approved wellhead protection, aquifer protection or water supply
plan, and mapped in said plan. Aquifer protection areas shall be overlay
maps to the Zoning Map and regulations applicable for aquifer
protection areas shall be applicable in all districts where such aquifer
protection areas exist.
AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — The outcropping part of the aquifer
through which water enters the aquifer.
ATTIC — A room or space that is immediately below the roof of a
building.
AWNING — A structure made of cloth, metal or other material affixed
to a building in such a manner that the structure may be raised or
retracted from a projecting position to a flat position against the
building.
BASEMENT or CELLAR — Any area of a building having its floor below
ground level.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT or INN — An owneroccupied
single-family detached residence which contains not more
than six bedrooms used to provide overnight accommodations to the
public. If the establishment offers dinner to the overnight guests, it
shall be considered an inn.
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:483
BEDROOM — A room not less than 70 square feet of net floor area
that, because of limited access and separation from the living areas, is
intended or may be used for sleeping.
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination
of streets, alleys, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way,
waterways or any municipal boundary.
BOARDING HOUSE — A dwelling, other than a membership club,
fraternity or sorority, dormitory, motel or hotel, in which lodging is
provided on a weekly or monthly basis without meals for one or more
persons in addition to the family occupying said dwelling.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Lewisburg.
BROADCAST TRANSMISSION FACILITY — The antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics
and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless broadcast
transmission services.[Amended 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1044]
BROADCAST TRANSMISSION TOWER ("TOWER") — Any structure,
other than a building, that is constructed for the primary purpose
of supporting one or more antennas, including, but not limited to,
self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles.[Added
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1044]
BUFFER AREA — A portion of a site intended to provide a visual
barrier between different land uses or to shield, block or provide other
protection from noise, light or nuisance between adjacent parcels of
land to lessen the impacts of incompatible land uses.
BUILDING — A combination of materials forming any structure that
is erected on the ground and permanently affixed thereto, that has a
roof supported by columns or walls and that is designed, intended or
arranged for the shelter, enclosure, housing or structural support of
persons, animals, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind.
The term "building" shall not include driveways, parking spaces or
parking lots.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of the horizontal area measured
from the exterior surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all
principal and accessory buildings on a lot to the total lot area.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open land on all
four sides within the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
finished grade level of the land at the front setback to the top of the
highest roof point, not including chimneys, cupolas and other accessory
structures such as weather vanes.[Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1013]
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:484
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the street or right-of-way line
touching that part of the building closest to the street.
BUILDING MASS — The height, width and depth of a structure.
BUILDING SCALE — The relationship of a particular building, in terms
of building mass, to other nearby and adjacent buildings.
BUILDING, SEMIDETACHED — A building that has one wall in common
with an adjacent building.
BULK REGULATIONS OR REQUIREMENTS — Standards and controls
that establish the maximum size of buildings and structures on a lot and
the area in the lot within which the buildings can be located, including
coverage, setbacks, height and floor area ratio requirements.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk four feet above grade.
CAMPGROUND — Land used for the purpose of providing a space or
spaces for six or more tents or two or more trailers or recreational
vehicles for temporary (180 days or less) purposes, regardless of
whether or not a fee has been charged for the leasing, renting or
occupancy of the space.
CANOPY — A structure made of metal, aluminum or other material
intended to be freestanding or affixed to a building and that serves as
an overhang intended to shield persons from the elements.
CELLAR — See "basement."
CENTRAL WATER OR SEWER — A water or sewer distribution system
that serves facilities or a community on an area-wide or regional basis.
The facility company must be approved by and/or licensed by the
appropriate state or federal agencies.
CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE — A document issued by the
Zoning Officer certifying that the use, building or structure for which a
zoning permit was issued has complied with all terms and conditions of
said zoning permit and allowing occupancy.
CHANGE OF USE — Any use that substantially differs from the
previous use of a building or land.
CHILD CARE CENTER — A state-licensed and/or -registered facility in
which care is provided or is intended to be provided for seven or more
children of any age at any time.
CHILD CARE HOME — A state-licensed and/or -registered facility that
is a single-family dwelling in which child care is provided by the
residents at any time for not more than six children under the age of
12, including any children under the age of 12 who are residents of the
dwelling.
CHURCH — See "house of worship."
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:485
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of the streets. (See § 360-23A.)
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more antennas, on an existing
tower, or on any structure that has been approved by the Borough, to
support at least one antenna.[Added 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1044]
COMMERCIAL USE — Activity involving the sale of goods or services
for profit.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Lewisburg.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land, an area of
water or a combination of land and water within a development site
that is designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of
a development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas
set aside for public facilities. Common open space shall be deeded to
an association of property owners, a nature and/or land conservancy or
the Borough.
COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION or HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION —
An organization whose purpose is to own, maintain and/or operate
common facilities and to enhance and protect the common interests of
the organization's members.
COMMUNITY LIVING ARRANGEMENT — The use of a lawful dwelling
unit to provide a living environment for unrelated residents who
operate as the functional equivalent of a family, and where supervision
and care by supportive staff may be necessary to meet the emotional,
physical and social needs of an aged person, a disabled or handicapped
person, a developmentally disabled person, a mentally ill person, and/or
a child as defined in the appropriate federal or state statutes, provided
that such person cannot reasonably be considered a threat to the
physical safety of others, and/or was not previously convicted of a
sexual offense committed against a minor.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space within a structure which is
designed and constructed to remain totally dry during flooding and to
prevent the passage of water and water vapor into said structure and
which will remain totally dry during flooding.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official public document prepared
in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,52 as amended and reenacted,
consisting of maps, charts, and textual material, that constitutes a
policy guide to decisions about the physical and social development of
the Borough of Lewisburg, as amended from time to time.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that may not be appropriate in a
particular zoning district as a whole but that may be suitable in certain
52.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:486
locations within the district when specific conditions and factors
described within this chapter for such uses are met. Conditional uses
are permitted only by the Lewisburg Borough Council.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of ownership in which units of property,
such as dwelling units or offices, in a building or group of buildings on
a parcel of land, are owned by individual owners and the parcel, the
structure of the building(s), the common areas and the facilities are
owned jointly by all the unit owners; also, refers to one such unit or the
building or group of buildings under such form of ownership.
CONSTRUCTION — The building, rebuilding, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of manufactured homes and/or
mobile homes.
CONTIGUOUS — Next to, abutting or touching and having a boundary,
or portion thereof, that is coterminous.
CONVERSION — A change in the use of land or structure that includes
an increase in the number of dwelling units.
COUNTY — The county of Union, Pennsylvania.
COVENANT OR RESTRICTIVE COVENANT — A restriction on the use
of land usually set forth in the deed or on a recorded plan.
CURB — The raised edge of a pavement confining surface water to the
pavement and protecting the abutting land from vehicular traffic.
CURB CUT — The opening along the curb at which point vehicles or
pedestrians may enter or leave the roadway.
DECISION — Final adjudication of matters subject to any land use
ordinance by the Zoning Hearing Board or Lewisburg Borough Council,
which has been granted jurisdiction under the land use ordinance(s)
to make such adjudication, either by reason of the grant of exclusive
jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from official determinations.
Decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common Pleas of Union
County, Pennsylvania.
DECK — An aboveground platform which is not covered by a roof or
permanent awning and is designed, intended or used for outdoor living
purposes as an accessory use to a structure.
DENSITY — The number of families, individuals, dwelling units,
households or structures per unit of land.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Guidelines defining parameters to be followed
in site and/or building design and development.
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged
with the administration of any land use ordinance or applications
thereof. Determinations shall be appealable only to the board(s)
designated as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:487
DEVELOPER — A landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who causes to be made any
subdivision of land or land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to the construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion or alteration of buildings
or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets
and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining,
dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and
the subdivision of land.
DISTRICT, ZONING — A part, zone or geographic area within the
Borough and indicated on the Zoning Map within which certain
development or zoning regulations apply as spelled out in this chapter.
DORMITORY — A building owned or operated by a university or
institution and designed for or used as sleeping quarters for the
residents of that university or institution; includes academic interest
houses.
DRIVE-IN or DRIVE-THROUGH — A structure or use whose design and/
or physical facilities through which the service is provided encourages
or permits customers to receive service, obtain goods or be entertained
while remaining in their motor vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway by means of which ingress and egress
to a parking lot, a parking space or parking spaces, dwelling, garage or
other structure is obtained and which intersects with a public roadway.
DWELLING — A building or structure designed for living quarters for
not more than one family. In terms of this chapter, a dwelling shall
not be deemed to include hotel, motel, dormitory, fraternity or sorority
house, or bed-and-breakfast establishment.
DWELLING, APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a multifamily or mixeduse
structure.
DWELLING, EFFICIENCY — A dwelling unit that is occupied by not
more than two occupants and that has a clear floor area of not less
than 220 square feet or a dwelling occupied by not more than three
occupants and that has a clear floor area of not less than 320 square
feet. The clear floor area shall not include the kitchen area consisting
of a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities each
having a clear floor space of not less than 30 inches in front, and shall
not include a separate bathroom, consisting of a water closet, lavatory
and bathtub or shower.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME — A mobile home or
manufactured housing, as defined herein.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building on a single lot with three or
more dwelling units.
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:488
DWELLING, SEASONAL — A dwelling unit not used as a principal
residence.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A free-standing dwelling.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A dwelling attached
to one other dwelling by a common vertical wall and located on a
separate lot. For determining setbacks and other requirements, each
dwelling is understood to have only a single side yard.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building on a single lot with two
dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — Two or more rooms including cooking, sleeping
and sanitary facilities for the use of not more than one family.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the
property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation or another
person or entity.
EASEMENT, CONSERVATION — The grant of a property right
stipulating that the described land will preclude any future or
additional development.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ESTABLISHMENT — An economic unit, generally at a single physical
location, where business is conducted or services or industrial
operations performed.
EXCAVATION — Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of
soil, rock, minerals, mineral substances or organic substances other
than vegetation from water or land, on or beneath the surface thereof,
whether exposed or submerged. It shall include the conditions resulting
from such activity.
EXISTING GRADE OR ELEVATION — The vertical location of the
ground surface prior to excavating or filling.
EXISTING USE — The use of a lot or structure at the time of the
enactment of this chapter.
EXTENSION — An increase in the floor area beyond the existing
exterior wall.
EXTERIOR WALL — Any wall that defines the exterior boundaries of a
building or structure.
FAMILY — Any individual; two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, legal adoption, foster placement, guardianship or other
domestic bond; members of a community living arrangement; or a
group of not more than a total of three persons not related by blood,
marriage, legal adoption, foster placement, guardianship, other
domestic bond or community living arrangement who live together as a
single household. "Family" shall not be deemed to include tenants of a
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:489
boarding, rooming or lodging house, nor group care facility, fraternity,
sorority or hotel occupants.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A residence offering child day care and/or
adult day care services by the residents of the premises to a maximum
of six persons unrelated by birth or marriage who are not permanent
residents of the household.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials erected to enclose, screen or separate areas.
FENCE, SOLID — A fence with less than a 5% open area, including
gates, concealing the activities conducted on a property from adjacent
properties and rights-of-way.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — A flood that, on the average, is likely
to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent-chance of
occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
FLOOD ELEVATION, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — The water surface
elevations of the one-hundred-year flood.
FLOOD FRINGE (FF) — The portions of land within the one-hundredyear
floodplain that are outside of the floodway in those areas where
detailed study and profiles are available and that are identified as an
AE Zone in the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — The area specifically identified as being
inundated by the one-hundred-year flood, including areas identified as
floodway (FW) and floodway fringe (FF). Identification of such an area
is determined by a study by the Federal Insurance Administration, the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Department
of Agriculture's Soil Conservation Service, the United States Geological
Survey, the Susquehanna River Basin Commission, the State
Department of Environmental protection or a licensed professional
registered by Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to perform such a study.
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A relatively flat or low land area that is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures that reduces or
eliminates flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (FW) — The channel of a watercourse and portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the one-hundred-year frequency flood and that are identified
as floodway in the Flood Insurance Study and accompanying maps
prepared by the FEMA and dated September 28, 2007, or the most
recent revision thereof; or, in an area where the boundary of the
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:490
floodway of the one-hundred-year frequency flood is not identified, are
assumed to be, absent evidence to the contrary, those areas that are
within 50 feet of the top of the bank of any stream.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (GFA) — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
all the enclosed floors of a building or structure from the exterior face
of the exterior walls, or from the center line of a wall separating two
buildings, but excluding any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is
less than six feet.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The aggregate of the horizontal area
of all rooms used for habitation, such as living room, dining room,
kitchen and bedroom(s) but not including hallways, stairways, cellars,
service rooms, utility rooms, bathrooms, closets, unheated areas such
as enclosed porches nor rooms without at least one window or skylight
opening onto an outside yard or court. At least 1/2 of the floor area of
every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven
feet and the floor area of that part of the room where ceiling height is
less than five feet shall not be considered part of the "habitable floor
area."
FLOOR AREA, NET — Gross floor area minus 15%.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The gross floor area of all buildings or
structures on a lot divided by the total lot area.
FOOTCANDLE — A standard measurement of illuminance.
FOOTCANDLE, INITIAL — The amount of illuminance, measured in
footcandles, produced by lamps and luminaires when they are new.
FORESTRY — The management of forested and wooded open space
when practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles,
through developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling
trees for commercial purposes.
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE — Any building or part thereof
officially recognized and designated by a college or university as a
residence for the members and alumni of a fraternity or sorority and/or
their social, scholastic, professional and extracurricular activities.
FREEBOARD — An additional amount of height above a flood elevation
used as a factor of safety in determining the level at which a structure's
lowest floor must be elevated or floodproofed to be in accordance with
floodplain management regulations.
FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting on a street that serves as the
front lot line. The front lot line shall be identified by the official U.S.
postal address of any structure on the lot.
FULL CUTOFF — Attribute of a lighting fixture from which no light is
emitted at or above a horizontal plane drawn through the bottom of the
fixture and no more than 10% of the lamp's intensity is emitted at or
above an angle 10 degrees below that horizontal plane, at all lateral
angles around the fixture.
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:491
FULLY SHIELDED — Attribute of a lighting fixture provided with
internal and/or external shields and louvers to prevent brightness from
lamps, reflectors, refractors and lenses from causing glare at normal
viewing angles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed structure for the storage of one
or more private motor vehicles incidental to the primary use of the
premises, provided that no business, occupation or service is conducted
therein.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A structure or portion thereof, other than a private
garage, used for the storage of motor vehicles for a fee.
GARAGE, REPAIR — A building, premises and land in which or upon
which a business, service or industry involving the maintenance,
servicing, repair or painting of vehicles is conducted or rendered.
GARDEN APARTMENT HOUSE — A multifamily dwelling, not
exceeding three stories in height, containing three or more dwelling
units on a lot that is held in single and separate ownership having yards
in common but that may also have other shared facilities and services.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION WITH OR WITHOUT A CONVENIENCE
STORE — A structure, building or area of land or any portion thereof
that is used for the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel and
oil and/or other lubricating substances that may or may not include
facilities for sale of accessories or for lubricating, washing and
otherwise servicing motor vehicles, but not including the painting
thereof. Sale of nonautomotive items is permitted.
GLARE — Excessive brightness in the field of view that is sufficiently
greater than the brightness to which the eyes are adapted to cause
annoyance or loss in visual performance and visibility, so as to
jeopardize health, safety or welfare.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Lewisburg.
GRADE — The average elevation of the land around a building; the
percent of rise or descent of a sloping surface. The slope is expressed
in a percent that indicates the rate of change in elevation in feet per
hundred feet.
GRADE, FINISHED — The final elevation of the ground level after
development.
GRADE, NATURAL — The elevation of the ground level in its natural
state, before construction, filling or excavation.
GRANDFATHER (GRANDFATHERED, GRANDFATHERING) — A term
that refers to the legal principle that nonconformities existing at the
time of enactment of an Ordinance or its subsequent amendment shall
be permitted to continue to exist unaltered despite their designation as
nonconformities.
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:492
GREENWAY — A linear open space established along a corridor, either
natural or man-made, such as a watercourse or ridgeline overland
along a right-of-way converted to recreational use; a canal, a scenic
road or other route; any natural or landscaped course for pedestrian
or bicycle passage; an open space connector linking parks, natural
reserves, historic features, cultural features, scenic views or aesthetic
features with each other and with populated areas; and, locally, certain
strip or linear parks designated as a parkway or greenbelt.
GROUP CARE FACILITY — A facility providing food, shelter and
personal guidance, with supervision, to persons who require assistance,
temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the community. Such
facilities shall include group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care
facilities, supervised living arrangements, domestic abuse shelters,
congregate residences or long-term care facilities. Group care facilities
shall not house more than 15 residents.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space arranged for
living, eating or sleeping purposes, not including bath or toilet rooms,
laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating corridors.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — A substance that because of its quantity,
concentration or physical, chemical, radioactive, reactive, flammable or
infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, an
increase in mortality or serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible
illness or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health, safety or welfare or to the environment when improperly
treated, stored, transported, used or disposed of or otherwise managed.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — A facility or institution, whether public
or private, principally engaged in providing services for health
maintenance and the treatment of mental or physical conditions.53
HEIGHT OF SIGNS — The vertical distance measured from the average
finished grade at the front of the structure to which the sign is affixed
to the highest point of the sign, including any supporting structure.
HISTORICAL AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD (HARB) — A
seven-member committee appointed by the Lewisburg Borough Council
responsible for reviewing plans for new construction and changes to
the exterior of a structure within the Historic District and making
recommendations to the Borough Council on whether a certificate of
appropriateness should be issued. A certificate of appropriateness is
required to obtain a building or zoning permit before making exterior
changes visible from the street.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — A mapped overlay district within the Borough
that contains buildings and structures of historic and/or architectural
significance where additional standards and regulations apply.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
53.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “height of a broadcast tower,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1044.
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:493
HOME OCCUPATION — Any occupation, other than a no-impact, homebased
business as defined in this chapter, that is permitted under
the provisions and conditions of this chapter, that is conducted on
a residential property by a member of the family residing on said
property, and that is clearly secondary and incidental to the use of
the property for residential purposes and does not exceed 25% of the
habitable floor area of the structures on the property. (See § 360-21G.)
HOSPITAL — Unless otherwise specified, includes a sanitarium, clinic,
rest home, nursing home and/or any other building for the diagnosis,
treatment or care of ailments.
HOTEL — Any building that contains six or more sleeping units used,
or intended or designed to be used, occupied, rented or hired out on
a daily basis for sleeping purposes by guests, that may include dining
facilities and that is licensed under applicable laws.
HOUSEHOLD — A group of people living together in a single dwelling
unit, with common access to and common use of all living, eating and
food preparation areas within the dwelling unit.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building or structure, or a group of buildings
or structures, that by design and construction is primarily intended for
organized religious services and associated accessory uses.
ILLUMINANCE — Quantity of light, measured in footcandles.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — That portion of a lot, expressed as a
percentage, that does not absorb precipitation. See "impervious
surface."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material that prevents absorption of
stormwater into the ground. All buildings, structures, parking areas,
roads, sidewalks, driveways, and other areas in concrete, asphalt,
packed stone or other similar materials shall be considered impervious
surface. Surfaces with a uniform spacing of openings for absorption of
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
(2)
Listed individually on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs approved by the Secretary of
the Interior.
(3)
Listed individually on the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum
Commission building inventory of historic places in Lewisburg with
historic preservation programs certified by an approved state
program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior.
(4)
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:494
stormwater into the ground, such as decorative gravel areas, decks,
pervious paving blocks and dry-laid masonry, shall be considered
partially pervious. In determining total impervious coverage on a lot,
partially pervious surfaces will be included in the calculation at 50% of
their actual coverage.
INDOOR RECREATION FACILITY — A structure or building containing
facilities for recreational activities, such as tennis, platform games,
swimming, exercise rooms, handball and similar activities.
INDUSTRIAL USE — A use that involves the extracting, manufacturing,
compounding, processing, assembling or treatment of materials,
articles or merchandise. Industrial uses include mining, construction,
manufacturing, transportation, communication, electric, natural gas
services, sanitary services and wholesale trade.
INN — See "bed-and-breakfast establishment."
INSTITUTION — A nonprofit, religious or public use, such as a church,
library, public or private school, hospital, or government-owned or -
operated building, structure or land used for public purpose.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The graphic and narrative
documentation for land development.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A landscape architect registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LAND USE REGULATIONS — Ordinances duly adopted by the Borough,
pursuant to applicable commonwealth-enabling statutes, including but
not limited to the Zoning Ordinance, the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, Building Codes, Property Maintenance Codes,
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential dwelling units or
nonresidential buildings, whether the improvement is
proposed initially or cumulatively, excluding the conversion
of an existing single-family detached dwelling or single-family
semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential
units or a rooming or lodging house; or a single nonresidential
building, excluding an accessory building, including farm
buildings, subordinate to an existing principal building, on a lot
or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features; or
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:495
Historic District Ordinance, Stormwater Management Ordinance and
Floodplain Management Ordinance.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light emitted by a lighting fixture or installation
which is cast beyond the boundaries of the property on which the
lighting installation is sited.
LOADING SPACE OR BERTH — Any off-street space on the same lot
with a building or contiguous to a group of buildings for temporary
parking (less than 24 hours) of a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials.
LOGO — A name, symbol or trademark designed for easy and definite
recognition.
LOT — A tract or parcel of land, regardless of size, held in single or joint
ownership, not necessarily a lot or lots shown on a duly recorded map,
that is occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings, structures
and accessory buildings, including such open spaces as are arranged,
designed or required. The term "lot" shall also mean parcel, plot, site,
tract or any similar term.
LOT AREA, GROSS — The area of land contained within the limits of
the property lines bounding that area.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the point of intersection of and abutting on
two or more intersecting streets that has an interior angle of less than
135 degrees at the intersection of the two street lines. The front lot line
shall be identified by the official U.S. postal address of any structure on
the lot.
LOT DEPTH — The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear
lot line.
LOT LINE — Any boundary line of a lot. Where a lot line is irregular,
its mean alignment shall be the determining measurement under this
chapter.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot whose boundaries are established by deed
and/or plot plan recorded in the Office of Register and Recorder.
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured at the building setback line
between side lot lines and parallel to the front lot line. When there is
only one side lot line, as in the case of single-family semidetached or
some single-family attached dwellings, the lot width shall be measured
between the side lot line and the centerline of the party wall. In no case
shall the street frontage be less than 1/2 of the required lot width in the
particular zoning district.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement/cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's
lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render
the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:496
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program and this
chapter.
LUMEN — A standard unit of measurement of the perceived power of
light.
LUMINAIRE(S) — A complete lighting unit, consisting of a lamp or
lamps together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to
position and protect the lamps and to connect the lamps to the power
supply.
MAJOR EXPANSION — An expansion of a use either due to a physical
expansion of an existing facility by more than 25% of the existing gross
floor area, and/or a structural alteration to the exterior of the structure,
and/or a change or improvement that increases vehicular traffic flow
and/or circulation in relation to that of the prior use.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — Factory-built structures that meet the
National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act
(42 U.S.C. 5401), commonly known as the HUD (U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development) Code.
MARQUEE — A permanent, roof-like structure supported by a wall of a
building but having no relationship to the building's roof structure and
usually at the entrance of a theater or arena.
MEAN — The average of a series of numbers.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB OR CLUB HOUSE — A nonprofit social
organization with formal membership requirements, bylaws and with
the objective of promoting the interests of its members.
METHADONE TREATMENT FACILITIES — Drug treatment facilities
employing the use of methadone and subject to locational regulations
as outlined in § 621 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
MINERALS — Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or
not coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone and
dolomite, sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc
ore, vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse,
peat and crude oil and natural gas.
MINOR EXPANSION — The replacement of existing work with
equivalent materials for the purpose of routine maintenance and
upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or
portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or
bearing support or the removal or change of any required means of
egress or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to or alteration
of replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer,
drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric
wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general
safety.
MIXED-USE — Use of a building or land for more than one use.
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:497
MIXED-USE STRUCTURE — A building or structure housing a variety
of uses such as, but not limited to, residential, office, retail, public or
entertainment.
MOBILE HOME (COMMERCIAL) — A transportable manufactured
single-family detached dwelling built on a permanent chassis, which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that
it may be used with or without a permanent foundation. A mobile home
shall remain a mobile home, subject to all regulations applying thereto,
whether or not wheels, axles, hitch or other appurtenances of mobility
are removed and regardless of the nature of the foundation provided.
The term does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. Also
see "dwelling, manufactured home."
MODEL HOME — A residential building erected on a lot situated within
an approved subdivision owned or developed by the owner of said
structure and intended to serve as a representation of the kind or type
of residential building the owner/developer intends to erect within said
subdivision. Said building shall be used for demonstration purposes and
shall include sales offices only for that period of time that the owner/
developer is actively marketing the lots in said subdivision.
MOTEL — See "hotel."
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — Any building owned, leased or used by the
Borough of Lewisburg or any agency or authority created by the
Borough of Lewisburg.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC) — The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,54
as amended and reenacted from time to time.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Lewisburg.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the date of the enactment of this chapter,
including any subsequent improvements thereto.
NO-IMPACT, HOME-BASED BUSINESSES — A business or commercial
activity administered and conducted as an accessory use clearly
secondary to the residential use of the dwelling and that meets the
following requirements:
The business requires no vehicular or pedestrian customer, client
or patient traffic;
(1)
The business use requires no pickup, delivery or removal functions
to or from the premises in excess of those normally associated with
the residential use of the district in which it is to be located;
(2)
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses;
(3)
54.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:498
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or
structure, or part of a structure, that does not comply with the
applicable provisions of this chapter or amendments heretofore or
hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the
enactment or amendment of this chapter or prior to the application
of this chapter or amendments thereto to the structure's location by
reason of annexation.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot whose area or dimension was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reason of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or structure, that
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter
or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was
lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such Ordinance or
amendment, or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment
thereto to the use's location by reason of annexation.
NUISANCE — An interference with the enjoyment and use of property,
capable of being documented by surveys, observations or
measurements.
NURSING HOME — A building containing sleeping rooms where
persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing
care and is operated by a corporation licensed and approved for such
use by the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit that is issued by the Code
Compliance Officer after it has been determined that the required work
allowing the use of any building or structure has been satisfactorily
completed.
(4) The business shall employ only residents of the dwelling;
The business shall not involve the display or sale of retail goods on
premises;
(5)
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including
but not limited to parking, signs or lights;
(6)
The business activity may not use any equipment or process that
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electronic or
electrical interference, including interference with radio or
television reception that is detectable in the neighborhood;
(7)
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type that is not normally associated with
residential uses in the neighborhood;
(8)
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor space.
(9)
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:499
OFFICE — A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of
a business, profession, service, industry or government and generally
furnished with desks, tables, files, communication equipment, etc.
OFFICE CENTER — A group of office establishments planned,
constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee
parking provided on-site.
OFF-STREET PARKING — The transient storage of motor vehicles as an
accessory use located upon the same lot as a permitted principal use to
serve the parking requirements and needs of the principal use.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — A parking space for one motor vehicle
provided in a parking lot, parking structure or private driveway and
excluding driveways, passageways and maneuvering space
appurtenant thereto.
ON-LOT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The control of runoff from
precipitation on the same lot where the runoff was generated. Devices
used to control the runoff shall be constructed using best management
practices as identified in the Pennsylvania Handbook of Best
Management Practices for Developing Areas. Applicants should consult
with the Union County Conservation District and a professional
engineering consultant for guidance in the selection of appropriate best
management practices.
OPEN SPACE — Unoccupied space open to the sky and on the same lot
with the principal use. Open space shall usually be in a natural state,
but may include planting beds, planting islands, landscaped buffers and
screens, lawn areas, woods and hedgerows, decorative stone not less
than four inches in size, stepping stones no larger than two feet by
three feet (separated at least eight inches between stones) and natural
mulch ground cover materials. Open space may not be underlain by
impervious surface or material.
PARENT TRACT — A parcel or parcels of land from which additional
lots are created.
PARKING AREA — Any public or private area designed and used for
parking motor vehicles, including parking lots, garages, private
driveways and legally designated areas of public streets.
PARKING LOT — Any off-street area or structure that is designed solely
for the transient storage of motor vehicles and includes the driveways,
passageways and maneuvering space appurtenant thereto.
PARKING, OFF-SITE — A parking area required to meet the parking
requirements of this chapter located within 200 feet of the parcel
containing the permitted principal use.
PARKING PLAN or PARKING SITE PLAN — A graphic and/or narrative
description provided by an applicant to meet the off-street parking
requirements established in this chapter. This plan shall be submitted
with the application for a zoning permit.
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:500
PATIO — An area intended for outdoor living purposes that is paved
or covered with brick or similar material, is flush with the ground and
is unenclosed except for any side that may adjoin a structure or any
fences, walls, shrubs or hedges.
PEDESTRIAN — A person traveling on foot; mobility device such as
stroller, wheelchair or scooter; or human-powered conveyance such as
bicycle, skateboard or roller skates.
PERMITTED USE — Any use not requiring special action by the Zoning
Hearing Board or the Borough Council before the Zoning Officer may
grant a zoning permit.
PERSON — An individual or any other legal entity recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
PLANT NURSERY or NURSERY — Land or greenhouses used to raise
flowers, shrubs and plants for sale.
PORCH — A roofed or unroofed structure projecting from the front,
side or rear wall of a building. A porch becomes a room when the
enclosed space is heated or air-conditioned and/or when the percentage
of window area to wall area is less than 50%.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A structure housing the main or principal
use of the lot on which the structure is situated.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of any lot or parcel.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a practitioner of a calling
or occupation, professional in character by virtue of specialized
knowledge, training, education and/or experience required for the
practice of said calling or occupation. Said professions shall include,
but not be limited to, law, medicine, chemistry, ministry, architecture,
accounting, engineering, writing and education.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes parks, playgrounds, picnic areas,
swimming pools, trails, paths, recreational areas, schools or scenic
or historic sites owned and operated by a governmental body or a
nonprofit agency created by a governmental body.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the governing body, the Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing
Board, intended to inform and obtain public comment prior to taking
action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of
July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84, as amended), known as the "Sunshine
Act."55
PUBLIC MEMORIAL or MONUMENT — A permanent and lasting
memorial stone, structure or building requiring little or no
maintenance, erected in remembrance of a person, persons, site or
55.Editor's Note: See 65 Pa. C.S. 701.
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:501
event of particular interest to the Borough of Lewisburg and its past,
present and future residents and visitors.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Such notice shall state the time and place of a public
hearing or meeting and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered at said hearing or meeting. The first publication shall not
be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than
seven days from the date of said hearing or meeting.
PUBLIC PARKS, RECREATION AREA AND/OR RECREATION FACILITY
— See "public grounds."
PUBLIC USE — Uses, buildings or structures designed, intended or
arranged for the use of or provision of service to the general public
by a governmental agency or any agency, authority or organization
created by a governing body or a group of governing bodies. Fees
and conditions for such use may be determined and regulated by the
operator thereof. Such uses shall include, but not be limited to, federal,
state, county and municipal offices, sewage treatment facilities, water
distribution facilities, recreation facilities, public safety facilities,
human service facilities and other similar uses. Such uses shall not
include privately owned facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER — A structure, owned and
operated by a public utility company and regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support electricity
transmission lines.
PUBLIC WAY — Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Leisure time activities, usually organized
and performed with others, requiring equipment and taking place at
prescribed sites or fields.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle that is built on a single chassis,
is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck and is not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but is
intended as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel
or seasonal use.
RECREATION AREA, OUTDOOR — An area for recreational activities,
free of structures except for comfort facilities, equipment storage, play
equipment, necessary maintenance and open-air pavilions for leisure
time activities, either of a formal, active or inactive nature such as, but
not limited to, sports fields or courts, playgrounds, trails, bike paths,
picnicking, table games and similar activities not taking place in a
building.
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:502
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Outdoor leisure activities not requiring
equipment, not involving participation in an organized sport, not taking
place at a prescribed site or field and/or not considered active.
RELATED EQUIPMENT or BASE STATION — Any structure or
equipment at a fixed location, not including a tower or an antenna, that
enables FCC licensed wireless communications between a user and a
wireless network.[Added 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1044]
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or any other
similar written document made by any agency, board, council, officer
or consultant other than a solicitor to any other agency, board, council,
officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the recipient of the
report in rendering any decision or determination. All reports shall be
deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall not be binding
upon the recipient agency, board, council, officer or consultant, nor
shall any appeal lie therein. Any report used, received or considered
by the agency, board, council, officer or consultant rendering a
determination or a decision shall be made available for inspection to
any party to any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be
provided at cost of reproduction.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING LOT — A lot upon which a residential unit is
located or is to be located.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A segment or strip of land acquired by reservation,
dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and
intended to be occupied by a road, sidewalk, crosswalk, railroad, trail,
electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary or
storm sewer and other similar uses.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC — A right-of-way under the control or
ownership of the Borough, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
United States of America and/or agencies and authorities of these
governmental units.
ROOMING HOUSE OR LODGING HOUSE — An owner-occupied,
single-family dwelling in which lodging without meals is provided on
a monthly basis and in which more than three unrelated persons
live.[Amended 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 1033]
SALE, GARAGE, YARD, BASEMENT OR OTHER TEMPORARY OR
ISOLATED — Transactions classified as "isolated," per the PA
Department of Revenue sales tax rules and regulations; that is, sales
which last for no more than three days in a row and which are held for
no more than seven total days in any calendar year.
SATELLITE DISH — A dish antenna used to receive and transmit
signals relayed by satellite.
SCREENING — A method of visually shielding or obscuring one
abutting or nearby structure or use from another by means of fencing,
walls, berms or densely planted vegetation.
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:503
SEMIPUBLIC USE — A use owned or operated by a nonprofit, religious
or educational institution and providing educational, cultural,
recreational, religious or other similar public services or programs.
This term does not include houses of worship.
SETBACK — A line within a property defining the minimum distance
as established by this chapter between any structure to be erected
or altered and an adjacent right-of-way, street or property line. The
setback line shall be measured at right angles and run parallel to the
adjacent street, right-of-way or property line.
SHOPPING CENTER, SHOPPING MALL or SHOPPING PLAZA — A
group of commercial establishments planned, constructed and
managed as a total entity, with customer and employee parking
provided on-site and provision for delivery of goods separated from
customer access.
SIDEWALK — A usually paved walk for pedestrians at the side of a
street.
SIGN — Any object, display or structure, or part thereof, that is used
to advertise, identify, display, or direct or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or
location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design
symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. The term
"sign" includes "billboard." "Sign" does not include any work of art that
in no way identifies a product or business, nor scoreboards located on
athletic fields, and does not include the flag of the United States of
America or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any federal, state
or municipal traffic or directional sign or other official federal, state,
county or municipal government signs.
SIGN, AWNING — A sign painted on or attached to an awning.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign that directs attention to a business or
profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or
manufactured, or to an entertainment event offered, on the premises
where the sign is located.
SIGN, COMMERCIAL OR OFFICE CENTER — A directory used to
identify specific enterprises that are located within the commercial or
office center.
SIGN, FACE — The area of a sign that contains words, letters, figures,
design symbols or projected images and is oriented in a distinct
direction.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A self-supporting sign in a fixed location and
not attached to any building structure.
SIGN, GROSS ALLOWABLE AREA — The entire area within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the face of a sign.
SIGN, INSTRUCTIONAL — An on-premises sign designed to guide
vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic.
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:504
SIGN, INTERIOR — Any sign placed within a building, excluding
window signs as defined in this chapter.
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — A sign illuminated by artificial
light projecting through its entire surface.
SIGN, MARQUEE — A sign painted on, attached to or consisting of an
interchangeable copyreader on a marquee attached to the face of a
building.
SIGN, NEON — An electrically powered sign that employs tubes of inert
gas, including but not limited to neon, which give off a luminous glow.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign that draws attention to, provides
direction or communicates information about a business, service or
commodity that exists or is conducted, sold, offered, maintained or
provided at a location other than the premises where the sign is
located.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign, other than a wall sign, that is attached
to and projects from a building face or wall, or from a structure whose
primary purpose is other than the support of the sign.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign that is not permanently affixed. Daily
special temporary signs display that day's menu or other information
uniquely pertinent to the day on which the sign is displayed.
SIGN, TRADEMARK — A sign advertising a brand, style or line of
goods, products and/or services, usually protected by copyright, having
a design or logo immediately recognizable to the general public,
intended for sale to regional or national audiences.
SIGN, WALL — A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building
or structure in such a manner that it does not project more than four
inches from such building or structure and that the wall becomes its
supporting structure or forms the background surface of the sign.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign affixed to the surface of a window, or within
two feet of the window, with its message visible to and readable from
the public right-of-way.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT — A permit issued by the Zoning Officer,
after authorization by the Zoning Hearing Board, before any special
exception use can be constructed or operated.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE — A use requiring approval from the Zoning
Hearing Board, after a public hearing, and meeting the requirements
established for said use in this chapter.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks and female
breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — These activities include human
genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal, acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy and fondling or other
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:505
erotic touching of the human genitalia, pubic region, buttocks or female
breast.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to
broadcast transmission facilities which render them more visually
appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or
visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally visible
to the casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited
to, architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure, and facilities
constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, flagpoles and light poles.[Added
12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1044]
STORY — The portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above
it, the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it. Each level
of a split level building shall be considered 1/2 story. Basement/cellar
shall be excluded from determining the maximum number of stories.
STORY, HALF — Any living space immediately below and within the roof
framing where the clear height of not more than 75% of the space has
structural headroom of seven feet or greater.
STREET — A public or private right-of-way built to approved municipal
standards, excluding driveways and alleys, intended for use as a means
of vehicular and pedestrian circulation that provides a means of access
to abutting property. The word "street" shall apply to thoroughfare,
avenue, boulevard, court, drive, expressway, highway, lane, road or
similar terms. Streets shall not be used for right-angle parking where
the Borough Council determines it will interfere with traffic movement.
Streets are functionally classified as follows:
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the structural members
of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders, or any addition
to any structure.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground including, but not limited to, buildings, sheds
and manufactured homes. This term includes any man-made object
having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water
whether or not affixed to land. See "principal and accessory structure."
Arterials: Limited-access, multi-lane or other important highways,
supplementing the interstate system, that connect principal
urbanized areas, industrial centers and serve the national defense.
(1)
Collectors: Provide land access and traffic circulation within
residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas, and
downtown city centers, connecting local roads and streets with
arterials.
(2)
Local: Roads and streets that provide a high level of access to
abutting land but limited mobility.
(3)
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:506
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devises, transfer of ownership or building or lot
development.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure, before the improvement or repair
is started; or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition,
"substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either
any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a
structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state
inventory of historic places.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A
modification to an existing broadcast transmission facility that changes
the physical dimensions of tower or base station if it meets any of the
following criteria:[Added 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1044]
For a tower outside the public rights-of-way:
It increases the height of the facility by more than 10%, or
by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna, not to exceed 20 feet,
whichever is greater; or
(a)
It protrudes from the edge of the broadcast transmission
facility by more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the
tower structures at the level off the appurtenance, whichever
is greater.
(b)
(1)
For a tower within the public rights-of-way:
It increases the height of the facility by more than 10% or 10
feet, whichever is greater;
(a)
It protrudes from the edge of the structure by more than six
feet;
(b)
(2)
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:507
SURVEYOR — An individual registered with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as authorized to measure the boundaries of tracts of land,
establish locations and perform the requirements of a survey.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE OR RESIDENTIAL — An accessory
structure used for swimming containing water at a depth of 42 or
more inches or exceeding 5,000 gallons of water, either in-ground
or aboveground. All decks, walkways, ladders, stairs, surrounds and
fencing appurtenant to such an accessory structure shall be included
for all measurement purposes.
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any place of business
where any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation
engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any
method of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing,
tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating parts of the body with
the hands or with the aid of any mechanical apparatus or electrical
apparatus or appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as
rubbing alcohol, oil or other such items.
TOWNHOUSE — A single-family dwelling that is one of between three
and eight such dwellings of similar construction, attached to each other
so that there is a common unpierced vertical wall between adjacent
dwellings. (Each dwelling unit shall have exposure to light and air and
entrances on at least two sides.)
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building
code, adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999,
applicable to new construction in all municipalities whether
administered by the municipality, a third party or the Department of
Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings,
the Code adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and
International Building Code (IBC) of 2003, by reference, as the
construction standard applicable with the Commonwealth floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are
made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
USABLE OPEN SPACE — An unenclosed portion of the area of a lot
not devoted to driveways, parking spaces or principal and accessory
structures. Usable open space may include common buildings such as
It involves installation of more than the standard number of
new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to
exceed four cabinets;
(c)
It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site
of the tower; or
(d)
It does not comply with conditions, associated with prior
approval of construction or modification of the tower, unless
the noncompliance is due to an increase in height, increase in
width, or addition of cabinets.
(e)
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:508
shelter, pavilions or recreational structures that are centrally located
and accessible to the occupants of the building or buildings.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a sign, structure or
building is designed, arranged, intended or for which it may be
occupied or maintained, or any activity, occupation, business or
operation that may be carried on. The term "permitted use" or its
equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use.
Nonconforming uses are legal only if they meet the definition of
"grandfathered." See "principal use" and "accessory use."
UTILITY NETWORK — Underground or overhead gas, electrical,
communication, steam or water transmission; waste disposal systems
or public safety apparatus erected, constructed, altered or maintained
by public utilities, private companies or municipal or other
governmental agencies. System components include poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewer pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police
call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, telephone control office buildings
and telephone booths, and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith that are reasonably necessary for the furnishing
of adequate service by such public utilities, private companies,
municipalities or other governmental agencies for the public health,
safety or general welfare. System components exclude broadcast
transmission facilities and supportive buildings as defined herein.
VARIANCE — A deviation from the terms and conditions of this chapter
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board in cases in which literal
enforcement would create unnecessary hardship as a result of peculiar
or unique conditions or circumstances pertaining only to the lot in
question, and when the authorizing of such deviation would not be
contrary to the public interest and would maintain the spirit and intent
of this chapter.
WAREHOUSE — A commercial structure for storage of goods.
WASTE — Any garbage, refuse or other waste or discarded material
including solid, liquid, semi-solid or gaseous material resulting from
the operating of residential, municipal, commercial, industrial or
institutional establishments including, but not limited to, sludge/
septage, construction/demolition, infectious/chemotherapeutic, leaf/
yard, residual, hazardous and/or nuclear wastes as defined by federal
and/or state statutes and regulations.
WASTE DISPOSAL — The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping,
spilling, leaking, incineration or placing of any waste on the land or in
the water so that such waste or any constituent or residue thereof may
enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any
waters, including groundwaters.
WASTE PROCESSING — Any method, technique or process designed
to change the physical, chemical or biological character or composition
of any wastes, including neutralization, incineration, stabilization,
solidification and other similar processes.
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:509
WASTE STORAGE — The actual or intended containment of waste for
a period not to exceed 30 calendar days in a manner that does not
constitute disposal or treatment.
WASTE TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process, including
landfill, incineration, stabilization, solidification or neutralization,
designed to change the physical, chemical or biological character or
composition of any waste material. Any method, technique or process
intended to neutralize any hazardous substance or to render any
hazardous substance nonhazardous, safer for transport, suitable for
recovery, suitable for storage or reduced in volume.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadcast Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1, et seq.).[Added 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1044]
WETLAND — Areas that under normal, inundated or saturated
circumstances, by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas, and subject to regulation by state and
federal agencies.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT — A business devoted to the sale of
commodities in quantity chiefly to retailers, other merchants, or
industrial, institutional and commercial users mainly for resale or
business use. Such commodities shall be limited to durable goods,
sundries, dry goods and nonperishable items.
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or
radio signals.[Added 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1044]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such
as a Tower or any other support structure that could support the
placement or installation of a Broadcast Transmission Facility if
approved by the Borough.[Added 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1044]
YARD, FRONT — The area between the public right-of-way line and a
line drawn parallel thereto at the nearest wall of the actual or proposed
principal structure, extending the full width of the lot. The front yard
on a corner lot shall be considered to be the official U.S. postal address
of any structure on the lot.
YARD, REAR — The area between the rear lot line and a line drawn
parallel thereto at the nearest wall of the actual or proposed principal
structure, extending the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE — The area between any side lot line and a line drawn
parallel thereto at the nearest wall of the actual or proposed principal
structure, extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
§ 360-6 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-6
324:510
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the
Borough of Lewisburg. (See § 360-43.)
ZONING MAP — A map, approved by the governing body, delineating
the various zoning districts in the Borough.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer charged with the duty
of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The ordinance in effect as adopted or
amended that controls or regulates land use in the Borough.
ZONING PERMIT — A document issued to indicate that a proposed
use or structure is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter
or with a decision by the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council
and authorizing the applicant to proceed with establishing such use,
building or structure but not occupying it until such time as a certificate
of zoning compliance shall be obtained.
§ 360-6 TAXATION § 360-6
324:511

ARTICLE III
Zoning Map
§ 360-7. Adoption of Zoning Map.
The municipality is hereby divided into zones or districts as shown on the
Zoning Map, that together with explanatory materials thereon is hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter, together with
all future notations, references and amendments.
A. Identification of Zoning Map. The Zoning Map shall be identified by
signature of the governing body and attested to by the Secretary of the
Borough, together with the date of enactment of this chapter.
B. Changing the Zoning Map.
(1) If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, changes
are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the
Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Zoning Map
promptly after the amendment has been made by the governing
body.
(2) No changes of any nature shall be made on the Zoning Map, or
matter shown thereon, except in conformity with the procedures
set forth in this chapter or any state law, if applicable. All changes
shall be noted on the Zoning Map by date with a brief description of
the nature of the change.
C. Location of Zoning Map. The Zoning Map shall be prominently
displayed in the offices of the Borough and an official copy shall be
prominently displayed in the offices of the Borough Zoning Officer. The
Zoning Map shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status
of land and water areas in the municipality, regardless of the unofficial
copies that may have been made or published from time to time.
D. Replacement of Zoning Map. In the event that the Zoning Map becomes
damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature
or number of changes and additions, the governing body may, by
resolution, adopt a new Zoning Map that shall supersede the prior
Zoning Map.
(1) The new Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or
omissions in the prior Zoning Map, but no such correction shall
have the effect of amending the original Zoning Map or any
subsequent amendment thereof.
(2) The new Zoning Map shall be identified by the signatures of the
governing body and attested to by the Secretary of the Borough,
and shall bear the following words: "This is to certify that this
Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Zoning Map adopted
§ 360-7 TAXATION § 360-7
324:513
§ 360-8. Classes of districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the municipality is hereby divided into
districts that shall be designated as follows:
December 19th, 2000, as part of Ordinance No. 928 of the Borough
of Lewisburg, Union County, Pennsylvania."
(3) Unless the prior Zoning Map has been lost or totally destroyed, the
prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be
preserved together with all available records pertaining to its
adoption or amendment.
A. Residential Suburban (RS): This district is intended to provide
residential development on lots of 10,000 square feet or greater.
B. Residential Town One (RT1): This district is intended to be primarily a
residential district of single-family detached and two-family dwellings.
C. Residential Town Two (RT2): This district is intended to provide higher
density residential uses as well as certain light-density commercial uses
and professional offices that retain the historic residential appearance
of existing structures.
D. Residential Town Three (RT3): This district is intended to provide
residential development on lots of 5,000 square feet or greater. This
district also includes structures and lands owned by or operated by
Bucknell University, not located within the Bucknell University District.
E. Highway Commercial (HC): This district is designed to allow for more
intense commercial development, such as restaurants, large-scale retail
and high-traffic generators, including office complexes, motels and
convenience stores. This district is intended to include lots or parcels
that contain frontage on Route 15.
F. Downtown Commercial (DC): This district is designed to accommodate
traditional commercial uses such as retail, office, banks, restaurants
and services.
G. Mixed-Use (MU): This district provides an area for a mixture of uses,
including compatible light industrial uses, to exist within reasonable
proximity to each other and to Routes 15 and the railroad.
H. Bucknell University (BU): This district is designed specifically for
structures and lands owned, operated by or associated with Bucknell
University that form the contiguous campus area.
I. Open Space (OS): This district provides designated areas for active and
passive recreation, wildlife habitat and flood protection. This district
shall include lands within the floodways and sections of the floodplain
as identified in the most recent Floodplain Mapping produced by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development as part of the
§ 360-7 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-8
324:514
§ 360-9. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
Borough Flood Insurance Study, as well as lands that are primarily open
space or recreation areas in the Borough.
J. Historic District (HD): This district is composed of land located within
the mapped historic district of the Borough and is listed in the National
Register of Historic Places. This district shall be an overlay district to
the Zoning Map, and regulations applying to the underlying district
shall be applicable to all lands situated in the district.
K. Floodplain District: See Article VI and refer to the applicable Flood
Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration
dated October 16, 2009, or the most recent revision thereof. This
district shall be an overlay district to the Zoning Map, and regulations
applying to the underlying district shall be applicable to all lands
situated in the district.
A. Designation of district boundaries: Boundaries indicated as
approximately following the center line of streets, highways, alleys,
railroad rights-of-way, streams, watercourses, existing lot lines or
municipal boundary lines shall be construed as to follow such features
indicated. Where a district boundary line does not follow such a feature,
its position is indicated on said Zoning Map by a specific dimension
expressing its distance, in feet, from a street right-of-way line or other
boundary line as indicated and running parallel thereto.
B. Determination of the location of boundaries: Where physical or cultural
features existing on the ground differ with those shown on the Zoning
Map, or if uncertainty exists as to the true location of a distance
boundary line in a particular instance, the Zoning Officer shall request
the Zoning Hearing Board to render its determination with respect
thereto, in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter.
§ 360-8 TAXATION § 360-9
324:515

ARTICLE IV
District Requirements and Related Standards
§ 360-10. General requirements.
§ 360-11. Residential Suburban (RS).
A. Only those uses identified herein as permitted uses are allowed by
right. Conditional uses and special exception uses identified for each
district must be considered and approved under the provisions of
Article VII of this chapter.
B. All proposed uses shall comply with the applicable requirements
contained in Article V.
C. All proposed conditional uses and special exception uses shall comply
with the applicable requirements contained in § 360-21 of this Article.
D. All proposed uses shall comply with all other applicable federal, state,
county and municipal statutes, regulations and Ordinances including
Land Development, Subdivision and the Floodplain Management
Ordinance.56
E. Where impervious coverage requirements provide for an increase in the
percentage of coverage if on-lot stormwater management is used, a
stormwater management plan, in compliance with all of the Borough's
stormwater management ordinance(s), shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer and approved by a professional engineer retained by the
Borough.
F. In all districts where houses of worship are allowed by special
exception or conditional use, maximum height of principle structure
shall be 35 feet, with an additional 45 feet maximum height for the
steeple.
A. Permitted uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-20 and 360-23 of
this chapter.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Community living arrangements.
(3) No-impact home-based businesses.
(4) Accessory uses and structures.
(5) Forestry.
(6) Agriculture.
B. Special exceptions, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and 360-45B
of this chapter.
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 179, Floodplain Management.
§ 360-10 TAXATION § 360-11
324:517
(1) Bed-and-breakfast establishments or inns.
(2) Public and semipublic uses and buildings.
(3) Home occupations not meeting the definition of no-impact homebased
businesses.
(4) Houses of worship.
C. Conditional uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and 360-45C
of this chapter.
(1) Group care facilities.
(2) Nursing homes.
D. Bulk, area and density standards.
(1) Minimum lot area.
(a) Residential uses.
[1] Single-family detached dwellings: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
[1] Public and semipublic use, group care facilities and
nursing homes: 22,000 square feet.
[2] Houses of worship: 44,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width (measured at the front yard setback).
(a) Residential uses.
[1] Single-family detached dwellings: 75 feet.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
[1] Public and semipublic uses, group care facilities and
nursing homes: 100 feet.
[2] Houses of worship: 200 feet.
(3) Setbacks.
(a) Residential and nonresidential uses.
[1] Front yard: 25 feet or the average of the two adjoining lots.
[2] Each side yard: principal structure, eight feet; accessory
structure, eight feet.
[3] Rear yard: principal structure, 30 feet; accessory
structure, 14 feet.
(4) Impervious coverage and height requirements.
§ 360-11 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-11
324:518
§ 360-12. Residential Town One (RT1).
(a) Maximum impervious coverage: 30% of total gross lot area
(40% if on-lot stormwater management is utilized).
(b) Maximum building height.
[1] Principal structure: 35 feet.
[2] Principal structure of houses of worship: 35 feet, including
steeple, 80 feet.
[3] Other accessory structures: 15 feet.
[4] Private garage: 35 feet.
(5) Design and architectural guidelines. All structures must have
appropriate scale and building massing, be coordinated with
existing street and utility networks, be context-sensitive and
otherwise fit the fabric of the existing neighborhood. Borough
Council, with the advice of the Zoning Officer and of HARB, shall
have the final authority to judge whether these guidelines have
been followed.
A. Permitted uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-20 and 360-23 of
this chapter.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(3) Two-family dwellings.
(4) Community living arrangements.
(5) No-impact, home-based businesses.
(6) Accessory structures.
(7) Forestry.
B. Special exception uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and
360-45B of this chapter.
(1) Public and semipublic uses.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast establishments or inns.
(3) Houses of worship.
(4) Home occupations not meeting the definition of no-impact, homebased
businesses.
C. Conditional uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and 360-45C
of this chapter.
§ 360-11 TAXATION § 360-12
324:519
(1) Townhouses, not to exceed four units per building.
(2) Multifamily dwellings, not to exceed four units.
(3) Off-site parking, pursuant to § 360-26C.
D. Bulk, area and density standards.
(1) Minimum lot area.
(a) Residential uses.
[1] Single-family detached dwellings and community living
arrangements: 5,197 square feet. (Note: 5,197 square feet
is the most common lot size in that section of the Borough
located east of Route 15.)
[2] Single-family semidetached dwellings: 5,197 square feet.
[3] Two-family dwellings: 2,598 square feet per dwelling unit.
[4] Townhouses: 2,598 square feet per dwelling unit.
[5] Multifamily dwellings: 1,800 square feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
[1] Public and semipublic uses: 10,394 square feet.
[2] Houses of worship: 10,394 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width (measured at the front yard setback).
(a) Residential uses.
[1] Single-family detached dwellings: 33 feet.
[2] Single-family semidetached dwellings: 33 feet.
[3] Two-family dwellings: 33 feet.
[4] Multifamily dwellings: 66 feet.
(b) Nonresidential uses: 66 feet.
(3) Setbacks.
(a) Residential and nonresidential uses.
[1] Front yard: The predominant setback of the buildings
located on the same side of the street between the two
nearest intersections.
[2] Each side yard: Principal structures (except townhouses as
approved), four feet; accessory structures (excluding
swimming pools), four feet; swimming pool, eight feet.
§ 360-12 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-12
324:520
§ 360-13. Residential Town Two (RT2).
[3] Rear yard: principal structures, 20 feet; accessory
structures (including swimming pools), 10 feet.
(4) Impervious coverage and height requirements.
(a) Maximum impervious coverage (single- and two-family
dwellings): 40% (55% if on-lot stormwater management is
used) of gross lot area.
(b) Maximum impervious coverage (multifamily dwellings): 60% of
gross lot area.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage (nonresidential uses): 60% of
gross lot area.
(d) Minimum usable open space on lot: 30% of gross lot area.
(e) Maximum building height.
[1] Principal uses: 35 feet.
[2] Private garage: 35 feet.
[3] Other accessory structures: 15 feet.
(5) Design and architectural guidelines. All structures must have
appropriate scale and building massing, be coordinated with
existing street and utility networks, be context-sensitive and
otherwise fit the fabric of the existing neighborhood. Borough
Council, with the advice of the Zoning Officer and of HARB, shall
have the final authority to judge whether these guidelines have
been followed.
A. Permitted uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-20, 360-22 and
360-23 of this chapter.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(3) Two-family dwellings.
(4) Class I Commercial Uses (listed in § 360-22 of this article) not
requiring alterations to existing buildings.
(5) Community living arrangements.
(6) No-impact, home-based businesses.
(7) Accessory structures.
(8) Forestry.
§ 360-12 TAXATION § 360-13
324:521
B. Special exception uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and
360-45B of this chapter.
(1) Home occupation not meeting the definition of no-impact, homebased
businesses.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast establishments or inns.
(3) Houses of Worship.
(4) Public or semipublic uses.
(5) Mixed-use structures.
(6) Class II commercial uses.
C. Conditional uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21, 360-22 and
360-45C of this chapter.
(1) Multifamily dwellings, not exceeding four units per structure.
(2) Class I commercial uses requiring alterations to existing buildings.
(3) Public or private schools.
(4) Funeral homes.
(5) Boarding houses.
(6) Rooming or lodging house(s).
D. Bulk, area and density standard.
(1) Minimum lot area.
(a) Residential uses.
[1] Single-family detached dwellings and community living
arrangements: 5,197 square feet.
[2] Single-family semidetached dwellings: 5,197 square feet.
[3] Two-family dwellings: 2,598 square feet per dwelling unit.
[4] Multifamily dwellings: 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Nonresidential uses: 5,197 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width (measured at the front yard setback).
(a) Residential uses.
[1] Single-family detached dwellings: 33 feet.
[2] Single-family semidetached dwellings: 33 feet.
[3] Two-family dwellings: 33 feet.
§ 360-13 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-13
324:522
§ 360-14. Residential Town Three (RT3).
[4] Multifamily dwellings: 66 feet.
[5] Conversions of single-family dwellings into two or more
dwelling units: 33 feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Nonresidential uses: 33 feet.
(3) Setbacks.
(a) Residential and nonresidential uses.
[1] Front yard: The predominant setback of the buildings
located on the same side of the street between the two
nearest intersections.
[2] Each side yard: principal structures, four feet; accessory
structures (excluding swimming pools), four feet;
swimming pool, eight feet.
[3] Rear yard: principal structures, 20 feet; accessory
structures, 10 feet.
(4) Impervious coverage and height requirements.
(a) Maximum impervious coverage (single-family and two-family
dwellings): 40% (55% if on-lot stormwater management is
used) of gross lot area.
(b) Maximum impervious coverage (multifamily dwellings): 60% of
gross lot area.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage (nonresidential uses): 60% of
gross lot area.
(d) Minimum usable open space on lot: 30% of gross lot area.
(e) Maximum building height.
[1] Principal structures: 35 feet.
[2] Private garages: 35 feet.
[3] Other accessory structures: 15 feet.
(5) Design and architectural guidelines. All structures must be of a
coherent and compatible style, have appropriate scale and building
massing, be coordinated with existing street and utility networks,
be context-sensitive and otherwise fit the fabric of the existing
neighborhood. Borough Council, with the advice of the Zoning
Officer and of HARB, shall have the final authority to judge whether
these guidelines have been followed.
§ 360-13 TAXATION § 360-14
324:523
A. Permitted uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-20 and 360-23 of
this chapter.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(3) Two-family dwellings.
(4) Community living arrangement.
(5) No-impact, home-based businesses.
(6) Accessory structures.
(7) Forestry.
B. Special exception uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and
360-45B of this chapter.
(1) Home occupations, not meeting the definition of no-impact, homebased
businesses.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast establishments or inns.
(3) Professional offices, provided:
(a) The exterior design of such new structures conforms with
design and architectural guidelines; or
(b) Renovations to existing buildings require no exterior
alterations.
(4) Public and semipublic uses.
(5) Houses of Worship.
(6) Uses permitted in the Bucknell University District.
C. Conditional uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and 360-45C
of this chapter.
(1) Multifamily dwellings.
D. Bulk, area and density standards.
(1) Minimum lot area.
(a) Residential uses.
[1] Single-family detached dwellings: 5,197 square feet.
(Note: 5,197 square feet is the average lot size in that
section of the Borough located east of Route 15.)
[2] Single-family semidetached dwellings: 5,197 square feet.
[3] Two-family dwellings: 2,598 square feet per dwelling unit.
§ 360-14 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-14
324:524
[4] Multifamily dwellings: 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
[1] Public or private schools: 10,000 square feet.
[2] University uses: 22,000 square feet.
[3] Houses of Worship: 40,000 square feet.
[4] Public uses and semipublic uses: 25,000 square feet.
[5] Professional offices: 10,394 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width (measured at the front yard setback):
(a) Residential uses: 33 feet.
(b) Nonresidential uses: 66 feet.
(3) Setbacks.
(a) Residential and nonresidential uses.
[1] Front yard: The predominant setback of the buildings
located on the same side of the street between the two
nearest intersections.
[2] Each side yard: principal structures, four feet; accessory
structures (excluding swimming pools), four feet;
swimming pools, eight feet.
[3] Rear yard: principal structures: 20 feet; accessory
structures: 10 feet; swimming pools, 10 feet.
(4) Impervious coverage and height requirements.
(a) Maximum impervious coverage (single-family and two-family
dwellings): 40% (55% if on-lot stormwater management is
used) of gross lot area.
(b) Maximum impervious coverage (multifamily dwellings): 60% of
gross lot area.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage (nonresidential uses): 60% of
gross lot area.
(d) Minimum usable open space (residential uses): 40% of gross
lot area.
(e) Minimum usable open space (nonresidential uses): 20% of
gross lot area.
(f) Maximum building height.
[1] Principal structures: 35 feet.
§ 360-14 TAXATION § 360-14
324:525
§ 360-15. Bucknell University (BU).
[2] Private garages: 35 feet.
[3] Other accessory structures: 15 feet.
(5) Design and architectural guidelines. All structures must be of a
coherent and compatible style, have appropriate scale and building
massing, be coordinated with existing street and utility networks,
be context-sensitive and otherwise fit the fabric of the existing
neighborhood. Borough Council, with the advice of the Zoning
Officer and of HARB, shall have the final authority to judge whether
these guidelines have been followed.
A. Permitted uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-20 and 360-23 of
this chapter.
(1) University buildings for classroom, laboratory, administrative,
maintenance, cultural or related uses.
(2) University-owned or -operated student housing.
(3) Fraternity, sorority houses and academic interest houses.
(4) University-owned and -operated housing.
(5) Recreation or athletic fields or buildings.
(6) Golf courses and club houses.
(7) Agriculture.
(8) Forestry.
(9) Accessory structures.
B. Special exception uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and
360-45B of this chapter.
(1) Houses of Worship.
C. Conditional uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and 360-45C
of this chapter.
(1) Multifamily dwellings.
(2) Permitted commercial uses.
(3) Boarding houses.
(4) Rooming or lodging houses.
(5) Townhouses, not to exceed four units per building.
D. Bulk, area and density standards.
§ 360-14 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-15
324:526
§ 360-16. Highway Commercial (HC).
(1) Minimum lot area.
(a) Residential uses: none.
(b) Nonresidential uses: none.
(2) Minimum lot width (measured at the front yard setback).
(a) Residential uses: none.
(b) Nonresidential uses: none.
(3) Setbacks.
(a) Residential uses.
[1] Front yard: 75 feet from the center line of any public road
or 50 feet from the edge of any public right-of-way,
whichever is greater.
[2] Rear and side yard: none.
(b) Nonresidential uses: none.
(4) Impervious coverage and height requirements.
(a) Maximum impervious coverage: 50% of the total land area
owned by the University within the boundaries of the Borough
within this district.
(b) Maximum building height: no structure shall exceed 60 feet
above the existing natural grade.
A. Permitted uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-20, 360-22 and
360-23 of this chapter.
(1) Class I commercial uses.
(2) Class II commercial uses.
(3) Class III commercial uses.
(4) Accessory structures.
(5) Public and semipublic uses.
(6) Forestry.
B. Special exception uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and
360-45B of this chapter.
(1) Accessory uses not located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use, with the exception of off-site parking.
§ 360-15 TAXATION § 360-16
324:527
(2) Adult uses.
(3) Mixed-use structures.
(4) Methadone treatment facilities.
(5) Multifamily dwellings.
(6) Group care facilities.
(7) Drug and alcohol residential treatment facilities.
C. Conditional uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and 360-45C
of this chapter.
(1) Shopping centers or malls.
(2) Off-site parking.
(3) Broadcast transmission facilities.
D. Bulk, area and density standards.
(1) Minimum lot area.
(a) Residential uses: none.
(b) Nonresidential uses.
[1] Shopping centers or malls: five acres.
[2] Other uses: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width (measured at the front yard setback).
(a) Residential uses: none.
(b) Nonresidential uses: 100 feet.
(3) Setbacks.
(a) Residential uses (principal and accessory).
[1] Front yard: 40 feet.
[2] Each side yard: 20 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 40 feet.
(b) Nonresidential uses (principal and accessory).
[1] Front yard: 40 feet.
[2] Each side yard: 20 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 40 feet.
(4) Impervious coverage and height requirements.
§ 360-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-16
324:528
(a) Maximum impervious coverage (multifamily dwellings): 60% of
gross lot area.
(b) Maximum impervious coverage (other uses): 75% of gross lot
area.
(c) Maximum building coverage: 50%.
(d) Maximum building height.
[1] Principal uses: 35 feet.
[2] Accessory structures: 15 feet.
E. Additional use requirements.
(1) Off-street parking and loading.
(a) All off-street parking and loading facilities shall comply with
the provisions of § 360-26 of this chapter.
(b) No more than 50% of any required setback depth may be used
for off-street parking or loading.
(c) No off-street parking shall be permitted within 10 feet of a
right-of-way of any arterial or collector street.
(d) Screening shall be provided in accordance with § 360-30 of this
chapter.
(2) Multifamily dwellings shall only be permitted on collector or local
streets. No multifamily dwellings shall be permitted on arterial
roads.
(3) Mixed-use structures.
(a) Only permitted in existing structures.
(b) All structures shall be treated as nonresidential structures for
the purposes of this section.
(c) Residential use shall not be permitted at the level abutting the
street or in the basement/cellar.
F. Access and traffic controls.
(1) Depressed curb cuts shall be required as a condition of approval.
(2) All means of ingress and egress shall be located at least 50 feet
from any street intersection.
(3) The purchase and erection of any traffic control or safety structures
or devices required to handle the increased traffic caused by a
development shall be at the developer's expense.
§ 360-16 TAXATION § 360-16
324:529
§ 360-17. Downtown Commercial (DC).
(4) The Borough Council may attach additional conditions based upon
the traffic impact study that may be required to be submitted with
the land development plan.
(5) Access roads and shared driveways shall be encouraged.
(6) Increased traffic caused by development shall not impact
residential streets.
G. Use and maintenance of setback areas. All required setback areas not
necessary for screening or parking and loading areas shall be kept clear
of obstructions and shall be planted in grass, landscaping and/or trees.
A. Permitted uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-20, 360-22 and
360-23 of this chapter.
(1) Class I commercial uses.
(2) Class II commercial uses.
(3) Single-family detached dwellings.
(4) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(5) Two-family dwellings.
(6) Bed-and-breakfast establishments or inns.
(7) Mixed (residential/Class I and Class II commercial) uses.
(8) Accessory structures.
(9) Forestry.
B. Special exception uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and
360-45B of this chapter.
(1) Home occupations not meeting the definition of No-Impact, Home
Based Businesses.
(2) Multifamily dwellings.
(3) Public or semipublic uses.
(4) Houses of Worship.
(5) Accessory uses not located on the same lot as a permitted principal
use.
C. Conditional uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and 360-45C
of this chapter.
(1) Off-site parking, pursuant to § 360-26C.
§ 360-16 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-17
324:530
(2) Boarding houses.
(3) Rooming or lodging houses.
D. Bulk, area and density standards.
(1) Minimum lot area.
(a) Residential uses: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Nonresidential uses: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width (measured at the front yard setback).
(a) Residential uses: 33 feet.
(b) Nonresidential uses: 33 feet.
(3) Setbacks.
(a) Residential uses (principal and accessory).
[1] Front yard: The predominant setback of the existing
buildings on the same side of the street between the two
nearest intersections.
[2] Each side yard: none.
[3] Rear yard: 15 feet.
(b) Nonresidential (principal and accessory).
[1] Front yard: The predominant setback of the existing
buildings on the same side of the street between the two
nearest intersections.
[2] Each side yard: none, except when adjacent to a
residential use or district, a minimum of 10 feet shall be
required.
[3] Rear yard: 15 feet.
(4) Impervious coverage and height requirements.
(a) Maximum impervious coverage: 85% of gross lot area.
(b) Maximum building height: 45 feet.
(5) Design and architectural guidelines. All structures must be of a
coherent and compatible style, have appropriate scale and building
massing, be coordinated with existing street and utility networks,
be context-sensitive and otherwise fit the fabric of the existing
neighborhood. Borough Council, with the advice of the Zoning
Officer and of HARB, shall have the final authority to judge whether
these guidelines have been followed.
§ 360-17 TAXATION § 360-18
324:531
§ 360-18. Mixed-use (MU).
A. Permitted uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-20, 360-22 and
360-23 of this chapter.
(1) Wholesale commercial uses conducted within an enclosed building.
(2) Warehouses.
(3) Industrial uses conducted in an enclosed building.
(4) Class I and II commercial uses.
(5) Public and semipublic uses.
(6) Accessory structures: The storage of any materials for the above
permitted uses must be enclosed within a building or screened in
accordance with § 360-30.
(7) All residential uses.
(8) Forestry.
B. Special exception uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and
360-45B of this chapter.
(1) Accessory uses not located on the same lot as the principal
permitted use, with the exception of off-site parking.
(2) Adult uses.
(3) Houses of Worship.
(4) Bed-and-breakfast establishment or inn.
(5) Recreation uses.
(6) Class III commercial uses.
(7) Research, development and testing laboratories.
C. Conditional uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and 360-45C
of this chapter.
(1) Off-site parking, pursuant to § 360-26C.
(2) Broadcast transmission facilities.
(3) Waste storage, treatment, processing and/or disposal facilities.
D. Bulk, area and density standards.
(1) Minimum lot area.
(a) Residential uses.
§ 360-18 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-18
324:532
[1] Single-family detached dwellings and community living
arrangements: 5,197 square feet. (Note: 5,197 square feet
is the most common lot size in that section of the Borough
located east of Route 15.)
[2] Single-family semidetached dwellings: 5,197 square feet
per dwelling unit.
[3] Two-family dwelling: 2,598 square feet per dwelling unit.
[4] Townhouses: 2,598 square feet per dwelling unit.
[5] Multifamily dwellings: 1,800 square feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Nonresidential uses: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width (measured at the front yard setback).
(a) Residential uses.
[1] Single-family detached dwellings: 33 feet.
[2] Single-family semidetached dwellings: 33 feet.
[3] Two-family dwellings: 33 feet.
[4] Multifamily dwellings: 66 feet.
(b) Nonresidential uses: 66 feet.
(3) Setbacks.
(a) Residential uses (principal and accessory).
[1] Front yard: 10 feet.
[2] Each side yard (except townhouses): 10 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 20 feet.
(b) Nonresidential (principal and accessory).
[1] Front yard: 10 feet.
[2] Each side yard: 10 feet, except when adjacent to a
residential district; then the setback shall be a minimum of
50 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 20 feet, except when adjacent to a residential
district; then the setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
[4] A buffer area shall be required in accordance with the
provisions of § 360-30.
(4) Impervious coverage and height requirements.
§ 360-18 TAXATION § 360-18
324:533
§ 360-19. Open Space (OS).
This district may include lands within the floodways and sections of the
floodplain, as identified in the most recent Floodplain Mapping produced
by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development as part of
the Borough Flood Insurance Study, as well as lands that are primarily
recreation areas in the Borough.
(a) Maximum impervious coverage (single-family and two-family
dwellings): 40% (55% if on-lot stormwater management is
used) of gross lot area.
(b) Maximum impervious coverage (multifamily dwellings): 60% of
gross lot area.
(c) Maximum impervious coverage (nonresidential uses): 70% of
gross lot area.
(d) Minimum usable open space on lot: 20% of gross lot area.
(e) Maximum building height: 45 feet.
A. Permitted uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-20 and 360-23 of
this chapter.
(1) Agriculture and horticulture.
(2) Water-related uses such as docks, piers, wharves and bridges.
(3) Passive recreation, including trails, bike paths, open space and
nature walks.
(4) Forestry.
B. Special exception uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and
360-45B of this chapter.
(1) Not applicable to this district.
C. Conditional uses, pursuant to the provisions of §§ 360-21 and 360-45C
of this chapter.
(1) Public memorials and monuments.
(2) Outdoor public recreational facilities and accessory uses or
structures.
(3) Cemeteries.
(4) Active recreation.
D. Bulk, area and density requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area.
§ 360-18 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-19
324:534
§ 360-20. Overlay districts.
This district shall be an overlay to the Zoning Map of the Borough. All
underlying district regulations shall apply, where applicable.
§ 360-21. Criteria for specific special exception and conditional
uses.
(a) Residential uses: none.
(b) Nonresidential uses: none.
(2) Minimum lot width (measured at the front yard setback): none.
(3) Setbacks: 10 feet all sides (front, side and rear).
(4) Impervious coverage and height requirements.
(a) Maximum impervious coverage: 40% of gross lot area.
(b) Maximum building height: 15 feet.
E. Additional safeguards.
(1) No part of any on-lot sewage disposal system shall be constructed
in any lands situated in the OS District.
(2) All uses in the floodway shall conform to the requirements of the
Lewisburg Borough Floodplain Ordinance.
A. Historic District. All buildings, structures, signs and uses shall comply
with the provisions of the Lewisburg Borough Historic District
Ordinance, Chapter 186 of the Lewisburg Borough Code of Ordinances.
B. Floodplain District. See Article VI and refer to applicable Flood
Insurance Study prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration
dated October 16, 2009, or the most recent revision thereof.
A. Adult uses, as defined in this chapter, provided they comply with all
other requirements of this chapter and meet the provisions listed
below:
(1) No adult use shall be located within 200 feet of any residential use
or district, as measured in a straight line from the lot lines of both
the subject parcel and any residential use or district.
(2) No adult use shall be located within 500 feet of any public park or
playground, community center, school or church, as measured in a
straight line from the lot lines of the subject parcel and any public
park or playground, school or church.
(3) No adult use shall be located within 500 feet of any other adult use,
as measured in a straight line from the lot lines of both the subject
parcel and any other adult use.
§ 360-19 TAXATION § 360-21
324:535
(4) No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the
observation of any material depicting, describing or related to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any
public way or from any property not permitted as an adult use. This
provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window,
door or other opening.
(5) No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that violates any of
the provisions of this chapter or any other federal, state, county or
municipal regulation.
(6) The entire perimeter of any lot containing an adult use shall be
landscaped with natural plant material in accordance with
§ 360-30, except for parking lot entrance and exit.
(7) For purposes of compliance with off-street parking requirements a
minimum of one off-street parking space per 100 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one off-street parking space per employee,
shall be required.
(8) The setbacks for adult uses shall be as follows:
(a) Front yard: 50 feet.
(b) Each side yard: 20 feet.
(c) Rear yard: 50 feet.
(9) Sign regulations applicable to all adult uses shall be as follows:
(a) Maximum area for any sign shall be 24 square feet.
(b) No sign shall be internally illuminated.
(c) No projecting signs shall be allowed for such uses.
(d) No freestanding signs shall be allowed for such uses.
(e) No off-premises directional signs related to any adult use shall
be permitted.
(10) If employees or patrons of an adult use promote, solicit, allow or
engage in acts of prostitution on the premises, as charged by
appropriate law enforcement authorities, then the zoning permit
shall be suspended. Should said employees or patrons be convicted
or plead guilty to said charges of prostitution as described above,
then the zoning permit shall be revoked.
(11) Any proposed adult use shall submit the necessary impact study
requirement as described in § 360-21L of this chapter.
B. Bed-and-breakfast establishments and inns.
(1) Such uses shall serve as both a home for their owners and a lodging
establishment.
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:536
(2) The bed-and-breakfast or inn is intended only as a secondary use of
the dwelling and shall not alter the residential appearance or
nature of the neighborhood.
(3) One parking space per guest room will be required in addition to
the two required for the residence.
(4) Signage is limited to two square feet and may be illuminated only
by shielded lighting.
(5) The establishment may be used to host family events such as
weddings and reunions as well as small business meetings.
C. Broadcast transmission facilities, including towers, antennas, related
equipment and broadcast transmission equipment buildings, except
satellite receivers less than 39 inches in diameter, transmission
facilities required for public safety, and facilities owned or operated by
a federally licensed amateur radio operator.
(1) General requirements for all antennas. The following regulations
shall apply to all antennas, except those operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio operator or a Borough recognized police,
fire or ambulance organization:
(a) Standard of care. All antennas shall be designed, constructed,
operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict
compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the most
recent editions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Commercial Code,
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, and
National Electrical Code. Antennas shall at all times be kept
and maintained in good condition, order and repair by qualified
maintenance and construction personnel so that the same shall
not endanger the life of any person or any property in the
Borough.
(b) Conditional use authorization required. An applicant proposing
the installation of an antenna, except those that fall under the
provisions of the WBCA, shall apply for conditional use
authorization from Borough Council. The conditional use
application shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna
complies with all pertinent provisions of this section. Antennas
are permitted in all zoning districts via conditional use.
(c) Historic areas. No antenna may be located upon any property,
or on a building or structure, that is listed on either the
National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places, or that is
recognized by the Borough as an historic structure.
(d) Wind. Antennas shall be designed to withstand the effects of
wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition to the
standard designed by the American National Standards
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:537
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association and the Broadcast
Transmission Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as
amended).
(e) Aviation safety. Antennas shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(f) Public safety communications. Antennas shall not interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(g) Radio frequency emissions. An antenna shall not, by itself or in
conjunction with other antennas and/or broadcast
transmissions towers, generate radio frequency emissions in
excess of the standards and regulations of the FCC, including,
but not limited to, the FCC Office of Engineering Technology
Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating Compliance with FCC
Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio Frequency
Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(h) Removal. In the event that use of an antenna is planned to be
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Borough of its intent to discontinue such use and the date
when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned
antennas, or portions of antennas, shall be removed as follows:
[1] All abandoned or unused antennas and related equipment
shall be removed within two months of the cessation of
operations at the site unless a time extension is approved
by the Borough.
[2] If the antenna or related equipment is not removed within
two months of the cessation of operations at a site, or
within any longer period approved by the Borough, the
antenna and/or related equipment may be removed by the
Borough. As security, the Borough reserves the right to the
salvage value of any removed antenna and/or related
equipment if such antenna and/or related equipment is/are
not removed by the owner as set forth herein.
(i) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates an antenna shall
provide the Borough with a certificate of insurance, naming the
Borough as an additional insured, and evidencing general
liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the antenna.
(j) Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates an
antenna shall, at their sole cost and expense, indemnify, defend
and hold harmless the Borough, and its elected and appointed
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:538
officials, employees and agents, at all times against any and
all claims for personal injury, including death, and property
damage arising in whole or in part from, caused by or
connected with any act or omission of the person, or their
officers, agents, employees or contractors, arising out of, but
not limited to, the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of the antenna. Each person that owns
or operates an antenna shall defend any actions or proceedings
against the Borough in which it is claimed that personal injury,
including death, or property damage was caused by the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or removal
of an antenna. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and
defend shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay
judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys'
fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of
indemnification.
(k) Maintenance. To the extent permitted by law, the following
maintenance requirements shall apply:
[1] The antenna shall be fully automated and unattended on a
daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair.
[2] Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the
upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety and
security of the Borough's residents.
[3] All maintenance activities shall utilize nothing less than
the best available technology for preventing failures and
accidents.
(l) Removal, replacement and modification.
[1] To the extent permitted by law, the removal and
replacement of antennas and/or related equipment for the
purpose of upgrading or repairing the antenna is
permitted, provided that such repair or upgrade does not
substantially change the overall size of the wireless
support structure or the number of antennas. If a
substantial change will occur as a result of such removal
or replacement, the applicant shall proceed through the
conditional use process, demonstrating that the proposed
removal or replacement complies with the terms and
conditions established herein.
[2] To the extent permitted by state law, any material
alteration to an antenna shall require notice to be provided
to the Borough, and possible supplemental permit
approval to the original permit or authorization.
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:539
(2) In addition to the regulations enumerated hereinabove, the
following regulations shall apply to antennas that fall under the
WBCA:
(a) Permit required. Antenna applicants proposing the
modification of an existing broadcast transmission tower or
wireless support structure, which does not substantially
change the dimensions of the existing structure, shall obtain a
building permit from the Borough. In order to be considered
for such permit, the applicant must submit a permit application
to the Borough in accordance with applicable permit policies
and procedures.
(b) Timing of approval for applications that fall under the WBCA.
Within 30 calendar days of the date that an application for an
antenna is filed with the Borough, the Borough shall notify the
applicant in writing of any information that may be required to
complete such application. Within 60 calendar days of receipt
of a complete application, the Borough shall make its final
decision on whether to approve the application and shall
advise the applicant in writing of such decision.
(c) Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual
costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval
of an antenna not to exceed the amounts set by applicable state
law.
(3) In addition to the regulations enumerated hereinabove, the
following regulations shall apply to antennas that do not fall under
the WBCA:
(a) Prohibited on residential dwellings. To the extent permissible
under federal and state law, no antenna shall be located on any
residential dwelling.
(b) Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any consultant(s)
and/or expert(s) necessary to assist the Borough in reviewing
and evaluating the application for approval of the antenna and,
once approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential
violations of the terms and conditions of these antenna
provisions. The applicant and/or owner of the antenna shall
reimburse the Borough for all costs of the Borough's
consultant(s) in providing expert evaluation and consultation
in connection with these activities.
(c) Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual
costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval
of an antenna, as well as related inspection, monitoring and
related costs.
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:540
(d) Development regulations. To the extent permitted by federal
and state law, antennas shall be co-located on existing wireless
support structures, subject to the following conditions:
[1] The total height of any wireless support structure and
mounted antenna shall not exceed 20 feet above the
maximum height permitted in the underlying zoning
district.
[2] In accordance with industry standards and where
permitted by state or federal law, all antenna applicants
must submit documentation to the Borough justifying the
total height of the antenna. Such documentation shall be
analyzed in the context of such justification on an
individual basis.
[3] If the applicant proposes to locate the related equipment
in a separate equipment building, the building shall
comply with the minimum setback requirements for the
applicable zoning district, and landscaping shall be
required to screen as much of the equipment building as
possible.
(e) A security fence with a maximum height of eight feet shall
surround any separate broadcast transmission equipment
building. Vehicular access to the broadcast transmission
equipment building, or any structure housing related
equipment, shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular
circulations on the site for the principal use.
(f) Noncommercial usage exemption. Borough residents utilizing
satellite dishes and antennas for the purpose of maintaining
television, phone, radio and/or internet connections at their
respective residences and amateur radio operators shall be
exempt from the regulations enumerated herein.
(g) Design regulations. Antennas shall employ stealth technology
and be treated to match the wireless support structure in order
to minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth
technology chosen by the applicant shall be subject to the
approval of the Borough.
(h) Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect any
antenna to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and any other applicable provisions found within the
Borough Code or state or federal law. The Borough and/or its
agents shall have the authority to enter the property upon
which an antenna is located at any time, upon reasonable
notice to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
(4) Regulations applicable to all antennas located within the public
rights-of-way. In addition to the regulations enumerated
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:541
hereinabove, the following regulations shall apply to antennas
located within the public rights-of-way:
(a) Co-location. Antennas within the right-of-way shall be colocated
on existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light
poles. If co-location is not technologically feasible, the
applicant, with the Borough's approval, shall locate its
antennas on existing poles or freestanding structures that do
not already act as wireless support structures.
(b) Design requirements:
[1] Antenna installations located above the surface grade in
the public right-of-way including, but not limited to, those
on streetlights and utility poles, shall consist of equipment
components that are no more than six feet in height and
that are compatible in scale and proportion to the
structures upon which they are mounted. All equipment
shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive equipment
feasible.
[2] Antennas and related equipment shall be treated with
stealth technology by the antenna owner or applicant to
match the wireless support structure and may be required
to be painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually
compatible with the support structure upon which they are
mounted.
(c) Time, place and manner. The Borough shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair
and/or removal of all antennas in the right-of-way based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the
right-of-way, and related considerations. For public utilities,
the time, place and manner requirements shall be consistent
with the police powers of the Borough and the requirements of
the Public Utility Code.
(d) Equipment location. Antennas and related equipment shall be
located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety
hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the right-of-way as determined by
the Borough. In addition:
[1] Ground-mounted related equipment shall be located
between the sidewalk and the curb. For reasons of safety
and aesthetics, such equipment shall neither protrude
onto the curb nor obstruct the sidewalk.
[2] Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:542
possible, through the use of landscaping or other
decorative features to the satisfaction of the Borough.
[3] Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to
blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of
the Borough.
[4] Any graffiti on any wireless support structure or any
related equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of
the owner.
(e) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within two months
following written notice from the Borough, or such longer
period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary or
such shorter period in the case of an emergency, the owner of
an antenna in the right-of-way shall, at its own expense,
temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter
the position of any antenna when the Borough, consistent with
its police powers and applicable Public Utility Commission
regulations, shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary under
the following circumstances:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Borough or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Borough or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Borough.
(5) General and specific standards for broadcast transmission towers.
The following regulations shall apply to all towers, excluding any
tower that is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur
radio operator:
(a) Standard of care. Towers shall be designed, constructed,
operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict
compliance with the current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes, including, but not limited to, the most
recent editions of the American National Standard Institute
(ANSI) Code, National Electrical Safety Code and National
Electrical Code, as well as the accepted and responsible
workmanlike industry practices of the National Association of
Tower Erectors. Towers shall at all times be kept and
maintained in good condition, order and repair by qualified
maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:543
shall not endanger the life of any person or any property in the
Borough.
(b) Notice. Upon submission of an application for a tower and the
scheduling of the public hearing upon the application, the
applicant shall mail notice to all owners of every property
within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The applicant shall
provide proof of such notification to the Borough.
(c) Conditional use authorization required. Towers are permitted
by conditional use in certain areas, at a height necessary to
satisfy their function in the applicant's wireless broadcast
transmission system. No applicant shall have the right under
these regulations to erect a tower to the maximum height
specified in this section unless it proves the necessity for such
height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the Tower is the
minimum height necessary for the service area.
[1] Prior to Borough Council's approval of a conditional use
authorizing the construction and installation of a tower, it
shall be incumbent upon the applicant for such conditional
use approval to prove to the reasonable satisfaction of
Borough Council that the applicant cannot adequately
extend or infill its broadcast transmission system by the
use of equipment, such as redoes, repeaters, antennas and
other similar equipment, installed on existing structures,
such as utility poles or their appurtenances and other
available tall structures. The applicant shall further
demonstrate that the proposed tower must be located
where it is proposed in order to serve the applicant's
service area and that no other viable alternative location
exists.
[2] The conditional use application shall be accompanied by a
propagation study evidencing the need for the proposed
tower or other communication facilities and related
equipment, a description of the type and manufacturer of
the proposed transmission/radio equipment, the frequency
range (megahertz band) assigned to the applicant, the
power in watts at which the applicant transmits, and any
relevant related tests conducted by the applicant in
determining the need for the proposed site and
installation.
[3] The conditional use application shall be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower
complies with all state and federal laws and regulations
concerning aviation safety.
[4] Where the tower is located on a property with another
principal use, the applicant shall present documentation to
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:544
Borough Council that the owner of the property has
granted an easement for the proposed tower and that
vehicular access will be provided to the facility.
[5] The conditional use application shall be accompanied by
documentation demonstrating that the proposed tower
complies with all applicable provisions in this section.
(d) Engineer inspection. Prior to the Borough's issuance of a
permit authorizing construction and erection of a tower, a
structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall issue to
the Borough a written certification of the proposed tower's
ability to meet the structural standards offered by either the
Electronic Industries Association or the Telecommunication
Industry Association and certify the proper construction of the
foundation and the erection of the structure. This certification
shall be provided during the conditional use hearing, or at a
minimum, be made as a condition attached to any approval
given that such certification be provided prior to issuance of
any building permits.
(e) Visual appearance and design. Towers shall employ stealth
technology, which may include the tower portion to be painted
silver or another color approved by Borough Council. All
towers and related equipment shall be aesthetically and
architecturally compatible with the surrounding environment
and shall maximize the use of a like facade to blend with the
existing surroundings and neighboring buildings to the
greatest extent possible. Application of the stealth technology
chosen by the applicant shall be approved by Borough Council.
(f) Co-location and siting. An application for a new tower shall
demonstrate that the proposed tower cannot be
accommodated on an existing or approved structure or
building, or sited on land owned and maintained by the
Borough. Borough Council may deny an application to
construct a new tower if the applicant has not made a good
faith effort to mount a broadcast transmission antenna on an
existing structure. The applicant shall demonstrate that it
contacted the owners of tall structures, buildings and Towers
within a one-quarter mile radius of the site proposed, sought
permission to install an antenna on those structures, buildings
and towers, and was denied for one of the following reasons:
[1] The proposed antenna and related equipment would
exceed the structural capacity of the existing building,
structure or tower;
[2] The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause
radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing building, structure or tower
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:545
and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable
cost; or
[3] Such existing buildings, structures or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access or height to
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to
perform its intended function, or a commercially
reasonable agreement could not be reached with the
owner of such building, structure or tower.
(g) Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible
under applicable state and federal law, any applicant proposing
the modification of an existing tower, which increases the
overall height of such tower, shall first obtain a building permit
from the Borough. Nonroutine modifications that do not fall
under the WBCA or the FCC's October 2014 Report & Order
shall be prohibited without such permit.
(h) Gap in coverage or deficiency in capacity. An application for a
tower must demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless
coverage or deficiency in capacity exists in the applicable area,
and that the type of broadcast transmission facility being
proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill such gap.
The existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage or
deficiency in capacity shall be a factor in the Borough's
decision on an application for approval of a tower.
(i) Additional antennas. As a condition of approval for all towers,
the applicant shall provide the Borough with a written
commitment that it will allow other service providers to
collocate antennas on its tower where technically and
economically feasible. The owner of a tower shall not install
any additional antennas without obtaining the prior written
approval of the Borough.
(j) Wind. Tower structures shall be designed to withstand the
effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition
to the standard designed by the American National Standards
Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association and the Telecommunications
Transmission Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222), as
amended.
(k) Height. The maximum height of any tower outside the public
rights-of-way shall not exceed 150 feet.
(l) Related equipment. Related equipment shall either be housed
in an equipment building not to exceed 500 square feet, or on a
pad not to exceed 20 feet by 10 feet, unless the applicant can
otherwise prove to the satisfaction of Borough Council that its
proposed tower necessitates a larger area for equipment
storage purposes.
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:546
(m) Public safety communications. No tower shall interfere with
public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties.
(n) Maintenance. A tower shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or
emergency repair. Such maintenance shall be performed to
ensure the upkeep of the facility in order to promote the safety
and security of the Borough's residents, and utilize the best
available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
(o) Radio frequency emissions. A tower shall not, by itself or in
conjunction with other antennas or towers, generate radio
frequency emissions in excess of the standards and regulations
of the FCC, including, but not limited to, the FCC Office of
Engineering Technology Bulletin 65 entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(p) Historic areas. A tower shall not be located upon a property
and/or on a building or structure that is listed on either the
National or Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places, or that is
recognized by the Borough as an historic structure.
(q) Signs. All towers shall post a sign in a readily visible location
identifying the name and phone number of a party to contact in
the event of an emergency. The only other signage permitted
on the Tower shall be those required by the FCC, or any other
federal or state agency.
(r) Lighting. No tower shall be artificially lighted, except as
required by law. If lighting is required, the applicant shall
provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as
unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under
state and federal regulations. The Applicant shall promptly
report any outage or malfunction of FAA-mandated lighting to
the appropriate governmental authorities.
(s) Noise. A tower shall be operated and maintained so as not to
produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under
state law and the Borough Code, except in emergency
situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where such
noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
(t) Aviation safety. Towers shall comply with all federal and state
laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(u) Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any consultant
and/or expert necessary to assist the Borough in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the tower and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:547
of the terms and conditions of these provisions. The applicant
and/or owner of the tower shall reimburse the Borough for
all costs of the Borough's consultant(s) in providing expert
evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities.
(v) Timing of approval. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for a tower is filed with the Borough, the Borough
shall notify the applicant in writing of any information that may
be required to complete such application. All applications for
towers shall be acted upon within 150 days of the receipt of a
fully completed application for the approval of such tower and
the Borough shall advise the applicant in writing of its
decision.
(w) Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming towers which are
hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause
may be repaired and restored at their former location, but
must otherwise comply with the terms and conditions of this
section.
(x) Removal. In the event that use of a tower is planned to be
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the
Borough of its intent to discontinue such use and the date
when the use shall be discontinued. Unused or abandoned
towers shall be removed within six months of the cessation of
operations at the site, unless a time extension is approved by
the Borough. If the tower and related equipment are not
removed within such time, the tower and related equipment
may be removed by the Borough and the cost of removal
assessed against the owner of the tower.
(y) Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and
reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual
costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval
of a tower, as well as related inspection, monitoring and
related costs.
(z) FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower over
35 feet in height shall submit a copy of its current FCC license,
including the name, address and emergency telephone number
for the operator of the facility, on an annual basis.
[1] Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower
greater than 35 feet in height shall provide the Borough
with a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $5,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $5,000,000 per occurrence covering
the tower. Each person that owns or operates a tower 35
feet or less in height shall provide the Borough with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:548
coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the
minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering
each tower.
[2] Indemnification. Each person that owns or operates a
tower shall, at their sole cost and expense, indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the Borough, and its elected and
appointed officials, employees and agents, at all times
against any and all claims for personal injury, including
death, and property damage arising in whole or in part
from, caused by or connected with any act or omission of
the person, or their officers, agents, employees or
contractors, arising out of, but not limited to, the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the tower. Each person that owns or operates a
tower shall defend any actions or proceedings against the
Borough in which it is claimed that personal injury,
including death, or property damage was caused by the
construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of the tower. The obligation to indemnify, hold
harmless and defend shall include, but not be limited to,
the obligation to pay judgments, injuries, liabilities,
damages, reasonable attorneys' fees, reasonable expert
fees, court costs and all other costs of indemnification.
[3] Financial security. Prior to receipt of a zoning permit for a
tower, the applicant shall provide to the Borough financial
security sufficient to guarantee the removal of the tower.
Said financial security shall remain in place until the tower
is removed.
(6) In addition to the regulations enumerated hereinabove, the
following regulations shall apply to towers located outside the
public rights-of-way:
(a) Development regulations.
[1] Towers are permitted by conditional use in the Mixed Use
(MU) District, the Bucknell University (BU) District, and
the Open Space and Recreation (OS) District.
[2] Sole use on a lot. A tower shall be permitted as a sole use
on a lot, provided that the underlying lot meets the
minimum size specifications set forth in this Article IV.
[3] Combined with another use. A tower may be permitted on
a property with an existing use, or on a vacant parcel in
combination with another use, subject to the following
conditions:
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:549
[a] The existing use on the property may be any permitted
use in the applicable district.
[b] Minimum lot area. The minimum lot shall comply with
the requirements for the applicable district and shall
be the area needed to accommodate the tower and
guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and
buffer planting if the proposed tower is greater than
35 feet in height.
[c] Minimum setbacks. The minimum distance between
the base of a tower and any adjoining property line or
street right-of-way line shall be equal to 100% of the
height of the tower or the minimum front yard setback
of the underlying zoning district, whichever is
greatest.
(b) Surrounding environs. The applicant shall ensure that the
existing vegetation, trees and shrubs located within proximity
to the broadcast transmission facility shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible. Landscaping shall be required to
screen as much of a newly constructed tower as possible.
Borough Council may permit any combination of existing
vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other
features instead of landscaping, if, in the discretion of Borough
Council, they achieve the same degree of screening.
(c) Fence. A chain-link security fence with a height of 10 feet shall
completely surround any tower greater than 35 feet in height,
as well as guy wires, or any building housing related
equipment. An evergreen screen shall be required to surround
the site, which must be a minimum height of six feet at planting
and grow to a minimum of 15 feet at maturity.
(d) Related equipment.
[1] Ground-mounted related equipment associated to, or
connected with, a tower shall be placed underground or
screened from public view using stealth technology.
[2] All related equipment, utility buildings and accessory
structures shall be architecturally designed to blend into
the environment in which they are situated and shall meet
the minimum setback requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
(e) Access road. For towers greater than 35 feet in height, an
access road, turnaround space and parking shall be provided
to ensure adequate emergency and service access to the tower.
Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private,
shall be made to the extent practicable. Road grades shall
closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:550
disturbance and minimize soil erosion. Where applicable, the
owner shall present documentation to the Borough that the
property owner has granted an easement for the proposed
facility.
(f) Parking. For each tower greater than 35 feet in height, there
shall be two off-street parking spaces.
(g) Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect any
tower not located in the right-of-way to ensure compliance with
this chapter and any other applicable provisions found within
the Borough Code or state or federal law. The Borough and/or
its agents shall have the authority to enter the property upon
which a tower is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to
the operator, to ensure such compliance.
(7) In addition to all applicable regulations enumerated hereinabove,
the following regulations shall apply to towers located within the
public rights-of-way.
(a) Location and development standards.
[1] Towers greater than 35 feet in height are prohibited in the
public right-of-way and in areas and subdivisions in which
all utilities are located underground.
[2] Towers shall not be located in the front facade area of any
structure.
[3] Towers shall be permitted along those roads and corridors
throughout the Borough, regardless of the underlying
Zoning District, as Borough Council shall determine by
resolution, adopted from time to time.
(b) Time, place and manner. The Borough shall determine the
time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair
and/or removal of all towers in the right-of-way based on public
safety, traffic management, physical burden on the right-ofway,
and related considerations. For public utilities, the time,
place and manner requirements shall be consistent with the
police powers of the Borough and the requirements of the
Public Utility Code.
(c) Equipment location. Towers and related equipment shall be
located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety
hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the right-of-way as determined by
the Borough. In addition:
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:551
[1] In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls,
or landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of
the curb.
[2] Ground-mounted related equipment shall be screened, to
the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping
or other decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Borough.
[3] Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall
be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
(d) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following
written notice from the Borough, or such longer period as the
Borough determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter
period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a tower in the
right-of-way shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of
any tower when the Borough, consistent with its police powers
and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall
determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration
is reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
[1] The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any Borough or other public improvement in the right-ofway;
[2] The operations of the Borough or other governmental
entity in the right-of-way;
[3] Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility
easement; or
[4] An emergency as determined by the Borough.
(e) Reimbursement for Right-of-Way Use. In addition to permit
fees as described in this Section, every tower in the right-ofway
is subject to the Borough's right to fix annually a fair and
reasonable fee to be paid for use and occupancy of the right-ofway.
Such compensation for right-of-way use shall be directly
related to the Borough's actual right-of-way management
costs, including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting,
permitting, supervising and other right-of-way management
activities by the Borough. The owner of each tower shall pay an
annual fee to the Borough to compensate the Borough for the
Borough's costs incurred in connection with the activities
described herein.
D. Rooming or lodging house. [Amended 1-20-2015 by Ord. No. 1033]
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:552
(1) Such use must conform to the light, ventilation and occupancy
limitations defined in Chapter Four of the 2009 International
Property Maintenance Code or most current Code, as applicable.
(2) Such use shall provide bedroom area for each bedroom that is a
minimum of 70 square feet per person.
(3) Such use shall comply with all applicable off-street parking
requirements as listed in § 360-26 of this chapter.
(4) Such use shall meet all required building and fire protection codes.
(5) Such use shall comply with all development, performance and
protection standards listed in § 360-31 and § 360-32 of this chapter.
(6) Such use shall meet all other required federal, state, county and/or
municipal regulations.
E. Commercial uses.
(1) Such use shall comply with all applicable off-street parking
requirements as listed in § 360-26 of this chapter.
(2) Such use shall meet all required building and fire protection codes.
(3) Such use shall comply with all development, performance and
protection standards listed in § 360-31 and § 360-32 of this chapter.
(4) Such use shall meet all other required federal, state, county and/or
municipal regulations.
F. Group care facilities.
(1) Such uses shall be licensed or meet all requirements of licensing or
certification by the appropriate departments and/or agencies of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Said license and/or proof of all
approved required documentation shall be submitted prior to
commencement of use.
(2) No such uses shall be located within 500 feet of any school,
playground, residential dwelling, childcare facility or house of
worship unless permitted by a majority vote of Borough Council. At
least 14 days prior to this vote, one or more public hearings
regarding the proposed facility location shall be held at a location
within the Borough following public notice and written notice to all
owners of real property located within 500 feet of the proposed
location at least 30 days prior to said public hearings.
(3) For purposes of determining required off-street parking, such
facilities shall be classified as "medical clinics."
(4) One sign, a maximum of two square feet, is permitted.
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:553
(5) Such uses shall be manned during all hours of operation by
personnel with credentials as required by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health.
(6) Such uses shall submit the required impact study as specified in
§ 360-21L of this chapter.
(7) The Zoning Officer shall have the authority to continue the
conditional use as long as proofs of required annual licensing and
certification are provided to the Borough when such documentation
is received by the provider.
G. Home occupation(s) not meeting the definition of no-impact, homebased
business shall be subject to the following criteria and any
additional conditions attached to the required special exception as
approved by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(1) No more than one home occupation may be located in any dwelling
unit.
(2) Such home occupations shall be conducted by the resident(s) of
that dwelling unit, who shall not employ more than one full-time or
two part-time employees.
(3) No evidence of a home occupation shall be reflected in the exterior
appearance of the dwelling structure that shall be maintained in its
residential character, other than a sign not exceeding two square
feet in area.
(4) No home occupation shall involve display windows, require truck
deliveries, other than that by delivery courier services normally
associated with residential use, or produce offensive noise, smoke,
glare, vibration, dust, odors or excessive heat.
(5) Permitted home occupations shall include:
(a) Sculpturing; pottery and woodworking; arts and crafts
workshops; television, radio or electronic repair shops;
furniture making and repair; antique shops or similar
activities.
(b) Training and/or tutoring of no more than six persons in small
classes.
(c) Child care or family day-care home.
(d) Custom dressmaking, millinery or tailoring.
(e) Photographic studios, graphic design studios or artist
workshops.
(f) Professional offices.
(g) Beauty salons, hairdressers, barbershops or similar activities.
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:554
(6) Home occupations in all districts shall have access to a public
street.
(7) The number of spaces required for a home occupation (in addition
to those for the residence) shall be determined by the Zoning
Hearing Board when ruling on the request for a special exception
permit and after considering the amount of traffic the home
occupation is projected to generate.
(8) Home occupations shall not adversely impact the residential
character of the neighborhood.
(9) Home occupations shall not occupy more than 25% of the gross
floor area of the dwelling unit.
(10) Upon approval of a home occupation, the Zoning Officer shall issue
a permit that may be revoked upon a site inspection by the Zoning
Officer that determines noncompliance with this chapter and/or
any permit conditions.
(11) The Zoning Officer shall provide an annual report to the Borough
Council listing all permitted home occupations.
H. Methadone treatment centers.
(1) Such facilities shall be licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Health.
(2) Such facilities shall not be established or operated within 500 feet
of any existing school, playground, public park, residential housing
area, childcare facility, community center or house of worship
unless permitted by a majority vote of Borough Council. At least 14
days prior to this vote, one or more public hearings regarding the
proposed facility location shall be held at a location within the
Borough following public notice and written notice to all owners of
real property located within 500 feet of the proposed location at
least 30 days prior to said public hearings.
(3) One sign, a maximum of two square feet, is permitted.
I. Public or private schools.
(1) Private schools shall include but not be limited to day schools,
nursery schools, schools for the blind or mentally or physically
handicapped, and shall meet state and federal guidelines
applicable to the institution or school.
(2) Maximum hours of operation per day are limited to 12.
(3) Shall have direct access to a public street.
(4) Shall comply with the off-street parking requirements contained in
§ 360-26 of this chapter.
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:555
J. Public and semipublic uses; Houses of Worship.
(1) Permanent landscaping and screening shall be required, in
conformance with the provisions of § 360-30 of this chapter and the
Borough Subdivision and Land Development chapter.57
(2) A land development plan shall be submitted with the application.
(3) All sites, lots, facilities, buildings, structures and appurtenances
shall have access by way of an internal street system and shall have
adequate emergency vehicle and equipment access. All such uses
shall comply with the off-street parking requirements contained in
§ 360-26 of this chapter.
(4) Sewage disposal and water supply facilities in accordance with
state regulations shall be provided by the applicant for all
structures to be occupied or used by human beings.
(5) Stormwater management facilities constructed in accordance with
an applicable stormwater management plan or ordinance shall be
installed.
(6) The need for the proposed use or facility shall be documented.
K. Waste storage, treatment, processing and disposal facilities.
(1) No facilities considered for a special exception under this section
shall be processed unless fully permitted by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and such other federal or state
agencies as required under applicable enabling statutes.
(2) All facilities considered for special exception under this section
shall submit the required impact study as specified in § 360-21L of
this chapter.
(3) All facilities considered for special exception under this section
shall submit the following information for the site:
(a) A description of the specific types of waste the applicant
proposes to accept for storage, treatment, processing or
disposal at the site.
(b) A description of the specific technology and procedures the
applicant proposes to treat, process and dispose of at the
facility.
(c) Preliminary specifications and architectural drawings of the
proposed facility.
(d) An approved site or land development plan.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:556
(e) A statement of qualifications to operate a waste disposal
facility.
(f) A complete compliance history for any and all facilities owned
and/or operated by the applicant, any parent, subsidiary or
cooperative owner/operator of waste treatment, processing or
disposal facilities, as per PA-DEP Form HW-C, Compliance
History and Instructions.
(g) Any and all information supplied to the PA Department of
Environmental Protection or the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency regarding the proposed site and/or facility.
(h) The names and addresses of any person, corporation or
partnership having any financial interest in the construction,
permitting, operation or closure of such facility.
(i) Any and all royalty and/or contingent payment agreements
related to citing, permitting or operation of such facility.
(j) All documents required by federal and/or state law regarding
registered lobbyist(s) acting on behalf of the applicant or any
related party.
(k) All insurance policies, closure accounts and/or documents
relating to self-insurance for the subject application.
(l) A proposed citing agreement specifying the terms, conditions
and provisions under which the facility shall be constructed,
maintained and operated, including but not limited to the
following terms, conditions and provisions:
[1] Facility construction and maintenance procedures.
[2] Operating procedures and practices, the design of the
facility and its associated activities.
[3] Monitoring procedures, practices and standards necessary
to ensure and continue to demonstrate that the facility will
be operated safely.
[4] The services to be offered by the applicant to the
community.
[5] The compensation, services and special benefits to be
provided to the community by the applicant and the timing
and conditions of their provisions.
[6] Provisions for renegotiation of any term, condition, or
provision of the citing agreement or of the entire
agreement.
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:557
[7] Provisions for resolving any disagreements in the
construction and interpretation of the citing agreement
that may arise between the parties.
[8] Provisions for compensation to be paid to abutting
landowners, residents, occupants or impacted
communities, landowners, residents or occupants.
[9] Provision for direct monetary payments to the Borough
and special services to be provided for demonstrable
adverse impact.
[10] Provision to assure health, safety, comfort, convenience
and social and economic security of the residents and
businesses in the Borough.
[11] Provision to assure the continuing economic viability of
the project.
[12] Provision to assure the protection of environmental and
natural resources.
[13] Provision to provide landowners, residents, occupants,
businesses and industries for adverse economic impacts
demonstrably attributable to the facility.
[14] Provision to compensate the Borough, the county and/or
other agencies for the review costs incurred due to the
applicant's proposal.
[15] Provision to provide site access to any and all Borough,
county, state, federal employees and/or their consultants
regarding review of the proposal or the site.
(4) The adequacy of all applicant submissions shall be determined by
the professional engineer and/or consultant as designated by the
Borough Council.
(5) All applicants for special exception under this section shall include
the following certification: "I, the undersigned, under the pains and
penalties of perjury, certify that I have personally examined and am
familiar with the information submitted in the attached documents
supporting the application, prepared by or under the direction of
the developer, and that the information contained in the application
and the supporting documents is true, accurate and complete." The
above application is to be signed by the Chief Executive Officer of
the application entity.
L. Impact study requirements. Any use required to submit a land
development plan or designated as a special exception or conditional
use may be required to submit a community and environmental impact
analysis. The requirement for the analysis will be made by the Borough
Council or the Zoning Hearing Board and shall be completed by
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:558
professionals acceptable to the Borough, but paid for by the applicant.
The analysis may be required to include any or all of the following
information related to the proposed development or use:
(1) Acoustics study. The acoustics study shall identify the existing
background level of noise and the anticipated noise impact from
the proposed use. The report shall contain measures of existing
ambient measurements, estimates or the noise measurements to be
anticipated from the type of operations and equipment that are
proposed for the use, and if there are any significant increases in
those noise levels. The report shall also contain specific proposals
intended to reduce noise levels emanating off the site. The study
shall be based upon actual sound level measurements and
estimates of potential noise impact at the property lines of the site
proposed for the proposed use.
(2) Air quality study. An air quality study shall be prepared and
submitted with the application that shall include an analysis of the
existing and predicted air quality levels, including smoke, odors,
fumes, dust and pollutants at the site. The study shall contain the
sources of the information, the data and background tests that
were conducted, and conclusions and recommendations as to what
would be required to maintain the air quality at a level equal to or
better than the existing background level prior to the proposed use.
(3) Community character impact analysis, including visual and
aesthetic impacts of the proposed facility on adjacent properties
and the community as a whole.
(4) Economic impact analysis. This analysis will focus on the impacts of
the proposed facility on the local and regional economy, including
the following:
(a) Changes to the tax base directly due to the proposed facility,
including property and earned income taxes.
(b) Number of new full- and part-time employment positions
created and/or retained by the facility.
(c) Number of temporary construction jobs created by the facility.
(d) Other effects of the facility on the local and regional economy.
(5) Emergency management and public safety impacts. This analysis
will focus on new and/or special public safety and emergency needs
created by the facility. Consideration should be given to fire
protection, police service and emergency medical and/or
management needs directly associated with the proposed facility.
(6) Geologic analysis and information. The geological analysis will
include an analysis of the geology of the area underlying the
proposed facility.
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:559
(7) Hydrologic and hydrogeologic analysis and information. This
analysis will focus on the following:
(a) An identification of water resources in the area affected by the
proposed facility and an analysis of the projected impacts of
the proposed facility, on groundwater, surface water, wetlands
and floodplains.
(b) Evaluation of the existing surface and subsurface
hydrogeology, based upon historical data and on-site
investigation and studies where such historical data, in the
judgment of the Planning Commission, is inadequate. The
study shall identify groundwater discharge and recharge areas
that may be affected by the proposed use, map the
groundwater table and analyze and delineate the effects of the
proposed use on the hydrology, including surface and
groundwater quantity and quality.
(c) Sources and destinations of surface water runoff, pre- and
post-development runoff volumes and rates, analysis of
chemical additives, erosion and sedimentation control plans,
stormwater management facilities for the two-, five-, ten-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year frequency storms to
prevent any increase in runoff volumes or rates.
(d) Existing and proposed impervious ground cover and the extent
and type of existing and proposed vegetative ground cover.
(e) Existing wetlands and the changes or steps proposed that
would modify or protect the existing wetlands and their
continued viability.
(f) Existing and proposed elevations and contours, areas of slope
in excess of 15%, and proposals to prevent erosion and damage
to such steep slope areas.
(8) Land use impact analysis. This study will focus on the present, past
and adjacent land uses in the area affected by the proposed facility,
and the impacts on and to these land uses by the facility.
(9) Soils analysis and information. This study will identify the soils
classifications in the area affected by the facility, along with an
analysis of the limitations posed by these soils in relation to
proposed activities.
(10) Transportation and traffic impacts. This study will focus on the
following:
(a) A description of the transportation and traffic impact area,
including its major roads and potential traffic generation rates
to be determined by current acceptable traffic generation
references. The impact area shall incorporate all roads to be
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-21
324:560
used by vehicles that will either originate or have a destination
at the proposed facility. Existing twenty-four-hour and peakhour
traffic volume data will be provided for all streets that
provide access to the proposed facility and for all of the
collector and arterial streets that will serve the facility, as well
as any major intersections within the impact area.
(b) Estimates of the total number of vehicle trips to be generated
by the proposed use for a typical twenty-four-hour period,
typical a.m. and p.m. peak periods, and maximum twenty-fourhour
and peak-hour periods, and the assignment of future
twenty-four-hour and peak-hour volumes to the road network
and other streets that will serve the proposed facility based
upon the projection of increased traffic volumes with the
impact area.
(c) Projected twenty-four-hour and peak-hour turning movements
for all access points to the proposed facility at any major
intersection used by traffic originating or destined for the
proposed facility.
(d) A capacity and level of service analysis on the major
intersections and roadways to be impacted by the additional
volumes generated by the proposed use.
(e) Accident analysis of all intersections and roadways within the
impact area, categorized by accident type at each location.
(f) Structural analysis of intersections and roadways to be used by
traffic originating at or destined for the proposed facility,
including designation of areas of inferior design and
inadequate maintenance, and the analysis of the ability of the
existing roads to carry traffic of the volumes and weights that
will be using the roadway for access to or from the proposed
facility.
(g) A description of any street or road improvements that would be
required to avoid problems or traffic congestion, traffic safety
or deterioration to existing streets and roads because of
increased traffic volume or weight of traffic, and the cost
estimates of any proposed improvements that may be required.
(h) Description of any action proposed or offered by the applicant
to correct or alleviate the impact of the proposed facility on the
transportation network.
(i) The source of the standards used, a description of the
procedures and analysis undertaken and the recommendations
and conclusions of the professionals who prepared the report.
(11) Utility capacity analysis. An analysis of the capacity of existing
public utility systems, including sanitary sewer, water supply,
§ 360-21 TAXATION § 360-21
324:561
§ 360-22. Classification of commercial uses.
electricity, storm drainage, telecommunications, natural gas and
other utilities required. The analysis shall determine capacities of
any improvements and documentation from the respective utilities
that service is available.
(12) Other critical resources analysis. The study shall identify other
critical impact areas on-site or off-site that may be impacted by the
proposed facility, including:
(a) The impact on natural vegetation, wildlife, archaeological,
cultural and historic resources.
(b) The protective measures and procedures to protect the critical
areas from damage, and the actions to be taken to minimize
environmental damage to the critical areas on the site and
surrounding areas during and after completion of the
operation.
A. All commercial uses shall be classified according to § 360-22 (Use
Classification Table). Should an applicant propose a use that is not
listed in the Classification Table, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
determine the appropriate use classification.
B. Use Classification Table. Where a question exists as to whether a
proposed use falls within a general use category or a specific use, the
Zoning Officer shall request an advisory recommendation from the
Zoning Hearing Board.
Use Classification Table
General Use
Category:
Commercial Specific Use ClassificationNotes
Adult use or
facility
Class III § 360-21A
Ambulance
service
Class III
Animal sales Class II
Animal boarding Class III
Animal grooming Class II
Animal training Class II
Animal supplies Class II
Animal sales/
service
Veterinary office or
hospital
Class III
§ 360-21 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-22
324:562
Use Classification Table
General Use
Category:
Commercial Specific Use ClassificationNotes
Antique and
craft shops
Sale of collectible
and craft goods
Class I Not to exceed
2,500 square feet
in gross floor area
Antique and
craft shops
Sale of collectible
and craft goods
Class II In excess of 2,500
square feet in
gross floor area
Artist studio Class I
Automobile
sales
Sale of new/used
motor vehicles
Class III
Broadcast
transmission
facility
(unmanned)
Broadcast
transmission
towers
Class III § 360-21C
Building and
construction
materials or
service
Class III
Catering
service
Class I
Commercial
filming
Class I
Bowling alley Class III
Concert facilities
(outdoor)
Class III
Electronic game
center
Class II
Golf course (public
or private)
Class III
Skating rinks Class III
Tennis and racquet
ball courts
Class III
Theaters (indoor) Class II
Commercial
recreation and
entertainment
All other
commercial
recreation and/or
entertainment
Class III
§ 360-22 TAXATION § 360-22
324:563
Use Classification Table
General Use
Category:
Commercial Specific Use ClassificationNotes
Communication
facility
(manned)
Radio and
television stations,
internet facilities
Class II § 360-21C
Commercial
stores (not
classified
elsewhere)
Variable As per review and
action by the
Zoning Hearing
Board
Restaurant,
general
Class II
Restaurant, fast
food
Eating/drinking Class III
establishments
Tavern/supper club Class II
Membership clubs Class I
Financial
institutions
Class II
Food and
beverage sales
Class II
Funeral/
internment
service
Class I
Hair styling
salon/barber
shop
Class I
Home and
business
service
Class I
Group care
facility
Class I
Hardware store Class II
Horticulture Class I
Laboratories Class II
Maintenance
and/or repair
service
Class I Not to include
repair and/or
maintenance of
internal
combustion
engines
§ 360-22 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-22
324:564
Use Classification Table
General Use
Category:
Commercial Specific Use ClassificationNotes
Maintenance
and/or repair of
internal
combustion
engines
Class III
Mall and/or
shopping
center
Class III
Mini-storage Self and ministorage
Class III
Model home
(commercial)
Class III
Nursing home Class III
Medical/dental Class I
Offices Professional offices Class I
Office center Class III
Pawnshop Class III
Personal
improvement
service
Health club, spa Class II
All other Class I
Professional
service
Class II
Public garage Class II
Furniture,
appliance, and
other large
consumer goods
Class II
Convenience store Class II
Retail sales/
rentals
Retail sales Class II
Therapeutic
massage
establishment
Class II
Travel service Class I
§ 360-22 TAXATION § 360-22
324:565
Use Classification Table
General Use
Category:
Commercial Specific Use ClassificationNotes
Car rental Class III
Car wash Class III
Service station Class III
Repair Class III
Sales/rentals Class III
Vehicle/
equipment
sales and
service
Storage Class III
Motels Class III
Visitor Hotels and inns Class II
accommodations
Bed and breakfast Class I
Waste storage,
treatment,
processing and/
or disposal
facilities
Mixed-use district
only
Class III § 360-21K
§ 360-22 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-22
324:566
ARTICLE V
Supplemental Regulations
§ 360-23. General supplemental requirements.
These supplemental regulations shall apply in all districts except where
otherwise specified herein. Compliance with these regulations is the
responsibility of the applicant, subject to verification by the Zoning Officer.
A. Visibility at intersections. No obstruction to vision (except street signs,
utility poles or traffic signs approved by the Borough, and existing
buildings, posts, columns or trees) shall be erected, placed, planted or
allowed to grow in a manner that would impede vision between a height
of 36 inches and eight feet above the grades of the intersecting streets.
This area of unobstructed vision (i.e., clear sight triangle) shall be
determined by lines of sight between points that are a certain distance
(as specified in Table 360-23A) from the center point of the intersection
along the center line of both intersecting streets (see example in Figure
360-23A). Distance from the street intersection shall be determined as
follows:
Table 360-23A: Determination of Clear Sight Triangle
Width of Pavement of the
Wider Intersecting Street
(feet)
Distance Along Center Line
From Intersection
(feet)
Less than 29 30
30 to 39 40
40 to 49 50
50 to 59 60
60 to 69 70
§ 360-23 TAXATION § 360-23
324:567
Figure 360-23A
B. Modifications to height regulations. Chimneys, water tanks, solar
panels or other similar types of appurtenances usually required to be
placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy shall
be allowed to exceed maximum height regulations by 10 feet in all
districts. Appurtenance heights exceeding this allowance must be
approved by variance. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1013]
C. Buildings to have access. All buildings hereafter erected or moved shall
be on a lot adjacent to a public street or a private street approved by the
Borough Council. All buildings shall be located on lots so as to provide
safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required
off-street parking, per § 360-26.
D. Corner lot restriction. On all corner lots there shall be provided the
minimum front yard setback, and a minimum of 150% of the required
side yard setback for the Zoning District in which the corner lot is
situated.
E. Lots in two or more districts. Where a district boundary line(s) divides
any lot in single or joint ownership at the time such line is established,
the more restrictive district regulations shall apply.
F. Lot area and lot width for lots not served with public water and/or
sanitary sewers. Any lot not served by a public water supply and/or
sanitary sewer system, and where municipal, county, state or federal
regulations require a higher standard for lot area or lot width than is
provided for in this chapter, shall be subject to the more restrictive
standards.
G. Right-of-way line. For purposes of measuring front yard setback
requirements, the right-of-way line shall be established by actual deed
or plan description. If no deed or plan description exists, said right-of-
§ 360-23 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-23
324:568
way line shall be established in all districts at a distance of 25 feet from
the center line of the road or street or 1/2 of the road or street right-ofway,
whichever is greater.
H. Through lots. Where a lot extends from a street to an alley, the property
shall be deemed to front upon the street. Where a single lot under
individual or joint ownership extends from one public street to another
parallel or nearly parallel public street, the front lot line shall be
identified by the official U.S. postal address of any structure on the lot.
I. Changes to conforming uses or buildings. Any conforming use or
building may be repaired, maintained, restored or rebuilt to the same
dimensions existing at the time that use or building was originally
constructed or started. Any enlargement or addition to any conforming
use must comply with all area, setback, bulk, impervious coverage and
other requirements of this chapter.
J. Applicability of additional standards and requirements. Applications
involving subdivisions, land development, changes in use and major
expansions are subject to the applicable sections of the Lewisburg
Subdivision and Land Development chapter.58
K. Projections into setback areas. Exceptions to the setback area
requirements in Article IV of this chapter shall be permitted only in the
following instances:
(1) Canopies, eaves, uncovered first-floor steps or landings, pergolas,
arbors, trellises or other architectural landscaping features not
required for structural support may project into required side, rear
or front yard setback areas, but by no more than three feet, as
measured from the wall of the structure.
(2) Porches may project into the required front yard setback areas in
all residential districts a maximum of three feet, and into the rear
yard setback areas of all residential districts a maximum of 10 feet.
(3) Fire escapes and stairs may project into the side or rear yard
setback areas no more than 20 feet but must include a minimum
four-square-foot landing which is within all lot lines.
(4) Off-street parking areas as required in § 360-26 of this chapter.
(5) Room air conditioning units may project into the required setback
areas by no more than 18 inches.
L. Restrictions for solid waste disposal. Owners and/or operators of
facilities for the disposal of wastes subject to municipal, county, state
and/or federal regulations shall verify that all methods and practices of
solid waste disposal comply with all applicable municipal, county, state
or federal statutes, regulations or Ordinances.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 360-23 TAXATION § 360-23
324:569
§ 360-24. Accessory buildings, structures and uses.
M. Restrictions for sewage and liquid waste disposal. Owners and/or
operators of facilities generating sewage and/or liquid waste subject to
municipal, county, state and/or federal regulations shall verify that all
sewage and liquid waste disposal practices comply with all applicable
municipal, county, state or federal statutes, regulations or Ordinances.
N. Restrictions for air pollution. Owners and/or operators of facilities
generating or potentially generating emissions subject to municipal,
county, state and/or federal regulations shall verify that all sources of
air pollution shall comply with all rules and regulations as defined and
established by any municipal, county, state or federal statute,
regulation or Ordinance.
O. Forestry.
(1) These provisions shall not apply to the harvesting of trees for
personal use or the clearing of trees for noncommercial uses.
(2) Forestry uses shall not adversely impact jurisdictional wetlands.
(3) Applicants for a zoning permit for forestry uses shall be required to
provide documentation that such operations will not adversely
impact plants or animals listed as rare, threatened or endangered
in the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Index.
(4) Applicants for a zoning permit for forestry shall be required to
provide documentation that such operations will not adversely
impact plants or animals deemed worthy of protection listed in the
Natural Areas Inventory for Union County.
(5) Applicants for a zoning permit for forestry shall provide copies of a
forestry plan prepared by a professional forester and reviewed and
approved by the Union County Conservation District.
A. All accessory structures shall conform to the bulk, area, height and
setback requirements established in each individual zoning district.
B. Accessory structures are only permitted in the side or rear yards.
Structures accessory to any residential use or structure shall not be
erected less than 10 feet from any portion of the principal structure.
C. Swimming pools. Private noncommercial swimming pools that are
designed to contain a water depth of 24 inches or more shall have a
continuous childproof barrier or fence not less than four feet in height
above the ground or deck level to surround the pool or yard in which
the pool is located. Access to the pool shall be regulated by a lockable
access way. Swimming pools with less than 24 inches shall be exempt.
D. Antenna and satellite dishes. Any freestanding antenna or satellite dish
on a mast over 12 feet in height and any satellite dish greater than 39
inches in diameter shall be considered an accessory structure. Any
§ 360-23 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-24
324:570
§ 360-25. Sign regulations. [Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1013;
2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 1055]
The purpose of this section is to regulate signage of all types visible from
a public right-of-way for the following ends: to protect public safety by
reducing potential hazards associated with signage, to protect and enhance
property values, to preserve the residential character of neighborhoods, to
protect open space, to create an attractive business climate, and to protect
and enhance the overall character of the Borough.
antenna or satellite dish to be erected in the historic district shall
require a zoning permit and will be subject to HARB review, if visible
from the public right-of-way.
E. Solar panels or other energy-generating devices. Any freestanding solar
array or other energy-generating device shall be considered an
accessory structure. Any such energy-generating device erected in the
Historic District shall be subject to HARB review, if visible from the
public right-of-way.
F. Prohibited accessory uses. The following are specifically excluded as
accessory uses, as noted:
(1) Stationary or static trailers used primarily for storage or signage.
(2) Outdoor storage of equipment, supplies or other bulk materials,
unless buffered by screening and/or enclosure.
G. Other accessory uses. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit
other accessory uses not mentioned, so long as such uses are
demonstrably accessory to the principal permitted use of the lot and do
not create a threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
A. Only permanent and time-limited or temporary signs as specified in this
section are allowed to be visible from a public right-of-way. New signs
may require a permit issued by the Zoning Officer, the cost of which
shall be established by resolution of Borough Council, who may from
time to time change such cost by further resolution. All permanent
signs in the historic district requiring a permit require approval by
Borough Council after submission to the Historical Architectural
Review Board for review and a recommendation. Some time-limited or
temporary signs may require approval by Borough Council.
B. Prohibited signs.
(1) Flashing, intermittent, rotating, scrolling, or motorized signs, and
signs in which the lettering, colors, brightness, or position of
elements within the sign change.
(2) Signs that make use of the words "stop," "look," "danger," or other
words, phrases, symbols, or characters in a manner that would
tend to interfere with, mislead, or confuse drivers or other persons.
§ 360-24 TAXATION § 360-25
324:571
(3) String lights having a bulb size in excess of 3/4 inch by 1/4 inch
used in connection with commercial premises for commercial
purposes other than window decorations or storefront decorations
denoting or celebrating a holiday or holiday sales [see Subsection
I(8) of this section].
(4) Any display that makes use of spinners, balloons, searchlights,
pinwheels, and/or streamers.
(5) Off-premises signs, including advertisements for garage, yard, or
other neighborhood sales, except for permanently affixed
commercial center signs in the Highway Commercial District; and
permanently affixed directional signs in both the Highway
Commercial and Bucknell Districts.
(6) Signs that are painted on, affixed to, or transported by a vehicle
and/or trailer that is parked in public view, not used for normal dayto-
day operations of a business or service, and/or not regularly
moved for business or service purposes.
(7) Trademark signs in the Downtown Commercial (DC) and Bucknell
University (BU) Districts, unless they are a corporate logo for the
business or service conducted on the premises where the sign is
located or logos for products or services available on those
premises.
(8) Electronic signs and signs with video display. Other internally
illuminated signs and facade treatments are also prohibited except
as hereinafter specifically allowed (see Subsection H of this
section).
(9) Inflated signs.
(10) Any sign that by reason of its location, brilliance, shape, or color
might be confused with or obstruct the view of any official traffic
sign, signal, or traffic marking.
(11) Signs painted on rocks, trees, or other natural features.
(12) Vertical banners.
(13) Human signs.
(14) Freestanding signs in the Highway Commercial District within a
street right-of-way.
C. Exempt signs.
(1) Official highway route number signs, street name signs,
directional, or other official government (federal, state, county, or
Borough) signs.
(2) Authorized municipal signs of the Borough, including, but not
limited to, traffic, parking, and street-maintenance signs.
§ 360-25 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-25
324:572
(3) Public service signs that do not exceed four square feet in area,
such as those advertising the availability of restrooms, telephones,
or similar public conveniences, and signs advertising meeting
times and places of nonprofit service or charitable clubs, provided
that such signs do not advertise any commercial establishment,
activity, organization, product, goods, or services.
(4) Government flags or insignias not exceeding 80 square feet.
(5) Signs that are a permanent architectural feature of a building or
structure, such as a cornerstone, or identifying letters carved into
or embossed on a building, provided that the letters are not made
of a reflective material nor contrast in color with the building.
(6) A single revolving barbershop pole sign, provided that it does not
exceed 36 inches in height.
D. Sign area.
(1) Determination of sign area.
(a) Where a sign has more than one face, all faces that can be
viewed simultaneously from any single vantage point will be
considered in determining the sign area.
(b) When identifying letters, symbols, designs, or characters
attached to or painted on a building, wall, or window without
an identifiable border or background, the area of such signs
will be calculated or computed based upon the smallest
geometric shape that encompasses all of the letters, symbols,
designs, or characters.
(c) When measuring the sign area of any freestanding sign, such
measurement will include all frames or structures to which the
sign is attached, with the exception of a supporting pole or
poles.
(2) Maximum sign area per business or service.
(a) Maximum gross area is determined by business or service
frontage, one square foot of sign area being allowed for each
linear foot of business or service frontage, except in the
Highway Commercial (HC) District. In the Highway
Commercial (HC) District, two square feet of signage for each
linear foot of business or service frontage will be allowed. See
the accompanying tables in this section for each district to
determine the maximum area allowed for each type of allowed
sign.
(b) Where a business or service fronts on more than one street, the
gross sign area for the business or service will be determined
by the smallest frontage for that specific business or service.
§ 360-25 TAXATION § 360-25
324:573
(3) Maximum sign area per sign. No single sign will exceed 64 square
feet in gross area, even if calculations based on the business or
service frontage may allow larger signs.
E. Quantity. No more than three individual signs of any type will be
allowed for each business or organization. The following exceptions are
allowed: credit card decals or signs of less than 12 square inches, not
exceeding a total of 10 in number; a single address sign or nameplate
not more than two square feet in area; and a single sign of not more
than 36 square inches indicating that a business or service is open.
F. Placement.
(1) Permanent signs will not be located in any public right-of-way.
(2) No sign will be erected in such a manner that, in the determination
of the Zoning Officer, it creates an unsafe condition for motor
vehicles, bicycles, or pedestrian traffic. Signs creating an unsafe
condition include, but are not limited to:
(a) Signs that obstruct free and clear vision at any intersection.
(b) Signs that by reason of size, position, shape, or color may
interfere with or obstruct the view of or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal, or device.
(3) No sign will be positioned in such a way that, in the determination
of the Zoning Officer,59 it hinders pedestrian traffic or violates the
Americans with Disabilities Act or other relevant state or federal
provision of law.
(4) No sign will obstruct the free ingress or egress to or from any door,
window, fire escape, or other exit; obstruct a window, door, or other
opening providing light or air; or interfere with the normal
functioning of any building.
(5) No sign will be erected upon the roof of any building, nor will any
sign extend above the height of the building measured at the lowest
part of the roof or beyond the ends of the wall or surface to which it
is attached.
(6) No sign will be attached to any utility pole, light standard, trafficcontrol
box, fence, or government signpost.
(7) Signs will be exempt from front yard setbacks.
G. Sign safety. Every sign allowed by this section must be constructed of
durable materials and kept in good condition or repair.
H. Illumination.
59.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 360-25 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-25
324:574
(1) Signs may be lighted with nonglaring lights or may be illuminated
by shielded floodlights. No signs will have illumination that is
flashing, moving, intermittent, or changing in brightness or hue. All
electrically illuminated signs will conform to the requirements of
the Borough Building Code and Borough Electrical Code. Also see
Subsections B(8) and B(10) of this section.
(2) Internal lighting.
(a) Only one internally lit sign per business or service is allowed in
the Downtown Commercial District upon recommendation by
the Historical Architectural Review Board and approval by
Borough Council. Such a sign may only be illuminated during
business or service hours.
(b) Internally lit signs are allowed in the Highway Commercial
(HC) District. Also see § 360-29D(5)(e) of this chapter.
(c) Individual design elements of signs in the Downtown
Commercial District, such as lettering, may be internally
illuminated if approved by Borough Council upon
recommendation by the Historical Architectural Review Board.
(d) Internally illuminated signs and design elements of such signs
must diffuse, shield, or enclose the internal lighting in such a
way that individual bulbs or lighting elements are
indistinguishable to the viewer at a distance of three feet.
(3) Halo-illuminated signs within the Downtown Commercial District
are allowed upon recommendation of the Historical Architectural
Review Board and approval by Borough Council. Halo-illuminated
signs are allowed in the Highway Commercial District.
(4) Decorative string lights on commercial premises will be UL-listed
exterior lights and will have a weatherproof cover on the exterior
outlet.
I. Regulations pertaining to signs with specific purpose. Signs described
in subsection I(1) through (5) of this section do not require a permit.
Signs described in Subsection I(6) through (8) of this section require a
permit.
(1) Address signs and/or nameplates. In addition to the street number
required to be affixed to any structure by § 120-1 of the Code of the
Borough of Lewisburg, not more than one sign displaying the street
number and/or name of the occupant of the premises upon which it
is erected will be allowed.
(a) Such sign may be attached to a post not more than six feet in
height and at least three feet from any right-of-way line.
(b) Such sign will not exceed two square feet in area.
§ 360-25 TAXATION § 360-25
324:575
(c) Such sign may be in addition to such other signs as are allowed
by the provisions of this section and will be in addition to the
maximum allowable sign area as established herein.
(2) On-site instructional signs. Instructional signs that are on premises
and designed to guide or direct vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic
(with words such as "Entrance," "Exit," "Parking," "One Way" or
similar instructions) are allowed without restriction as to number.
Such signs will not include any advertising copy, although the name
or logo of the business or service is allowed. Such signs also will
not exceed two square feet in area, and the top of such sign will be
no greater than three feet in height above the grade of the public
street abutting or adjacent to said sign.
(3) Holiday signs and decorations.
(a) Signs, window decorations, or storefront decorations denoting
or celebrating a holiday or holiday sales are allowed and are
exempt from the limit on number of signs allowed, provided
that they are not displayed prior to the generally understood
holiday shopping season for the holiday in question and are
removed within two calendar weeks after the end of that
season.
(b) Other restrictions on size, illumination, and placement of signs
and decorations remain applicable to holiday signs.
(4) Signs indicating no trespassing or private use of a road, driveway,
or premises, and signs controlling fishing or hunting on the said
premises will be allowed. No more than one such sign for every 30
feet of frontage will be allowed.
(5) Signs listing the business or service hours of operation are allowed
and are exempt from the limit on number of signs allowed.
(6) Historical tablets are allowed, upon recommendation of the
Historical Architectural Review Board and approval of Borough
Council.
(7) Signs or bulletins or announcement boards for schools, houses of
worship, hospitals, clubs, or multifamily dwellings of more than 10
units are allowed. Such signs will be on the same lot therewith. No
more than one such sign will be erected on any one street frontage.
(8) A commercial center or mixed-use structure is allowed to have one
sign identifying the center or structure name and one directory
sign identifying the establishments at that location. In addition,
each occupant is allowed one sign proximal to the entrance to each
business or service or the common entrance. Total square footage
of all signs must meet the allowed gross sign area for the building.
§ 360-25 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-25
324:576
J. Regulations pertaining to specific physical types of signs (refer to
§ 360-6 of this chapter for descriptions of these types). All signs
described in this section require a permit.
(1) Freestanding signs. There will be only one freestanding sign per
frontage, with the exception of instructional signs. Freestanding
signs will have no more than two faces.
(2) Sidewalk signs.
(a) Signs placed freestanding on a sidewalk may only be placed on
the sidewalk in front of or beside the building in which the
pertinent business or service is located. Such signs are only
allowed in the Downtown Commercial District; such signs may
be placed no further than one foot from the building. In no case
may such signs, in the determination of the Code Enforcement
Officer, impede pedestrian traffic, impede access to parking, or
violate ADA regulations.
(b) Sidewalk signs may only be displayed during the business or
service hours of operation.
(c) Each face of a sidewalk or freestanding sign may be no more
than seven square feet in area, and the sign may be no more
than two feet wide and three-and-one-half feet high when
opened.
(d) Sidewalk signs will not be illuminated.
(3) Marquee signs.
(a) Such signs may be painted on or attached flat against the
surface of the marquee, but may not extend or project beyond
the marquee or be attached to the underside thereof.
(b) Letters or symbols on such signs will not exceed 16 inches in
height.
(c) The bottom of such signs will have a minimum clearance of
nine feet above the sidewalk.
(4) Projecting signs.
(a) No sign(s) will project beyond four feet from the building or
structure to which it (they) are attached.
(b) All projecting signs will allow a minimum nine-foot clearance
from finish grade.
(c) All signs overhanging any public right-of-way (including
sidewalks) will be covered by a liability insurance policy with a
company authorized to conduct business in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
§ 360-25 TAXATION § 360-25
324:577
(5) Wall signs. No wall sign will project more than four inches from the
building surface, nor extend beyond the ends of the wall to which it
is attached.
(6) Window signs. The total area of all window signs in any single
window will not exceed 30% of the total glass area of that window
and such signs will advertise only on-premises uses, activities,
goods, services, or products.
K. Regulations pertaining to time-limited and temporary signs.
(1) Time-limited and temporary signs requiring a permit.
(a) Over-the-street banners must have the prior approval of
PennDOT and Borough Council.
(b) Signs, window decorations, or storefront decorations denoting
or celebrating a special event pertaining to a business or
service (e.g., anniversaries, grand openings, sales) will be
allowed for a period of time not to exceed one calendar month.
(2) Time-limited and temporary signs not requiring a permit will not
exceed six square feet on a single face and will be placed no more
than one month prior to the event described and removed within
seven days of the end of the event. Such signs include signs
announcing or celebrating a campaign, drive, or event of a civic,
philanthropic, educational, or religious organization; signs
intended to advertise yard, garage, or neighborhood sales; signs
for contractors, developers, architects, engineers, builders,
artisans, and lenders erected and maintained on the premises
where contracted work is being performed; signs offering the sale
or rental of the premises upon which the sign is erected; and signs
designed, intended, or designated to influence the action of voters
for either the passage or defeat of a law, statute, ordinance,
amendment, rule, regulation, or other measure, or of a candidate
for nomination or election to public office in a national, state, or
local election.
L. Nonconforming signs. Any sign legally allowed at the time of the
enactment of this section that does not conform to the standards
contained in this section will be considered a nonconforming use and
may continue until such time as the sign is replaced or relocated, the
structure or size of the sign is altered in any way, or there is a change of
use.
M. Removal of signs.
(1) All signs and/or sign messages will be removed from the premises
within 30 calendar days of the date when the use advertised is no
longer conducted.
§ 360-25 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-25
324:578
(2) When any sign or sign-support structure becomes unsecured, is in
danger of falling, or is otherwise unsafe, the Zoning Officer will
order the removal of said sign and/or structure. If it is the
determination of the Zoning Officer that the sign or structure poses
an imminent danger to the public, the Zoning Officer will have the
power to remove the sign or structure immediately, and the cost of
the removal will be borne by the owner of the property on which
the sign or structure was located.
(3) Time-limited or off-premises signs in the public right-of-way may be
removed by the Zoning Officer or the Borough Manager or his/her
designee at any time without notice or approval of Borough
Council.
(4) The Zoning Officer or the Borough Manager will store any removed
sign for 10 calendar days, after which said sign will be discarded if
not claimed by the sign owner. Removal, storage, or destruction
will be at the sign owner's expense.
N. Sign regulations applicable in Residential Districts (RS, RT1, RT2, and
RT3).
Table 360-25N
Type
Maximum
Gross Area
per Sign
(square
feet)
Maximum
Number
per
Business
or Service Notes
Permit
Required
Awning Not allowed
Freestanding
Address 2 1 See
§ 360-25I(1)
No
Bulletin or
announcement
boards
20 1 per street
frontage
Yes
Marquee Not allowed
Projecting 3 1 See
§ 360-25J(4)
Yes
Time-limited 6 2 No
Wall 1
Address 2 1 See
§ 360-25I(1)
No
Bulletin or
announcement
boards
20 1 per street
frontage
Yes
§ 360-25 TAXATION § 360-25
324:579
Table 360-25N
Type
Maximum
Gross Area
per Sign
(square
feet)
Maximum
Number
per
Business
or Service Notes
Permit
Required
Shopping, office,
or commercial
center signs
20 2 (1 on
building
sign, 1 near
entrance).
1 per
business or
service
near
entrance
See
§ 360-25I(6)
Yes
All other uses 3 1 Yes
Window Not allowed (except for political signs and for
sale/rent signs)
O. Sign regulations applicable to the Mixed-Use (MU) District.
Table 360-25O
Type
Maximum
Gross
Area per
Sign
(square
feet)
Maximum
Number
per
Business
or Service Notes
Permit
Required
Awning 1 per linear
foot of
business or
service
frontage
Clearance
of 6 feet, 9
inches
Yes
Freestanding
Address and/or
nameplate
2 1 See
§ 360-25I(1)
No
One use 2 1 Maximum
height: 9
feet above
finish
grade to
top of sign
Yes
§ 360-25 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-25
324:580
Table 360-25O
Type
Maximum
Gross
Area per
Sign
(square
feet)
Maximum
Number
per
Business
or Service Notes
Permit
Required
Two or more
distinct and
separate uses
4 1 Yes
Marquee 1 per linear
foot of
business or
service
frontage
See
§ 360-25J(3)
Yes
Projecting 9 See
§ 360-25J(4)
Yes
Time-limited 6 2 See
§ 360-25J(4)
No
Wall 1 per linear
foot of
business or
service
frontage
1 See
§ 360-25J(5)
Yes
Address 2 1 See
§ 360-25I(1)
No
Shopping, office,
or commercial
center signs
1 per
building
listing
businesses,
1 per
business or
service
near
entrance
2 (1 on
building
sign, 1 near
entrance)
See
§ 360-25I(6)
Yes
Bed-andbreakfast
2 1 Yes
Bulletin or
announcement
boards
20 1 per street
frontage
Yes
Home occupation 2 1 Yes
Window 30% of
glass area
See
§ 360-25J(6)
Yes
§ 360-25 TAXATION § 360-25
324:581
P. Sign regulations applicable to the Downtown Commercial (DC) District.
Table 360-25P
Type
Maximum
Gross
Area per
Sign
(square
feet)
Maximum
Number
per
Business
or Service Notes
Permit
Required
Awning 1 per linear
foot of
business or
service
frontage
1 Clearance
of 6 feet, 9
inches
Yes
Freestanding
Address Not
allowed
One use 2 1 Maximum
height: 9
feet above
finish
grade to
top of sign
Yes
Two or more
distinct and
separate uses
4 1 Yes
Sidewalk 2 feet by
3.5 feet
high when
opened
1 No more
than one
foot from
building.
On-site
only
Yes
Marquee 1 per linear
foot of
business or
service
frontage
1 See
§ 360-25I(5)
Yes
Projecting 9 1 See
§ 360-25I(7)
Yes
Time-limited 6 2 See
§ 360-25J(4)
No
§ 360-25 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-25
324:582
Table 360-25P
Type
Maximum
Gross
Area per
Sign
(square
feet)
Maximum
Number
per
Business
or Service Notes
Permit
Required
Wall 1 per linear
foot of
business or
service
frontage
1 See
§ 360-25I(9)
Yes
Address 2 1 See
§ 360-25I(1)
No
Bed-andbreakfast
2 1 Yes
Bulletin or
announcement
boards
20 1 per street
frontage
Yes
Home occupation 2 1 Yes
Window 30% of
glass area
See
§ 360-25I(10)
Yes
Q. Sign regulations applicable to the Highway Commercial (HC) District.
Table 360-25Q
Type
Maximum
Gross
Area per
Sign
(square
feet)
Maximum
Number
per
Business
or Service Notes
Permit
Required
Awning 1 per linear
foot of
business or
service
frontage
Clearance
of 6 feet, 9
inches
Yes
Freestanding
Address 2 1 See
§ 360-25I(1)
No
§ 360-25 TAXATION § 360-25
324:583
Table 360-25Q
Type
Maximum
Gross
Area per
Sign
(square
feet)
Maximum
Number
per
Business
or Service Notes
Permit
Required
One or two
distinct and
separate uses
30 1 Maximum
height: 9
feet above
finish
grade to
top of sign
Yes
Three or more
distinct and
separate uses
60 1 Maximum
height: 15
feet above
finish
grade to
top of sign
Yes
Marquee 2 per linear
foot of
business or
service
frontage
See
§ 360-25I(5)
Yes
Projecting 9 See
§ 360-25I(7)
Yes
Time-limited 6 2 No
Wall 2 per linear
foot of
business or
service
frontage
Yes
Address 2 1 See
§ 360-25I(1)
No
Shopping, office,
or commercial
center signs
1 per
building
listing
businesses,
1 per
business or
service
near
entrance
2 (1 on
building
sign, 1 near
entrance)
See
§ 360-25I(6)
Yes
§ 360-25 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-25
324:584
Table 360-25Q
Type
Maximum
Gross
Area per
Sign
(square
feet)
Maximum
Number
per
Business
or Service Notes
Permit
Required
Window 30% of
glass area
See
§ 360-25I(10)
No
R. Sign regulations applicable to the Bucknell University (BU) District.
Table 360-25R
Type
Maximum
Gross
Area per
Sign
(square
feet)
Maximum
Number
per
Business
or Service Notes
Permit
Required
Awning 1 per linear
foot of
business or
service
frontage
Clearance
of 6 feet, 9
inches
Yes
Freestanding
Address 2 1 See
§ 360-25I(1)
No
One or two
distinct and
separate uses
15 1 Maximum
height: 9
feet above
finish
grade to
top of sign
Yes
Three or more
distinct and
separate uses
24 1
Marquee 1 per linear
foot of
business or
service
frontage
See
§ 360-25I(5)
Yes
Projecting 9 See
§ 360-25I(7)
Yes
§ 360-25 TAXATION § 360-25
324:585
§ 360-26. Off-street parking and loading areas.
The purpose of this section is to reduce traffic congestion on public streets
by requiring that all new development activities provide off-street parking
and loading areas. The following regulations are intended to guide the
design of more efficient off-street parking facilities and load areas, to
improve emergency access, to minimize development problems with
neighboring uses and to provide for special parking needs for handicapped
drivers, bicycles and motorcycles.
Table 360-25R
Type
Maximum
Gross
Area per
Sign
(square
feet)
Maximum
Number
per
Business
or Service Notes
Permit
Required
Time-limited 6 2 No
Wall 1 per linear
foot of
business or
service
frontage
Yes
Address 2 1 See
§ 360-25I(1)
No
Window 30% of
glass area
See
§ 360-25I(10)
No
A. General parking impositions and prohibitions.
(1) When applying for a zoning permit to construct, remodel, occupy or
change any structure or any use on a parcel or of a structure, a
parking site plan must accompany the zoning application.
(2) Property owners and residents shall conform at all times to the
parking requirements and/or parking plan that is part of the
approved land development or zoning application.
(3) With the exception of parking spaces for single- and two-family
residential units with fewer than four spaces per property, offstreet
parking areas and access drives shall be of a weatherproof
and cohesive surface comprised of concrete, bituminous pavement,
bricks, pavers or other materials, as approved by the Zoning Officer
or required by the Borough Subdivision and Land Development
chapter,60 as applicable.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 360-25 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-26
324:586
(4) The repair or maintenance of vehicles of any kind, except for
emergency repairs, shall not be permitted in any public parking
space or public lot.
(5) Unless a permitted use in the respective district, only emergency
repairs or repairs made to vehicles owned by the property occupant
shall be permitted in any parking area or accessory structure.
(6) All vehicles which require state licensing and inspection, including
but not limited to cars, trucks, motorcycles, boats and trailers, and
which are not currently licensed and inspected shall not be parked
or stored on any public street or on any lot in any residential
district or in residential use unless said vehicle is in a completely
enclosed building.
(7) Existing uses and buildings approved prior to the enactment of this
chapter shall be exempt from the requirements of § 360-26. If a use
is changed, altered or expanded, or the number of residential uses
is expanded, such changes will automatically terminate all
exemptions to the requirements of this chapter and any subsequent
amendments.
(8) All uses containing drive-in/drive-through uses shall contain a
stacking or waiting lane, in conformance with § 360-26F and the
table in § 360-26F(1) of this chapter.
(9) Off-street parking for nonresidential uses in the Downtown
Commercial District is not required.
(10) All parking facilities shall be adequately maintained.
B. Determination of required number of off-street parking spaces.
(1) The required number of off-street parking spaces for specific uses
shall be calculated using the table in § 360-26B of this chapter.
Table 360-26B — Parking Requirements
Type of Use* 1 Space for Each
Offices, retail businesses and
customer service
establishments
300 square feet of floor area
plus 1 per employee**
Restaurants, taverns,
nightclubs
3 seats
Professional offices Employee** plus 3 spaces, or 5
total spaces, whichever is
greater
In the RT-3 District, a minimum
of 3 off-street parking spaces in
addition to those required for
the residence(s)
§ 360-26 TAXATION § 360-26
324:587
Table 360-26B — Parking Requirements
Type of Use* 1 Space for Each
Motels, hotels Sleeping room plus 1 for each
employee**
Inns, bed-and-breakfast
establishments
Sleeping room in addition to
those required for the
residence(s)
Cinemas, theaters and
auditoriums
5 seats, based on maximum
capacity
Elementary and secondary
public, private, and religiously
affiliated schools
Employee** plus 3 for each
classroom
Technical and commercial
schools
5 classroom seats plus 1 for each
employee**
Child and adult day-care
centers
Employee** plus 3 spaces, in
addition to those for the
residence, where applicable
Social halls, club, and lodges 200.0 square feet of floor area
Recreation facilities and
community centers
200.0 square feet of floor area
plus 1 per employee**
Bowling alleys 2 alleys plus 1 per employee**
Open-air markets 300 square feet of utilized
outdoor space
Hospitals, assisted living and
nursing care facilities
2 beds, plus 1 per employee**
Group care facilities Employee** plus 3 spaces
Independent living units that
are part of a nursing care
complex or retirement
community
Independent living unit
Funeral homes 5.0 seats, based on maximum
capacity
Rooming or lodging houses Rental bedroom
Boarding houses Rental bedroom, plus those for
the residence
Dormitories and fraternities 3 persons in residence
Manufacturing plants and
laboratories
Employee**, but in no case shall
the parking area be less than
25% of the floor area
§ 360-26 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-26
324:588
Table 360-26B — Parking Requirements
Type of Use* 1 Space for Each
Wholesale establishments and
warehouses
Employee**, plus one additional
space for each 1,000 feet of floor
area
Houses of worship 5 seats, based on maximum
capacity
Automotive, building supply
and/or equipment sales
1,500 square feet of indoor and
outdoor sales area
Medical clinics 250 square feet of gross floor
area
NOTES:
* Off-street parking requirements for nonresidential uses are
waived in the Downtown Commercial District.
** Includes owner(s)/operator(s)
(2) Parking for residential uses not specified in § 360-26B.
(a) For single- and two-family dwellings there shall be two spaces
per dwelling unit.
(b) For other residential densities there shall be 0.75 of a parking
space for each bedroom, documented by floor plans supplied
by the applicant, and when the total number of spaces required
results in a fraction, the rounding up to the next whole number
shall be applied. [Amended 6-18-2013 by Ord. No. 1022]
(c) The required number of spaces for home occupations shall be
determined by the Zoning Hearing Board when considering the
special exception use application per § 360-21C.
(d) For all other uses not specified in § 360-26B, the Zoning Officer
shall apply the off-street parking standard specified for the
listed use that is deemed by the Zoning Officer to be most
similar to the proposed use.
(3) Other requirements.
(a) All references to floor area in the table in § 360-26B shall be
defined as gross floor area and shall involve gross floor area of
the structure containing the use, or in the case of outdoor uses
the gross area of where the use occurs.
(b) For the purpose of computing parking requirements based on
employees, students, residents or occupants, calculations shall
be based on the largest number of persons working on any
single shift, the maximum enrollment or the maximum fire-
§ 360-26 TAXATION § 360-26
324:589
rated capacity, whichever is applicable and whichever results
in the greater number of spaces.
(c) Buildings and parcels containing more than one use shall
provide parking spaces equal to the sum of the spaces required
by all the uses of that parcel or in that building, unless the
applicant documents that spaces may be shared due to
different operational hours. The number of spaces required
shall be determined by the use requiring the highest number of
spaces.
(d) Where off-street parking requirements are specified by special
exception requirements (§ 360-21 of this chapter), those
requirements shall take precedence over the table in
§ 360-26B.
(e) Designated parking for physically handicapped persons. A
portion of the total number of required off-street parking
spaces in each public off-street parking area shall be
specifically designated, located and reserved for use by
persons with physical disabilities. Parking spaces reserved for
persons with disabilities shall be counted toward fulfilling offstreet
parking requirements. The minimum number of
handicapped spaces to be provided shall be determined from
the table in § 360-26B(2).
Table 360-26B(2) — Handicapped Parking
Requirements
Total
Parking
Spaces
Provided
Minimum
Number of
Accessible
Spaces
Minimum
Number of
Van-
Accessible
Spaces
Minimum
Number of
Car-
Accessible
Spaces
6 through 12 1 1
13 through 35 2 1 1
36 through 50 3 1 2
51 through 75 4 1 3
76 through
100
5 1 4
101 through
150
6 1 5
151 through
200
7 1 6
201 through
300
8 2 6
§ 360-26 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-26
324:590
Table 360-26B(2) — Handicapped Parking
Requirements
Total
Parking
Spaces
Provided
Minimum
Number of
Accessible
Spaces
Minimum
Number of
Van-
Accessible
Spaces
Minimum
Number of
Car-
Accessible
Spaces
301 through
400
9 2 7
401 through
500
10 2 8
C. Off-site parking. To meet the required number of parking spaces, offsite
or remote parking may be permitted as a conditional use by the
Borough Council. All applicants for off-site or remote parking shall meet
the following standards.
(1) Off-site or remote parking facilities shall be located within 200 feet
of the parcel containing the principal use.
(2) The designated walking path between a use and an off-site parking
site shall not cross streets except at designated cross walks. In the
interest of public safety, no walking path to a principal use shall
cross U.S. Route 15.
(3) The person applying for the conditional use of off-site parking shall
provide a copy of the written contract with the owner of the off-site
parking space(s) that rents or otherwise gives the applicant use of
said space(s). The conditional use permit expires with the
expiration or cancellation of the contract or if Borough monitoring
identifies a pattern of abuse by intended users.
D. General design standards for off-street parking and accesses.
(1) Location and setbacks for off-street parking.
(a) Privately owned parking areas shall be located on the same lot
as the principal use to which they are accessory, except as
permitted in § 360-26C.
(b) Off-street parking shall be permitted only in the area behind
the principal structure, except in the Residential Suburban
(RS) and Highway Commercial (HC) Districts, where this
restriction does not apply, and in the Residential Town Districts
(RT1, RT2, and RT3) where curb cuts for parking to the side of
the principal structure exist at the time of the enactment of
this chapter.
§ 360-26 TAXATION § 360-26
324:591
(c) In all districts the setback for parking areas with five or more
spaces shall be a minimum of five feet from property lines,
eight feet from alleys and 15 feet from public streets.
(2) Parking space dimensions.
(a) Angle spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet.
(b) Parallel spaces shall be a minimum of 10 feet by 20 feet and
perpendicular spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18
feet.
(3) Parking lot aisles. Aisles shall be wide enough to allow for both the
safe and orderly flow of traffic and the safe and orderly movement
of vehicles into and out of parking spaces. Depending on the angle
of the parking spaces, the aisle widths shall be as illustrated in the
drawings below:
(4) Access to parking areas.
(a) All off-street parking facilities shall have accesses that extend
between well-defined points. No off-street parking facility shall
occupy the full width of the lot along any street from which it
derives its access. Accesses shall be designed to insure safety
for adjoining or nearby uses and pedestrian traffic.
(b) For any parking lot with five or more spaces, the width of its
access(es) at the point of intersection with a public right-ofway
shall not be less than 10 feet for one-way traffic or 20 feet
§ 360-26 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-26
324:592
for two-way traffic, but in no case shall the width be more than
22 feet.
(c) For accesses, including driveways, comprising fewer than five
parking spaces, the width at the point of intersection with a
public right-of-way shall not be less than 10 feet or greater
than 22 feet.
(d) The Borough Council, after consultation with a professional
engineer, may require accesses to have widths that exceed
those stated in § 360-26D(4)(b) and 360-26D(4)(c), where
unusual traffic, grade or site conditions exist. In addition, the
Borough Council may require accesses to be constructed with
full curb returns and handicapped ramps, rather than curb
depressions.
(e) All accesses shall be at least 50 feet from any intersection.
(f) The visibility from an access shall not be blocked between a
height of 36 inches and eight feet above the grades of the
intersecting streets for a depth of 10 feet from the face of the
curb. This visibility zone shall extend for at least 80 feet in each
direction along any public right-of-way.
(g) For all nonresidential uses and for all parking lots with five or
more spaces, each off-street parking space shall have its own
access onto an aisle or driveway.
(h) In parking lots with five or more spaces that permit two-way
traffic, paved accesses shall have directional arrows and a
traffic separation stripe the length of the access.
(i) For additional regulations concerning driveways, see Chapter
158 of the Borough's Code of Ordinances.
§ 360-26 TAXATION § 360-26
324:593
(5) Designated parking for physically handicapped persons.
(a) All parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall
comply with the most current revision of the Uniform
Construction Code (UCC) or this section, whichever is more
restrictive. Such spaces shall comply with parking space
dimension standards of this section, in addition to which there
shall be provided boarding areas abutting such spaces in the
following dimensions:
[1] Car-accessible spaces. Car-accessible spaces shall have at
least a five-foot wide boarding area. Two such spaces may
share a boarding area where both are contiguous and
parallel to the boarding area.
[2] Van-accessible spaces. Van-accessible spaces shall have at
least an eight-foot wide boarding area. Two such spaces
may share a boarding area where both are contiguous and
parallel to the boarding area.
(b) Required spaces for persons with disabilities shall be located in
close proximity to building entrances and shall be designed to
permit occupants of vehicles to reach the building entrance on
an unobstructed path and, where feasible, without crossing
traffic lanes.
(c) Required spaces for persons with disabilities shall have signs
and pavement markings identifying them as reserved for
persons with disabilities. Signs shall be posted directly in front
of the parking spaces at a height of no less than 42 inches and
no more than 72 inches above pavement level.
(6) Markings.
(a) Where there are five or more parking spaces, the spaces shall
be identified by surface markings, which shall be arranged to
provide for the orderly and safe loading, unloading and
parking, as well as free circulation of vehicles.
(b) All markings for parking, including striping, directional
arrows, lettering on signs and in handicapped-designated
areas and field color, are required to be maintained so as to be
highly visible.
(7) Screening and landscaping requirements per § 360-30.
(8) Miscellaneous standards.
(a) All parking facilities containing five or more spaces shall be
required to provide bumper blocks, not exceeding six inches in
height, for all spaces if concrete curbing is not utilized.
§ 360-26 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-26
324:594
(b) All parking facilities containing five for more spaces shall be
lighted in compliance with the provisions of § 360-29 of this
chapter.
(c) All stormwater management facilities, including but not
limited to basins, ponds, swales and drainage piping, shall
comply with the Borough's Stormwater Management chapter61
and the applicable watershed stormwater management plan.
(d) No parking facility shall be designed so that parked vehicles
overhang any sidewalks.
E. Passenger drop-off areas and pick-up areas.
(1) All schools and public or private institutional and recreational uses
shall provide an on-site area for drop-offs and pick-ups.
(2) A traffic circulation plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer
for approval prior to the issuance of any permits for the use.
(a) The plan shall describe proposed measures for ensuring safe
and efficient traffic circulation on-site and in the area
surrounding the subject site.
(b) The plan shall also include information about the number of
enrollees or users; the hours of operation and peak loading and
unloading times; the projected number of vehicles that will be
using the loading and unloading area; plans for directing traffic
within the area and other safety measures; and other
information deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer.
(3) Required drop-off and pick-up areas for schools (public or private)
that do not provide or utilize bus transportation on a regular basis
shall be three twelve-foot-by-twenty-foot spaces for every 30
students. Schools that do provide or utilize bus transportation on a
regular basis shall provide, in addition to the aforementioned
spaces, one school bus space for every 30 students, but no more
than nine school bus spaces are required. Drop-off and pick-up
spaces shall not be counted when determining the number of
required off-street parking spaces.
(4) Drop-off and pick-up areas may be adjacent to a roadway, primary
access or aisle, but they shall be located far enough off the roadway
access or aisle that they do not disrupt the flow of traffic on the
roadway.
(5) Minimum widths for drop-off areas shall be 12 feet for one-way
traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic.
(6) Any drop-off and pick-up areas shall be a minimum of 50 feet from
any intersection.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 290, Stormwater Management.
§ 360-26 TAXATION § 360-26
324:595
(7) Passenger drop-off areas shall be paved in a manner acceptable to
the Borough and shall be graded and drained so as to comply with
all applicable stormwater management regulations.
F. Stacking spaces. Certain nonresidential uses dependent on vehicular
traffic shall require vehicle stacking areas. The vehicle stacking
standards of this subsection shall apply unless otherwise expressly
approved by the professional engineer retained by the Borough.
Stacking spaces shall not be counted in determining the number of
required off-street parking spaces.
(1) Minimum number of spaces. Off-street stacking spaces shall be
provided as specified in Table 360-26F(1).
Table 360-26F(1) - Stacking Requirements
Activity Type
Minimum Stacking
Spaces Measured From
Bank teller lane 4 Teller or window
Automated teller
machine
3 Teller machine
Restaurant drivethrough
6 Order box
Restaurant drivethrough
4 Order box to pickup
window
Car wash stall,
automatic
6 Entrance
Car wash stall, selfservice
3 Entrance
Gasoline pump
island
2 Pump island
Other (as
determined by
Borough)
Determined by
parking study
supplied by
applicant
(2) Required stacking spaces are subject to the following design and
layout standards.
(a) Stacking spaces must be a minimum of eight feet by 20 feet in
size.
(b) Stacking spaces may not impede on- or off-site traffic
movements or movements into or out of off-street parking
spaces.
(c) Stacking spaces must be separated from other internal
driveways by raised medians if deemed necessary by the
Borough for traffic movement and safety.
§ 360-26 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-26
324:596
G. Off-street loading spaces.
(1) General requirements.
(a) Loading docks shall be provided for all uses specified in Table
360-26G for uses that require the loading of any truck
requiring a CDL, unless proof is provided that the specific use
does not require a loading dock.
Table 360-26G — Loading Space Requirements
Type of Use
Number of Loading Spaces per
Square Foot of Total Floor Area
Commercial, including
warehouses
1 space per 10,000 square feet
GFA* or fraction thereof
Industrial,
transportation
1 space per 20,000 square feet
GFA* or fraction thereof
Public and recreational
uses**
1 space per 40,000 square feet
GFA* or fraction thereof (unless
under 10,000 square feet GFA in
which case no loading space is
required)
NOTES:
* See Article II, Definitions: Floor Area, Gross (GFA)
** In calculating the number of spaces required for public
and recreational spaces the square footage of roofed
structures, not of open fields, needs to be considered.
(b) No repair work or servicing of vehicles, except for emergency
repairs, shall be conducted in a loading space.
(c) If more than one use is located on a parcel or lot, the number of
loading spaces provided shall be equal to the sum of the
requirements prescribed in Table 360-26G for each use.
(d) In no case shall the required off-street loading space be
considered as part of the area provided to satisfy off-street
parking requirements.
(e) In no case where a building is being erected, converted or
enlarged for commercial, manufacturing or business purposes
shall a public right-of-way be used for loading or unloading
materials.
(2) Location and design standards.
(a) All off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same parcel
or lot as the use they are intended to serve.
§ 360-26 TAXATION § 360-26
324:597
§ 360-27. Fences and walls.
(b) Loading spaces shall not be located within any front, side or
rear setbacks; however, rear or side setbacks may be used for
maneuvering.
(c) Each loading space shall not be less than 45 feet in length and
12 feet in width and shall have an overhead clearance of not
less than 14 feet, except that for mortuaries, cemeteries,
columbariums, and crematories a loading berth used
exclusively for hearses shall not be less than 24 feet in length
and 10 feet in width and shall have an overhead clearance of
not less than eight feet.
(d) Each loading space shall have unobstructed access from a
street, alley or service drive.
(e) Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be
provided on the side of the loading space, except that not more
than one loading space per site may be located in a manner
that would necessitate backing a vehicle across a property line
abutting a street. Alleys may be used for maneuvering.
(f) If loading spaces are illuminated, they shall comply with the
provisions of § 360-29 of this chapter.
(g) All loading spaces shall be screened in accordance with the
provisions of § 360-30 of this chapter.
(h) Loading spaces and their accesses shall be paved in a manner
acceptable to the Borough and shall be graded and drained so
as to comply with all applicable stormwater management
regulations.
A. Fences may be erected, altered and maintained along property lines if
the adjoining property owner provides a written agreement of
concurrence. If there is no agreement with the adjoining property
owner the fence must be placed a minimum of six inches from property
line.
(1) Determining the site of a fence is the responsibility of the applicant
and the Borough assumes no responsibility in relation to actual
property lines.
(2) The applicant is advised to take into consideration future
maintenance needs when determining the site of a fence.
(3) Fences shall not impede access by emergency services personnel.
B. Fence or wall heights shall be measured from finished grade to the top
of the fence or wall at its highest point. Unless expressly provided
otherwise in this chapter, fences and walls shall comply with § 360-23A,
as well as the following general standards.
§ 360-26 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-27
324:598
§ 360-28. Residential protection standards.
(1) The maximum height of a fence or wall in a residential zoning
district shall be six feet, except in required front setbacks, where
the maximum height of a fence or wall shall be 48 inches.
(2) The maximum height of a fence or wall in all other zoning districts
shall be eight feet.
C. Solid fences are permitted in side and rear yards only. Barbed wire and
razor wire fences are prohibited in all districts.
D. In locations where potential health or safety hazards may arise, a
secure fence which prevents access is required to be erected and
maintained.
E. Fences and walls in the Historic Overlay District are under the purview
of the Historical and Architectural Review Board. Construction,
demolition or major alteration of fences and walls in the Historic
District requires HARB review.
A. Operational compatibility standards. Upon the recommendation of the
Zoning Officer, the Borough Council shall be authorized to impose
conditions of approval of any permit for any nonresidential use located
adjacent to a residential use or district to reduce or minimize any
potentially adverse impacts on residential property unless said permit
requires a special exception. In this case the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be authorized to impose conditions. Such conditions may include
but shall not be limited to the following:
(1) Hours of operation and deliveries;
(2) Location on a site of activities that generate potential adverse
impacts on adjacent uses such as noise, dust, odor, glare, etc.;
(3) Placement of trash receptacles;
(4) Lighting location, intensity and hours of illumination;
(5) Placement and illumination of outdoor vending machines,
telephones and similar outdoor services and activities;
(6) Additional landscaping and buffering;
(7) Additional height restrictions to preserve light, air rights, privacy
and views of significant features from public property and rights-ofway;
(8) Preservation of natural lighting and solar access;
(9) Ventilation and control of odors, fumes and gases;
(10) Additional dust control paving.
§ 360-27 TAXATION § 360-28
324:599
§ 360-29. Outdoor lighting.
The purposes of this section are to set and require minimum standards
for outdoor lighting practices and installations that provide for safety and
security, promote energy conservation, minimize adverse impacts of
outdoor lighting, such as glare and light trespass, and protect and retain
the intended visual character of the various Borough districts.
B. Setbacks: Any new nonresidential structure in a nonresidential district
shall maintain fifty-foot side and rear setbacks from any adjacent
existing residential use.
A. General requirements.
(1) Outdoor off-street lighting shall meet the applicable standards as
follows:
Table 360-29A - Outdoor Area Lighting Standards
Zoning District
Maximum
Permitted
Illumination
at the
Property Line
(footcandles)
Maintain
Minimum
Illumination
in Parking
and
Pedestrian
Areas
(footcandles)
Maximum
Permitted
Height of
Luminaire
(feet)
Highway
Commercial (HC)
0.5 (0.1 where
adjoining a
private property
line in a
residential
district)
0.2 20
Downtown
Commercial (DC)
0.5 (0.1 where
adjoining a
private property
line in a
residential
district)
0.2 20
RS, RT1, RT2,
RT3
0.1 0.2
(commercial
parking areas
only)
12 feet
Bucknell
University District
(BU)
0.5 (0.1 where
adjoining a
noncampus
residential
property)
0.2 12
§ 360-28 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-29
324:600
Table 360-29A - Outdoor Area Lighting Standards
Zoning District
Maximum
Permitted
Illumination
at the
Property Line
(footcandles)
Maintain
Minimum
Illumination
in Parking
and
Pedestrian
Areas
(footcandles)
Maximum
Permitted
Height of
Luminaire
(feet)
Mixed Use
District (MU)
0.5 (0.1 where
adjoining a
private property
line in a
residential
district)
0.2 20
Open Space (OS) 0.5 (0.1 where
adjoining a
private property
line in a
residential
district)
0.2 (in
parking areas
only)
At the
discretion of
Borough
Council
NOTES:
1 The maximum permitted illumination is measured in
footcandles at the property lines at ground level.
2 Light illuminating the living space of balconies of multistory
buildings shall not be subject to the twelve-foot height
limitation. Such lighting shall not include flood, spot or
directional lighting and shall be shielded so that neither light
trespass nor glare occurs.
(2) Except where noted in § 360-29E(3) and (4), all luminaires used in
outdoor lighting installations primarily intended for illumination of
horizontal surfaces shall be cutoff luminaire types.
(a) Such installations shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
[1] Pole-mounted luminaires.
[2] Luminaires mounted on the exterior of buildings and
structures.
[3] Luminaires mounted on or within exterior canopies of
buildings or in freestanding canopies.
[4] Pedestal or bollard-mounted luminaires.
§ 360-29 TAXATION § 360-29
324:601
(b) Cutoff luminaires shall not be installed or subsequently placed
in a canted or tilted position that permits candlepower
distribution above the horizontal plane of the luminaire.
(3) All outdoor lighting fixtures maintained on public or private
property shall be turned off between 11:00 p.m. (E.S.T.) and
sunrise, except in the following cases:
(a) When commercial, industrial or governmental uses are
operational during these hours, but only while the business is
being conducted.
(b) Security lighting as approved by the Zoning Officer.
(c) When safety or security lighting is needed for closed
businesses during these hours, as approved by the Zoning
Officer. During these hours the lighting intensity levels shall
not exceed 25% of the levels normally permitted by this
section.
(d) Motion-activated lighting.
(e) When supervised activities are taking place in parks,
playgrounds or recreation areas.
B. Nonconforming lighting. Outdoor luminaires and lighting systems
existing prior to the effective date of this chapter are protected and may
continue as nonconforming structures or uses, except as noted below:
§ 360-29B(1), (2) and (3). Such lighting shall also conform to the
regulation in § 360-29A(3). Nonconforming luminaires and lighting
systems may be maintained and repaired. Maintenance and repair
means replacement of burnout or inoperative lamps and/or
replacement or repair of damaged or inoperative luminaire components
like ballasts, ignitors, lenses, reflectors, refractors, sockets or photocell
controls.
(1) Nonconforming luminaires that pose a safety hazard to pedestrian
or vehicular traffic shall be shielded or redirected to eliminate the
hazard.
(2) Nonconforming luminaires that cause light trespass in excess of
the limits given in Table 360-29A shall, if possible, be shielded or
redirected to eliminate the trespass.
(3) When nonconforming luminaires are replaced with new luminaires
or when nonconforming lighting systems are expanded or
extended, such replacement, expansion or extension shall be done
in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section.
C. Exempt lighting. The following luminaires and/or lighting installations
are exempt from the requirements of this section.
§ 360-29 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-29
324:602
(1) Federal- and state-required security lighting and air travel safety
lighting.
(2) Temporary holiday and special event lighting, except that noncutoff
luminaires shall not exceed 2,300 lumens and shall be situated to
prevent glare and light trespass.
(3) Municipal streetlights, except that the maximum height of the
luminaire shall be 25 feet.
(4) Temporary lighting used by fire, police, rescue or repair personnel
for emergencies or road repair work.
(5) Lighting for municipal parking lots.
D. Specific applications.
(1) Outdoor canopy. The provisions in this section apply to all canopies
associated with service stations and convenience stores; all
canopies over store and office fronts; all marquees and projecting
overhangs; exterior canopies over driveways and building
entrances; and pavilions and gazebos.
(a) Luminaires mounted beneath canopies shall be recessed so
that the lens cover is recessed or flush with the bottom surface
(ceiling) of the canopy and/or shielded by the fixture or the
edge of the canopy so that light is cut-off at less than 90
degrees.
(b) Luminaires shall not be mounted on the top or sides (fascias) of
the canopy and the sides (fascias) of the canopy shall not be
illuminated.
(2) Service station/convenience store lighting.
(a) The average illuminance in the area directly below the canopy
shall not exceed 20 initial footcandles and the maximum shall
not exceed 30 initial footcandles.
(b) Pole-mounted luminaires shall not exceed seven initial
footcandles average illuminance and the maximum shall not
exceed 10 initial footcandles.
(c) Horizontal lamp mounting and flat glass lens are preferred
over vertical lamp mounting. "Sag" or "drop" lenses are
prohibited.
(3) Parking lots.
(a) In all cases, the light standard and luminaires shall not detract
from the visual character of the surrounding district.
(b) Illumination shall not exceed four initial footcandles.
§ 360-29 TAXATION § 360-29
324:603
(4) Security lighting. Security lighting sometimes requires the use of
noncutoff luminaires. Noncutoff luminaires will be permitted
provided that the luminaires used meet the following requirements:
(a) All luminaires shall be shielded and aimed so that the
candlepower distribution is directed toward the area being
secured or protected. Luminaires shall not be directed toward
property lines in such a direction as to cause light trespass;
(b) Security lighting shall not be used to illuminate vertical
surfaces that are higher than eight feet above grade;
(c) Security lighting shall not be mounted on poles that are located
farther than 10 feet from the perimeter of the designated
secured area;
(d) Security lighting used to illuminate a perimeter such as a fence
line shall have motion sensors.
(5) Building facade and landscape lighting requirements.
(a) In nonresidential districts, cutoff luminaires may be mounted
on walls or under roof overhangs to illuminate building
facades, provided that their direct light is confined to the
surface of the building. In residential districts, only the facades
of public buildings of historic or symbolic significance, such as
schools or churches, may be so illuminated, with the same
restrictions applying. In both cases the maximum illuminance
level at the fixture shall not exceed 4,000 lumens.
(b) In nonresidential districts, spotlights, floodlights or other
noncutoff luminaires may be used to illuminate building
facades, provided the lamps are shielded and aimed toward the
functional area being illuminated on the facade. The maximum
illuminance level, at the fixture, shall not exceed 4,000 lumens.
(c) Spotlights, floodlights or other noncutoff luminaires may be
used to illuminate landscaping in all districts, provided the
lamps are shielded and aimed toward the landscape area
intended to be illuminated. The maximum illuminance level of
the fixture shall not exceed 4,000 lumens. The maximum
permitted illuminance at the property line must comply with
the standards set forth in Table 360-29A.
(d) Noncutoff luminaires using globes or period-style fixtures may
be installed on walls or otherwise situated to illuminate only
first level facades, provided that the maximum illuminance
level at the fixture does not exceed 2,000 lumens in
nonresidential districts, or 750 lumens in residential districts,
and the mounting height does not exceed 10 feet above grade.
§ 360-29 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-29
324:604
(e) Neon lighting used to decorate or highlight a building shall be
permitted only in the HC district under the following
requirements:
[1] The cumulative length of neon light tubing that shall be
permitted on the exterior of the building shall be limited to
the amount determined by multiplying the linear length of
all sides of the building parallel to and facing a street or
alley by two, and in no case shall the cumulative length of
such neon lighting exceed 200 linear feet of light tubing
per building.
[2] Neon lighting shall not be located higher than 25 feet
above grade.
[3] The maximum diameter of neon tubing shall not exceed
one inch.
(6) Outdoor facility and event lighting (applies but is not limited to
lighting installations for ball fields, ballparks, stadiums, tennis
courts, soccer fields, golf courses, driving ranges, amphitheaters
and other recreational fields).
(a) Noncutoff luminaires may be used, provided such luminaires
are equipped with glare shields, visors, barn doors or other
shielding. To the extent possible, the illumination shall be
restricted to the playing field, stage or other surface upon
which an event actually occurs.
(b) Only cutoff luminaires shall be used to illuminate areas beyond
the playing field, stage or other surface upon which an event
actually occurs.
(c) The primary light source for all activities shall be turned off
within 60 minutes of the end of the event, but under no
circumstances shall be on past midnight (12:00 a.m.).
E. Additional regulations.
(1) All floodlights and spotlights used for any purpose whatsoever shall
be aimed and/or equipped if necessary with glare shields, visors,
barn doors or other shielding to prevent glare and light trespass
across property lines.
(2) Sweeping laser and searchlight beams are permitted only for
emergency situations or special events that are approved by
Borough Council.
(3) All applications for a major expansion, land development, change in
land use or subdivision of land of or to commercial uses or
multifamily residential uses, or for residential uses that require the
construction of new roads, must include a lighting plan,
superimposed on the site plan, showing location, type, height and
§ 360-29 TAXATION § 360-29
324:605
§ 360-30. Buffers, screening and landscaping.
lumen output of all proposed outdoor lighting. The applicant shall
provide enough information to verify that the proposed lighting
conforms to the provisions of this section.
(4) All residential lighting of 1,750 lumens (approximate brightness of
a one-hundred-watt incandescent light bulb) or more shall be
shielded or aimed so that neither light trespass nor glare occurs.
(5) Outdoor commercial lighting may be provided by various luminaire
types but shall have a Kelvin temperature (light color) of 4,000
degrees or higher.
A. General buffer regulations. Buffer areas act to integrate development
with its surroundings and to separate incompatible land uses.
(1) When a buffer area is required, it shall be a continuous pervious
planting bed consisting of trees and shrubs, as well as grass or
ground cover, of not less than eight feet in depth along the property
line between the incompatible uses.
(2) For every 100 linear feet of buffer, the following minimum
quantities and types of plant material shall be required: one canopy
tree; two ornamental trees; two evergreen trees; and 10 shrubs.
The required plant material shall be distributed over the entire
width of the buffer area.
(3) The requirements above are minimum standards; additional plant
material, berms or architectural elements may be included in the
buffer area at the applicant's discretion.
(4) Existing healthy trees, shrubs or woodland may be substituted for
part or all of the required plant material.
§ 360-29 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-30
324:606
(5) The buffer areas may be included within required setbacks but
must not encroach upon clear sight triangle areas required for
unobstructed views at street intersections and driveways.
(6) Parking is not permitted in the buffer area.
(7) Fences and other accessory structures do not relieve requirements
for landscaped buffers.
(8) A buffer that contains a variety of native plant material arranged in
informal groupings that reflect a naturalistic arrangement is
encouraged.
B. General screening regulations. Screens are intended to provide an
effective visual barrier.
(1) Suitable types of screening include solid fences and dense
evergreen hedges. A solid fence shall be a minimum of four feet and
a maximum of eight feet in height, be constructed of durable and
visually attractive materials and must comply with the
requirements of § 360-27. Plants selected for screening shall be a
minimum of three feet in height at the time of planting and shall be
arranged in such a manner as to provide at least a five-foot visual
barrier within three years after planting. This plant screen shall not
exceed eight feet in height at maturity.
(2) The screen shall be located as close as possible to the object to be
screened without impeding the function of, or encroaching upon,
any clear sight triangles.
(3) Any combination of walls, fences, hedges, shrubs or evergreen
trees may be used to screen the site element as long as it is
demonstrated that the element will be fully screened from view, as
required.
(4) Screening should be selected and located where it will not
contribute to conditions hazardous to public safety. Locations that
would be hazardous include, but are not limited to, underground
and aboveground utilities and sight triangle areas required for
unobstructed views at street intersections.
C. General planting regulations. The following standards shall apply to all
plant materials or transplanted trees, as required under this chapter.
(1) Plantings should be selected and located where they will not
contribute to conditions hazardous to public safety. Such locations
include, but are not limited to, underground and aboveground
utilities and clear sight triangle areas required for unobstructed
views at street intersections.
(2) Plant maintenance.
§ 360-30 TAXATION § 360-30
324:607
(a) Required plant material shall be maintained for the life of the
project to achieve the required visual effect of the buffer or
screen. It shall be the ultimate responsibility of successive
property owners to insure that the required plantings are
properly maintained. Dead or diseased plant material shall be
removed or treated by the property owner and replaced as
necessary at the next growing season.
(b) Any plant material that could endanger safety, such as unstable
limbs, shall be removed and the plant material replaced if
necessary. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner
to maintain all plantings and architectural elements to ensure
a safe environment.
(c) Required plant material shall be maintained to achieve the
intended visual effect of the buffering or screening, so long as
the identified use requires said screening or buffering.
D. Land uses requiring buffers.
(1) Nonresidential uses shall require a buffer area when adjoining a
residential use or residential district.
(2) Multifamily uses shall require a buffer area when adjoining a
single-family or two-family residential use.
(3) An industrial, warehouse or waste storage, treatment, processing
and/or disposal use shall require a twenty-foot buffer area when
adjoining any nonindustrial commercial use, residential use or
public right-of-way.
E. Site elements requiring screening from roads and surrounding land
uses.
(1) Dumpsters, trash disposal or recycling areas.
(2) Service or loading docks.
(3) Outdoor storage.
(4) Vehicle storage (not to include vehicle sales).
(5) Sanitary sewer and water pump stations.
(6) Utility apertures and exposed machinery, in conformance with
§ 360-31F(6).
F. Buffer, screening and landscape requirements for off-street parking.
(1) All off-street parking areas with five or more parking spaces shall
require a minimum eight-foot buffer area within the setbacks from
streets and alleys, as specified in § 360-26D(1)(c).
§ 360-30 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-30
324:608
§ 360-31. Performance standards.
No land or building in any district in the Borough shall be used or occupied
in such a manner so as to create any dangerous or objectionable elements
in such amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area or premises.
(2) All off-street parking areas with five or more parking spaces shall
be screened from adjoining residential uses or districts. Screening
shall be located within the setback area specified in
§ 360-26D(1)(c). Screening may be accomplished by the placement
of buildings, a solid fence, a maintained hedge or any combination
thereof.
(3) Interior landscaping which meets the following requirements shall
be provided for parking areas containing more than 6,000 square
feet of paved area or more than 20 vehicular parking spaces,
whichever is less. Interior landscaping is required in addition to
required buffers and screening.
(a) For every 10 parking spaces, the applicant shall provide not
less than 200 square feet of interior landscaped parking lot
areas containing at least one deciduous tree with a minimum
caliper of two inches and two shrubs.
(b) If interior landscaping requirements cause a shortfall in the
number of parking spots required for the use, as specified in
Table 360-26B, each 200 square feet of area designated for
landscaping may be counted as one parking space.
(c) To assure that landscaped areas are properly dispersed, and to
break up large expanses of parking pavement, no individual
landscape area shall be larger than 500 square feet.
(d) Curbs or wheel stops shall be provided to prohibit bumpers
and bodies of parked vehicles from overhanging an interior
landscape area by more than 2 1/2 feet.
(e) To retain visibility, trees shall have a clear trunk of at least five
feet above the ground. Shrubs and other landscape material
shall not exceed three feet in height.
(4) The location of any landscaping shall not interfere with the
illumination of the parking area.
(5) Parking lot buffers shall be broken only at points of vehicular or
pedestrian access.
(6) Parking lot screening and landscaping shall meet all applicable
provisions of Article VI. Any deciduous tree proposed to be located
in any public right-of-way shall require a shade tree permit issued
under and pursuant to the provisions of the Borough's Shade Tree
Ordinance (Chapter 332).
§ 360-30 TAXATION § 360-31
324:609
All uses of land or building shall initially and continuously comply with all
applicable performance standards established by this chapter or any federal
or state agency.
A. Storage of potential contaminants.
(1) All outdoor bulk storage for fuel, chemicals, industrial wastes and
other hazardous or toxic materials must be on impervious
pavement and shall be completely enclosed by an impervious
barrier high enough to contain the total volume of liquid kept in the
storage area, plus the accumulated rainfall of a fifty-year storm
event of twenty-four-hour duration.
(2) Storage tanks for home heating oil and diesel fuel that do not
exceed 275 gallons in size, and containers of fuels or chemicals
kept in ANSI-ASTM-certified containers, shall be exempted from
this requirement, provided there is no seasonal high water table
(within four feet of the surface), and that rapidly permeable sandy
soils are not present on the site.
B. Toxic materials. No emission of toxic or noxious materials that are
demonstrably injurious to public health and safety or animal and plant
life will be permitted at or beyond the boundaries of any lot. Where
such an emission may result from an accident or equipment
malfunction, adequate precautions for mitigation and safe utilization in
the future shall be taken.
C. Dust, fumes, vapors, gases and odors. Emission of dust, dirt, flyash,
fumes, vapors or gases that could be injurious to human health,
animals, or vegetation; detrimental to the enjoyment of adjoining or
nearby properties; or that could soil or stain persons or property, at any
point beyond the lot line of the use generating such emission, shall be
prohibited. In addition, no land use or establishment shall be permitted
to produce harmful, offensive or bothersome odors, scents or aromas
(such as, but not limited to, those produced by manufacturing process,
commercial food preparation, food processing, fish sales, rendering,
fermentation process, decaying organic matter, and incinerators)
perceptible beyond their lot lines, either at ground or habitable
elevation. The location and vertical height of all exhaust fans, vents,
chimneys or any other sources discharging or emitting smoke, fumes,
gases, vapors, odors, scents or aromas shall be shown on the plan
submitted for a zoning permit, with a description of the source
materials.
D. Glare. No land use or establishment shall be permitted to produce a
strong, dazzling light, or reflection of that light, beyond its lot lines onto
neighboring properties, or onto any public way, so as to impair the
vision of any driver of a vehicle upon that public right-of-way. All such
activities shall also comply with applicable federal and state
regulations.
§ 360-31 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-31
324:610
§ 360-32. Development standards.
All applicants should attempt to conform to the illustrations in Figure(s)
360-32A and 360-32B for the uses specified in this section. However, literal
conformance to the illustrations shall not be mandatory, except for
applications involving subdivisions, land developments, major expansions,
changes in use or when the Historical and Architectural Review Board
(HARB) shall mandate it.
E. Noise. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., noise shall be
required to be muffled so as not to exceed 55 decibels beyond the
property line of the use generating said noise.
F. Compliance with other regulations. Applicants shall conform to the
following:
(1) Refuse disposal. All applicants shall provide for the disposal of all
solid and liquid wastes on a timely basis and in an environmentally
safe manner.
(2) Stormwater run-off. Surface water run-off shall be minimized and
detained on-site if possible or practicable, in accordance with the
Borough Stormwater Management Ordinance.
(3) Erosion control. Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses
and water bodies shall be minimized by employing best
management practices, as approved by the Union County
Conservation District.
(4) Floodplain control. Any proposed use or structure to be located in
any floodplain shall comply with the Borough Floodplain
Management Ordinance, prior to any zoning permit being issued.
(5) Excavation. All excavation activities shall comply with the
Pennsylvania One-Call Regulations.
(6) Electrical/utility apertures. All electrical/utility apertures shall be
installed, protected and screened in accordance with the installing
utility's rules and regulations.
§ 360-31 TAXATION § 360-32
324:611
§ 360-32 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-32
324:612
ARTICLE VI
Floodplain Management
§ 360-33. Interpretation.
The provisions in this article are based on the Pennsylvania Floodplain
Management Act (Act 166 of 1978), the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968, Section 1361, and the National Flood Insurance Program Section
60.3(d), 44 CFR 59, and have been designed to satisfy state and federal
floodplain management requirements and to provide protection from flood
hazards. In any conflict between the provisions herein and those of the
aforementioned acts and programs, whichever is more restrictive shall
prevail.
§ 360-34. General.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of
property and life, the creation of health and safety hazards, the
disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary
and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and
relief, and the impairment of the tax base by:
(1) Regulating uses, activities, and development which, acting alone or
in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and
development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights,
velocities and frequencies;
(2) Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development
from locating within areas subject to flooding;
(3) Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur
in flood-prone areas to be elevated and/or floodproofed against
flooding and flood damage.
B. Applicability. These provisions shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of the Borough's Zoning Ordinance that are identified as
being subject to the one-hundred-year flood as shown on the maps
prepared for the Borough by the Federal Insurance Administration.
C. Coordination with the Uniform Construction Code. The standards and
specifications contained in the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code, PA Act 45 of 1999, and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405, as
from time to time reauthorized and amended, shall apply to activities
regulated under this section to the extent they are more restrictive and/
or supplement the requirements of this chapter.
D. Warning and liability disclaimer. The degree of flood protection sought
by the provisions of this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes, and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study.
Larger floods may occur; flood heights may increase due to man-made
or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by
debris. This chapter does not imply that areas outside any identified
§ 360-33 TAXATION § 360-34
324:613
§ 360-35. Identification of floodplain areas.
floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas, will
be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the Borough or any officer or employee thereof
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administration decision lawfully made thereunder.
E. Flood boundary interpretation. Where interpretation is needed
concerning the exact location of any boundary of any floodplain, the
Zoning Officer shall make the initial determination. The Zoning Hearing
Board shall make final determinations. The person questioning or
contesting the location of the boundary and/or the Zoning Officer's
decision shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his/her case
to the Zoning Hearing Board and to submit his/her own technical
evidence if he/she so desires.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, floodplain areas within the Borough
shall be those areas identified as being subject to the one-hundred-year
flood, as designated in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared for the
Borough of Lewisburg by the Federal Insurance Administration, dated
September 28, 2007, or the most recent revision thereof. A map
showing all areas considered to be subject to the one-hundred-year
flood is available for inspection at the Lewisburg Borough Building, 55
South Fifth Street, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania.
(1) This Floodplain District shall be an overlay to the existing
underlying zoning districts as shown on the official Zoning Map. As
such, the provisions for this district shall serve as a supplement to
the underlying district provisions. Where there happens to be any
conflict between the provision or requirements for the Floodplain
District and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive
provisions pertaining to the floodplain shall apply.
B. Description of Floodplain District areas. For the purposes of this article,
the following nomenclature is used in referring to the various floodplain
areas:
(1) FW (floodway area): The areas identified as "floodway." The FW
(floodway area) shall include that portion of the floodplain area
required to carry and discharge the waters of the one-hundred-year
flood. The channel of the watercourse and portions of the adjoining
floodplains reasonably required to carry and discharge the onehundred-
year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood
insurance studies provided by FEMA, dated September 28, 2007,
or the most recent revision thereof. In an area where no FEMA
maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year
frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary,
that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of
the bank of the stream.
§ 360-34 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-35
324:614
§ 360-36. Permits.
(2) FF (flood fringe area): The areas identified as "flood fringe." The FF
(flood fringe area) shall include that portion of the one-hundredyear
floodplain not included in the floodway. The basis for the
outermost boundary of this area shall be the one-hundred-year
flood elevation contained in the flood profiles of the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying maps.
C. Changes in floodplain area delineations. The identified floodplain area
may be revised or modified by the Borough Council upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission and Borough Engineer,
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
document the need or possibility for such revision. No modification or
revision of any floodplain area identified in the FIS shall be made
without prior approval from the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).
D. Disputes. Should a dispute arise concerning the identification of any
floodplain area or boundary, an initial determination shall be made by
the Zoning Officer. Any party aggrieved by such decision or
interpretation may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board, which shall
have jurisdiction to issue a final determination. The burden of proof
shall be on the appellant.
A. Issuance of zoning and building permit. Prior to the issuance of permits
for any activities regulated under this section, the Zoning Officer shall
review the application to determine if all other necessary governmental
permits or approvals required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act, P.L. 1535, No. 537, January 24, 1966, P.S. § 750.1 et seq., as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania; the Dam Safety and Encroachments
Act, P.L. 1375, No. 325, November 26, 1978, 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania; the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section
404, 33 U.S.C. § 1334; and the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act, P.L.
1987, No. 394, June 22, 1937, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq., as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
B. Application procedures and requirements.
(1) To insure that the flood damage controls required herein are being
employed in all new construction, development and substantial
improvement within any designated floodplain area, including use
of fill, the applicant or developer shall obtain a zoning and building
permit prior to the commencement of any such activity. Any
proposed construction or development located entirely or partially
within any identified floodplain area shall provide the necessary
§ 360-35 TAXATION § 360-36
324:615
information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the Zoning
Officer to determine that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage and conform with the requirements of this and
all other applicable codes and ordinances;
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(2) Applicants shall file the following minimum information, plus any
other pertinent information, e.g., any or all the technical
information contained in § 360-37F(3) as may be required by the
Zoning Officer to make the above determination:
(a) A completed and signed zoning permit application form;
(b) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
[1] North arrow, scale and date;
[2] Topographic contour lines;
[3] All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
[4] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and land
development;
[5] The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessible
ways and parking areas, with information concerning
widths, pavement types and construction, and elevations;
[6] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, buildings, structures and other public or
private facilities, including railroad tracks and facilities,
and any other natural and man-made features affecting or
affected by the proposed activity or development,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(c) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
[1] The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building, based upon National Geodetic Vertical Datum in
§ 360-36 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-36
324:616
the most recent Flood Insurance Study (FIS) (North
American Vertical Datum);
[2] The elevation of the one-hundred-year flood, as designated
in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS);
[3] Information concerning flood depths, pressures, velocities,
impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with
a one-hundred-year flood;
[4] Detailed information concerning any proposed
floodproofing measures;
[5] Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34
Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405, as amended, Sections
1612.5.1, 104.7 and 109.3.3 of the 2003 IBC and Sections
R109.1.3 and 104.7 of the 2003 IRC.
(d) The following data and documentation:
[1] A document, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the construction
or development has been adequately designed to
withstand the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift
forces with the one-hundred-year flood. Such statement
shall include a description of the type and extent of
floodproofing measures which have been incorporated into
the design of the structure and/or the development;
[2] Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§§ 360-37E(6) and 360-37F, including:
[a] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 360-37E(6) and 360-37F
which are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on-site or within structures;
[b] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or
spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed
in §§ 360-37E(6) and 360-37F during a one-hundredyear
flood.
[3] The appropriate component of the DEP's "Planning
Module for Land Development;"
[4] Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of DEP to implement and
maintain erosion and sedimentation control.
C. Review by County Conservation District. A copy of all applications and
plans for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodway area to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the
§ 360-36 TAXATION § 360-36
324:617
§ 360-37. Technical provisions.
Zoning Officer to the County Conservation District for review and
comment prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. The
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by
the Zoning Officer for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
D. Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications for
any proposed construction or development in any identified floodplain
area to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the Zoning
Officer to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g.,
Borough Council, Borough Planning Commission, County Planning
Commission, etc.) for review and comment.
A. General.
(1) No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the Borough
and until all required permits or approvals have been first obtained
from DEP. In addition, FEMA and the DCED Governor's Center for
Local Government Services shall be notified prior to the relocation
of any watercourse.
(2) Any new construction, development, use or activity allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the provisions contained in this section and any
other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
B. Special floodway requirements. Within any FW (floodway area), the
following provisions apply:
(1) Any new construction, development, use, activity or encroachment
that would cause any increase in flood heights shall be prohibited.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed in the
floodway or within 50 feet landward from the top of bank from any
watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from DEP, Bureau of Dams
and Waterway Management. However, the issuance of a permit by
DEP is not a guarantee of approval and the Borough retains
ultimate authority for final approval.
C. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
(1) Residential structures: Within any FW or FF Area, the lowest floor
(including basement) of any new or substantially improved
residential structures shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above the onehundred-
year flood elevation.
(2) Nonresidential structures.
(a) Within any FW or FF Area, the lowest floor (including
basement) of any new or substantially improved nonresidential
§ 360-36 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-37
324:618
structure shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundredyear
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that
the space enclosed by such structure shall remain either
completely or essentially dry during any flood up to that height.
(b) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, having a lowest
floor which is not elevated to at least 1 1/2 feet above the onehundred-
year flood elevation shall be floodproofed in a
completely or essentially dry manner, in accordance with the
W1 or W2 space classification standards contained in the
publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations," published by
the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, March
1992, as amended) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the
proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above-referenced standards.
(c) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in Section 1612.4 of the 2003 IBC and ASCE 24
(Sections 2.4 and Chap. 7) and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401
through 405, as amended, shall be utilized.
(3) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) is prohibited.
(b) Partially enclosed spaces below the lowest floor, which will be
used solely for the parking of vehicles and building access in an
area other than a basement or cellar, shall be designed and
constructed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces
on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. The term "partially enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space;
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade;
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters;
[4] Consideration shall be given to the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code Chapters 401 through 405, as amended, and the
§ 360-37 TAXATION § 360-37
324:619
2003 IRC (Sections 8327.2.1 and 8327.1.4) and the 2003
IBC (Sections 1612.4 and 1202.3).
D. Special provisions for accessory structures.
(1) Accessory structures to a principal building which are proposed to
be built in any identified floodplain area need not be elevated or
floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a minimum, with
the following requirements:
(a) The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to
the storage of tools, material and equipment related to the
principal use or activity.
(b) The floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
(c) The structure shall have a low damage potential.
(d) The structure shall be located on the site so as to cause the
least obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(e) Power lines, wiring and outlets shall be at least 1 1/2 feet
above the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(f) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(g) Sanitary facilities shall be prohibited.
(h) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation
or movements, and shall be designed to automatically provide
for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space;
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade;
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices, provided they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(2) Individuals should be aware that building a structure as described
above could significantly increase the cost of flood insurance for
the accessory structure and its contents.
§ 360-37 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-37
324:620
E. Design and construction standards. The following standards shall apply
for all construction and development proposed within any identified
floodplain area:
(1) Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points.
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted.
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring or settling.
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to three feet horizontal, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to
and approved by the Zoning Officer.
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
(2) Drainage. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the
flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings, where drainage is the
method of conveyance utilized. The system shall also be designed
to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
(3) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(a) All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of
floodwaters.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(c) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area.
(d) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and 34 Pa.
Code Chapters 401 through 405, as amended and contained in
the 2003 IBC (Appendix G), the 2003 IRC (Section 8327.1.6),
the ASCE 24-98 (Section 8.3) and FEMA 348, Protecting
Building Utilities From Flood Damages, shall be utilized.
(4) Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
(5) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 360-37 TAXATION § 360-37
324:621
(6) Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life,
and those listed in § 360-37F(1)(f), shall be stored at or above the
regulatory flood elevation and/or within a completely dry space to
preclude their causing damage to life or property.
(7) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and shall not increase the
height of floodwater. The following shall not be placed or caused to
be placed in the FW (floodway area): fences, except two-wire
fences; other structures or other matter which may impede, retard
or change the direction of the flow of water, or that will catch or
collect debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the
natural flow of the stream or floodwaters would carry the same
downstream to the damage or detriment of either public or private
property adjacent to the flood-prone areas.
(8) Anchoring.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored, in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(b) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(c) The design and construction requirements of the UCC
pertaining to this subsection, as referred in 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405, as amended and contained in the
2003 IBC (Sections 1605.2.2, 1605.3.1.2, 1612.4), the 2003
IRC (Sections 8301.1, 327.1.1) and ASCE 24-98 (§ 5.6), shall be
utilized.
(9) Floors, walls and ceilings.
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing
structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are waterresistant
and will withstand inundation.
§ 360-37 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-37
324:622
(d) Windows, doors and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
(e) The provisions of the UCC pertaining to this subsection and
referenced in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405, as
amended and contained in the IBC (Sections 801.1.3, 1403.7),
the IRC (Sections R327.1.7, R501.3) and ASCE 24-98 (Chapter
6) shall be adhered to, to the extent they are more restrictive.
(10) Paints and adhesives.
(a) Paints or other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(b) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(c) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine or
water-resistant paint or other water-resistant finishing
material.
(d) The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405, as amended and contained in
Sections 801.1.3 and 1403.7 of the 2003 IBC and Sections
327.1.7 and 8501.3 of the 2003 IRC shall be adhered to, to the
extent they are more restrictive.
(11) Electrical components.
(a) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(c) The provisions pertaining to the above and referenced in the
UCC and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405, as amended
and contained in the 2003 IBC (Section 1612.4), the 2003 IRC
(Section 8327.1.5) the 2000 IFGC (Section 8301.5 and
81601.3.8) and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8), shall be utilized.
(12) Equipment.
(a) Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units,
and other electrical, mechanical, or utility equipment or
apparatus, shall not be located below the regulatory flood
elevation.
(b) The provisions referenced in the UCC and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405, as amended and contained in the
2003 IBC (Section 1612.4), the 2003 IRC (Section 8327.1.5)
§ 360-37 TAXATION § 360-37
324:623
the 2000 IFGC (Section 8301.5 and 81601.3.8) and ASCE 24
(Chapter 8), shall be utilized.
(13) Fuel supply systems.
(a) All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from
the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be
made for the drainage of these systems in the event that flood
infiltration occurs.
F. Development which may endanger human life.
(1) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act,62 and the regulations adopted by the Department of
Community and Economic Development, as required by the Act, the
commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used or
intended to be used for any of the following activities, shall be
prohibited in any floodway. The same activities are also prohibited
in the flood gringe, except as permitted in § 360-37F(2). [Amended
4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1013]
(a) Facilities involved with the production, storage or use of any
amount of radioactive substances.
(b) Landfills and solid waste storage, processing and disposal
facilities (does not include municipal recycling centers).
(c) Nursing homes, orphanages, group homes for the mentally and
physically handicapped, day-care centers and residential drug
and alcohol treatment facilities.
(d) Jails, prisons, other penal institutions and community
correctional centers.
(e) Facilities involved in the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances:
[1] Acetone;
[2] Ammonia;
[3] Benzene;
[4] Calcium carbide;
[5] Carbon disulfide;
[6] Celluloid;
[7] Chlorine;
62.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 360-37 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-37
324:624
[8] Hydrochloric acid;
[9] Hydocyanic acid;
[10] Magnesium;
[11] Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen;
[12] Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel, etc.);
[13] Phosphorus;
[14] Potassium;
[15] Sodium;
[16] Sulphur and sulphur products;
[17] Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides);
[18]Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are
not otherwise regulated;
[19] Infectious biological agents;
[20] Explosives; and
[21] Toxic wastes.
(f) Any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more
than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the
dangerous materials or substances listed in Subsection F(1)(e)
on the premises.
(g) New manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing
manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision.
(h) Power generation facilities.
(2) Where a facility, as described in § 360-37F(1), lawfully existed prior
to the enactment of these provisions, such facility can expand in the
flood fringe in accordance with this chapter, provided that any new
construction shall:
(a) Not be a substantial improvement, as defined in this chapter.
(b) Be elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year flood
elevation.
(c) Be designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a one-hundred-year flood. Any such
structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
§ 360-37 TAXATION § 360-37
324:625
accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" (United States Army Corps of Engineers, June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
watertight standard;
(d) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and
any occupants. At a minimum, all new structures shall be
designed, located and constructed so that:
[1] The structure will survive inundation by waters of the onehundred-
year flood without any lateral movement or
damage to either the structure itself, or to any of its
equipment or contents below the one-hundred-year flood
elevation.
[2] The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any
time during the one-hundred-year flood.
(e) Receive special approval for jails, prisons, hospitals, nursing
homes and manufactured home parks, in accordance with the
administrative regulations promulgated by the Department of
Community and Economic Development (DCED) to implement
the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, P.L. 851, No.
166, October 4, 1978, (32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.), as hereinafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania.
(f) Upon receipt of an application for a jail, prison, hospital,
nursing home or manufactured home park, the following
procedures shall apply in addition to those prescribed
elsewhere in this chapter.
[1] Within three working days following receipt of the
application, a complete copy of the application and all
accompanying documentation shall be forwarded to the
Union County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies
of the application shall also be forwarded to the Borough
Planning Commission for review and comment.
[2] If an application is received that is incomplete, the
Borough shall notify the applicant, in writing, stating in
what respects the application is deficient.
[3] If the Borough decides to disapprove an application, it
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval.
[4] If the Borough approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent
§ 360-37 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-37
324:626
information, with DCED by registered or certified mail,
within five working days after the date of approval.
[5] Before issuing the permit, the Borough shall allow DCED
30 days after receipt of the notification to the DCED to
review the application and the decision made by the
Borough.
[6] If the Borough does not receive any communication from
DCED during the thirty-day review period, it may issue a
permit to the applicant.
[7] If DCED should decide to disapprove an application, it
shall notify the Borough and the applicant, in writing, of
the reasons for the disapproval, and the Borough shall not
issue an approval and/or zoning and building permits.
(3) All applications under § 360-37F(2) shall include the following:
(a) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections and exterior building elevations;
(b) Elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and, as
required, the elevation of any other floor;
(c) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors
associated with the one-hundred-year flood;
(d) Detailed information concerning proposed floodproofing
measure;
(e) Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives and
vehicular access ways, including existing and proposed grades;
(f) Plans and profiles of sanitary storm sewer systems, water
supply systems and any other utilities and facilities;
(g) Certification from a registered professional engineer that the
proposed construction has been adequately designed to
protect against damage from the one-hundred-year flood;
(h) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
which contains a complete and accurate description of the
nature and extent of pollution that might possibly occur from
the development during the course of a one-hundred-year
flood, including a statement concerning the effects such
pollution may have on human life and the environment.
G. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(1) Within any floodway area or flood fringe, manufactured homes,
mobile homes, park trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles
§ 360-37 TAXATION § 360-37
324:627
and other similar types of homes, buildings and structures shall be
prohibited.
(2) Where legally existing within any flood fringe before enactment of
this chapter, all manufactured homes and any additions thereto
shall be placed on a permanent foundation and shall be:
(a) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by
providing over-the-top ties and frame ties to ground anchors,
in accordance with the American National Standards, as
specified in the Standard for Installation of Manufactured
Homes, including Manufactured Home Park Requirements
(NFPA No. 01A-1974) (ANSI A119.3-1975), as amended, for
manufactured homes in hurricane zones or other appropriate
standards such as the following:
[1] Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four
corners of the manufactured home with two additional ties
per side at intermediate locations for units 50 feet or more
in length, and one additional tie per side for units less than
50 feet in length;
[2] Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the
manufactured home, with five additional ties per side at
intermediate locations for units 50 feet or more in length,
and four additional ties per side for units less than 50 feet
in length;
[3] All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds;
[4] Shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top of bank of any watercourse;
[5] Shall be placed on a permanent foundation;
[6] Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in
accordance with the manufacturers' installation
instructions, as provided by the manufacturer. Where the
applicant cannot provide the above information, the
requirements of Appendix E of the 2003 International
Residential Code or the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development's Permanent
Foundations for Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition,
draft or latest revision thereto shall apply and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405;
[7] Consideration shall be given to the installation
requirements of the 2003 IBC Appendix G, Section 501.1-3
and the 2003 IRC (Section 8327.1.8 and Appendix AE 101)
or the most recent revisions thereto and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405, as amended, where
§ 360-37 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-37
324:628
§ 360-38. Existing structures and uses in identified floodplain areas.
A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed in any
identified floodplain area prior to the enactment of this chapter but is not
in conformity with these provisions may continue, subject to the following
provisions:
appropriate and/or applicable to units where the
manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be
provided or were not established for the unit(s) proposed
for installation.
(b) Elevated in accordance with the following requirements:
[1] The stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill or on
pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home
will be 1 1/2 feet or more above the elevation of the onehundred-
year flood;
[2] Adequate surface drainage is provided;
[3] Adequate access for a hauler is provided;
[4] Where pilings are used for elevation, the pilings shall be
placed in stable soil not more than 10 feet apart;
reinforcement shall be provided for pilings that will extend
for six feet or more above the ground level.
(3) An evacuation plan, acceptable to the Borough Emergency
Management Coordinator, indicating alternative vehicular access
and escape routes, shall be filed with the Zoning Officer of the
Borough.
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any identified floodway that would cause any increase in the
elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is
started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. The term "substantial improvement" does
not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with any
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
§ 360-37 TAXATION § 360-38
324:629
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
§ 360-38 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-38
324:630
ARTICLE VII
Administration, Enforcement and Hearings
§ 360-39. Interpretation.
The provisions in this article are based on the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,63 as amended. In any conflict
between the provisions herein and those of the aforementioned act,
whichever is more restrictive shall prevail.
§ 360-40. Zoning Officer.
A. Appointment. A Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Borough
Council to administer and enforce this Zoning chapter. The Zoning
Officer shall not hold any elective office within the Borough.
B. Duties and powers of the Zoning Officer. It shall be the duty of the
Zoning Officer to enforce literally the provisions of this chapter. To
carry out this charge, the Zoning Officer shall have all the duties and
powers conferred by or reasonably inferred from this Zoning
Ordinance, as well as those that may be conferred from time to time by
the Borough Council. These powers and duties shall include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(1) Instruct applicants in necessary procedures, receive applications
for and issue zoning permits, as permitted by the terms of this
chapter.
(2) Keep an official record of all business and activities, including
complaints of violation(s) of any of the provisions of this chapter,
along with photographs of the violation and the action taken
consequent to each such complaint. All such records shall be open
and available for public inspection. File copies of all applications
received, permits issued and reports of inspections made in
connection with any structure, building, sign and/or land shall be
retained in hard copy in accordance with Borough policies and
state requirements.
(3) Examine, or cause to be examined, all buildings, structures, signs
and/or land or portions thereof for which an application has been
filed for the erection, construction, alteration, repair, extension,
replacement and/or use of same before issuing any permit.
Thereafter, he/she may make such inspections as necessary during
the completion of work for which a permit has been issued to
determine that the work is progressing in compliance with the
information provided on the permit application and with all
applicable laws and Ordinances of the Borough. Upon completion
of the building, structure, sign and/or change, a final inspection
shall be made. The Zoning Officer may also make inspections as
63.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-39 TAXATION § 360-40
324:631
§ 360-41. Administration.
otherwise necessary to fulfill her/his duties. In order to make
inspections, the Zoning Officer shall have the power to enter upon
any property at any reasonable hour in the course of his/her duties.
Should any property owner, lessee or other person prevent access
to the property in question, the Zoning Officer shall have the
authority, with the approval of the Borough Manager, to obtain a
search warrant for said property.
(4) Issue permits for special exception uses, conditional uses and/or
variances only after applications for such uses and/or buildings
have been approved in writing by either the Zoning Hearing Board,
in the case of special exceptions and/or variances, or the Borough
Council, in the case of conditional uses.
(5) Issue certificates of zoning compliance in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(6) Investigate alleged violations and address violations of this chapter.
(7) Prepare and submit monthly reports to the Borough Council and
provide a copy to the Borough Planning Commission.
(8) Identify and register nonconforming uses and structures created as
a result of the adoption of this chapter or created as a result of
amendments thereto.
(9) Advertise public hearings related to this chapter.
(10) Perform any other such duties as directed by Borough Council, or
as required, to implement and verify compliance with decisions by
the Zoning Hearing Board (ZHB) and Borough Council.
A. Zoning permits. No building, structure or sign shall be erected,
constructed, moved, added to or structurally altered, nor shall land or
any structure be put to any use, nor shall there be a change in use of
land or any structure without the obtaining of a zoning permit, issued
by the Zoning Officer. No zoning permit shall be required for repairs to
or maintenance of any building, structure or grounds provided such
repairs do not change the use or structure or otherwise violate the
provisions of this chapter, as determined by the Zoning Officer.
(1) No permit shall be issued, except in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter, or upon written order from the Zoning Hearing
Board in the form of a special exception or variance, or upon
written order from the Borough Council in the form of a conditional
use, or upon written order from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(2) Applications for a permit shall be submitted in writing in such form
as the Zoning Officer may prescribe. All applicable fees shall
§ 360-40 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-41
324:632
accompany all applications and two sets of drawings or plans
showing, at a minimum, the following information if applicable:
(a) Actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be used;
(b) The exact size and location on the lot of buildings, structures or
signs, existing and/or proposed, including any extensions
thereto;
(c) The number of dwelling units;
(d) Parking plan, indicating the number, size and location of all offstreet
parking spaces and/or required loading areas;
(e) Statement indicating any existing or proposed use(s);
(f) Height of any structure, building or sign existing or proposed;
(g) The name, address and telephone number of the property
owner, the applicant (if different from the owner) and the
estimated value of any proposed improvements;
(h) Any other information deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer
in order to determine compliance with this and any other
applicable ordinances.
(3) Within 30 days from the date of submission of a complete
application, the Zoning Officer shall review the application and the
accompanying site plan, shall perform a site visit to confirm
compliance of the application with the provisions of this chapter
and other applicable ordinances, and either grant or deny the
permit. The Zoning Officer must grant a permit if compliance is
confirmed. If the permit is denied, the applicant must receive a
written statement of the reasons for denial as well as notification of
his/her rights of appeal along with a ZHB hearing application. For
applications involving the review and a recommendation by the
HARB, the thirty-day period begins on the date the Borough
Council approves the HARB's final recommendation.
(4) A zoning permit shall expire 180 days from the date of issuance if
the construction and/or development for which the permit was
issued has not begun. If such construction and/or development did
begin within this one-hundred-eighty-day period but is not
completed, said permit shall expire after two years from the date of
issuance thereof. One-year extension(s) shall be granted, at the
discretion of the Zoning Officer, for a maximum of two additional
years.
(a) Construction and/or development shall be considered to have
started with the preparation of land; land clearing; grading;
filling; excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations;
erection of temporary forms; installation of piling under
§ 360-41 TAXATION § 360-41
324:633
proposed subsurface footings or installation of sewer, gas and
water pipes or electrical or other service lines from the street.
(b) Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request and
applicable fee is submitted by the applicant, which sets forth
sufficient and reasonable cause for the Zoning Officer to
approve such request.
(c) If work is not initiated and/or completed within the time frames
noted herein, the application will be considered void. New
applications for zoning permits, variances, special exceptions
or conditional uses, with all applicable fees as outlined in
§ 360-49, shall be submitted for review and approval before
work can proceed on a project whose original application has
been voided.
(d) Work initiated prior to the issuance of a zoning permit shall be
subject to fees double those outlined in § 360-49.
(5) After the issuance of a zoning permit by the Zoning Officer, no
changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any
of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the Zoning
Officer. Requests for any such change shall be in writing and shall
be submitted by the applicant to the Zoning Officer for
consideration.
B. Certification of zoning compliance. Zoning compliance shall be certified
upon the completion of any work permitted under this chapter. It shall
be unlawful to use and/or occupy any structure, building and/or land or
portions thereof for which a zoning permit has been issued until such
certification of zoning compliance has also been issued.
(1) The applicant shall notify the Zoning Officer in writing upon
completion of the work. The Zoning Officer shall inspect any use,
structure, building, sign and/or land or portions thereof and shall
determine the compliance therewith to the provisions of this
chapter and with any conditions listed on the zoning permit.
(2) Certification of zoning compliance shall be given or refused in
writing, within 30 days of notification of completion of work.
(a) In the event that certification of zoning compliance is refused,
the reasons for said refusal shall be included in the written
notice of refusal and a notice of violation may be issued.
(b) If the Zoning Officer fails to determine zoning compliance
within 30 days of notification of completion of work, the work
for which the permit was issued shall be considered compliant.
(3) In the case of permits where performance standards outlined in
§ 360-31 may pertain, certification of zoning compliance shall be
§ 360-41 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-41
324:634
§ 360-42. Enforcement.
considered provisional until 30 days after the use is fully
operational and there has been a determination that such
standards have been met.
(a) The applicant shall submit documentation of compliance with
all relevant performance standards, as requested by the
Zoning Officer.
(b) Upon completion of the 30 days, if the use is in compliance
with all applicable performance standards, the Zoning Officer
shall notify the applicant, in writing, as to that finding and that
the certificate of zoning compliance is permanent. If within the
thirty-day period the use is found not to be fully compliant with
the applicable performance standards, the applicant will be
notified in writing about any standards that still have not been
met.
(c) In the event that the required performance standards are not
met within 90 days after the start of operation of said use, the
certificate of zoning compliance shall be withdrawn and the
use shall be ordered to cease and desist from operations until
such time as compliance with the performance standards can
be determined by the Zoning Officer.
A. Enforcement notice. If the Zoning Officer deems that a violation of this
chapter or of any detailed statement or plan approved thereunder has
occurred, the Zoning Officer shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending a written enforcement notice to the person, firm, corporation
or partnership deemed responsible for the violation and to the owner of
record of the parcel on which the violation has occurred.
(1) Such written notice, signed by the Zoning Officer, shall be served
personally or sent by certified mail or other method requiring
signed receipt and shall state at a minimum the following:
(a) The party deemed responsible for the violation and the name of
the owner of record of the property in question;
(b) The date and location of the violation;
(c) The specific section of this chapter that has been violated;
(d) The specific action required to correct such violation;
(e) The date by which or the time period within which the violation
must be corrected;
(f) The right of the party to appeal the decision of the Zoning
Officer to the Zoning Hearing Board within the period of time
specified in this chapter, from receipt of notice of the violation,
and the procedures to be followed to file such appeal;
§ 360-41 TAXATION § 360-42
324:635
(g) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with the possible sanctions clearly
described.
(2) Any party who wishes to appeal the decision(s) of the Zoning
Officer to the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council shall
follow the provisions set forth in this chapter per §§ 360-43, 360-44,
360-45 and 360-46.
(3) In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing
Board, the Zoning Officer shall have the responsibility of
presenting the Borough's evidence first.
(4) Any filing fees paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to
the Zoning Hearing Board shall be returned to the appealing party
by the Borough if the Zoning Hearing Board, or any court in a
subsequent appeal, rules in the appealing party's favor.
B. Causes of action. If the property owner or other party who has received
an enforcement notice fails to bring the property in question into
compliance within the time frame specified in the notice and unless the
property owner or party has filed an application for a hearing appealing
the Zoning Officer's determination within the specified period of time
from receipt of the notice of violation, the Zoning Officer shall refer the
matter to the Borough Solicitor, who may initiate an action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building,
structure, sign, landscaping or land use, or to prevent, in or about such
premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
(1) Jurisdiction. The district magistrate shall have initial jurisdiction
for proceedings brought under this section. Any further subsequent
legal action shall be taken to the Union County Court of Common
Pleas, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,64 as reenacted and amended.
(2) Violation remedies.
(a) Any person, partnership or corporation that has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not
more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No
judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the district
justice. If the defendant neither pays nor appeals in a timely
way the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
64.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-42 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-42
324:636
§ 360-43. Zoning Hearing Board.
Pursuant to Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,65 as reenacted and amended, the Borough
Council has created a Zoning Hearing Board, herein referred to as the
"Board," which shall perform all the duties and have all the powers
prescribed by said statute and as herein provided.
(b) Each day that a violation continues beyond the fifth day after
the judgment shall constitute a separate violation.
(c) All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected by
the court for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to the
Borough.
(d) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order
of stay upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Borough Council the
right to commence any action pursuant to this section.
A. Membership of the Board.
(1) The Board shall consist of three residents of the Borough appointed
by the Borough Council.
(2) The terms of office shall be three years, and the terms shall be so
fixed that the term of one member shall expire each year.
(3) Members of the Board shall hold no other office in the Borough,
elected or appointed.
B. Removal of members of the Board.
(1) Any member of the Board may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance or for other just cause by a majority
vote of the Borough Council.
(a) A member shall receive a minimum of 15 days' advance notice
of the intent to take such a vote.
(b) A public hearing shall be held if the member requests one in
writing.
(2) Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Borough Council for
the unexpired portion of the vacated term.
C. Compensation of members of the Board. Members shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by Borough Council by
65.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-42 TAXATION § 360-43
324:637
resolution, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation
authorized to be paid to the members of the Borough Council.
D. Organization of the Board.
(1) The members of the Board shall elect a chairperson and such
officers as the Board determines necessary. Such officers shall
serve a term of one year and may succeed themselves.
(2) The solicitor to the Board shall be appointed by the Board and shall
not be the solicitor to the Borough.
E. General conduct of Board business.
(1) Meetings and hearings of the Board shall be held at the call of the
chairperson and at such other times as the Board by majority vote
may determine.
(2) For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a
quorum of not less than a majority of all members of the Board shall
be present.
(3) The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with this chapter of the Borough and the
laws of Pennsylvania. Upon adoption, such rules as may be
established by the Board shall continue in force and effect until
amended or repealed by the Board, by municipal ordinance or by
federal or state law.
(4) The Board shall keep full public records of its business, which
records shall be the property of the Borough.
(5) The Board shall submit a report of its activities to the Borough
Council as may be requested by the Borough Council. The Board
shall also submit an annual report of its activities to the Borough
Council.
F. Expenditures for services. Within the limits of funds appropriated by
the Borough Council, the Board may employ or contract for secretaries,
clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical or legal staff.
G. Jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board regarding the Borough's
zoning and other land use ordinances. The Board shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the following
matters:
(1) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer including, but
not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit or failure to act
on the application therefor; the issuance of any cease and desist
order; the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot; the interpretation of any district boundary line
or any other official map; compliance with any performance
§ 360-43 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-43
324:638
§ 360-44. Jurisdiction of Borough Council.
The Borough Council shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render
final adjudication in the following matters:
standards, required impact study, or density requirements of this
chapter.
(a) In exercising this power, the Board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision, determination or permit appealed from.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed to deny the appellant
the right to proceed directly to court, when appropriate,
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure relating
to mandamus.
(2) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter, including
the provisions concerning floodplain management (Article VI) or
the Stormwater Management Ordinance,66 pursuant to § 360-45A
of this chapter.
(3) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter pursuant to
the special exception criteria in § 360-45B of this chapter.
(4) Appeals from the decision by the professional engineer retained by
the Borough or the Zoning Officer with reference to the
administration of the floodplain management provisions of this
chapter (Article VI) or the Borough's Stormwater Management
Ordinance.67
(5) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or a
professional engineer retained by the Borough in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with
reference to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater
management, insofar as the same relate to development not
involving the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.68
(6) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those that are brought before the Borough Council involving
a curative amendment.
(7) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal made within 30 days after the effective date of said
Ordinance.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 290, Stormwater Management.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 290, Stormwater Management.
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 360-43 TAXATION § 360-44
324:639
§ 360-45. Standards and criteria for proceedings requiring
hearings.
A. Applications for conditional use pursuant to the conditional use criteria
in § 360-45C of this chapter.
B. Applications for curative amendment to this chapter.
C. All petitions for amendments to this chapter, including the floodplain
management provisions (Article VI).
A. Standards and criteria for variances.
(1) The Board shall, by rule, prescribe the form of application and may
require the submission of a preliminary application to the Zoning
Officer.
(2) The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the following
findings are made where relevant in a given case.
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size
and shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances created by the provisions of this chapter in the
district in which the property is located.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(d) That the variance will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood in which the property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
development of adjacent property nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(e) That the variance will represent the minimum variance that
will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue.
(f) That no nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or
buildings in the same district, and no permitted or
nonconforming use of land, structure or buildings in other
districts, shall be considered grounds for the granting of any
variance.
§ 360-44 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-45
324:640
(g) That in no case shall a variance be granted solely for reasons of
financial hardship or additional financial gain on the part of the
applicant.
(3) When applications for a variance within any identified floodplain
area are being considered, the following provisions also apply:
(a) Variances may be granted for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, provided that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and that the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
(b) Variances may not be granted for any construction,
development, use or activity within any floodway area that
would result in any increase in flood levels during a onehundred-
year flood, as certified by a professional engineer
retained by the applicant and verified by the Borough
Engineer.
(c) Except for a possible modification of the one-and-one-half-foot
freeboard requirement involved, no variance shall be granted
for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to
§ 360-37F.
(d) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Board shall
consider that there is a good and sufficient cause; that failure
to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and that the granting of the variance will neither
result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood
heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary
public expense nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimize the public or conflict with any other applicable state
or local ordinances or regulations.
(e) If a variance from the floodplain management requirements is
granted, the Board shall notify the applicant in writing that the
erection, construction, development, alteration, extension, use
or activity for which the variance is being granted may result
in:
[1] Increased premium rates for flood insurance.
[2] Increased risk to life and property.
(f) Notwithstanding any of the above, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of
resisting a one-hundred-year flood, as certified by a
professional engineer retained by the applicant and verified by
the Borough Engineer.
§ 360-45 TAXATION § 360-45
324:641
(4) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to protect the
public health, safety and welfare, and to achieve the purposes of
this chapter.
(5) All applications for variances shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission for review and recommendation before application for
a hearing is submitted. Lack of recommendation by the Planning
Commission shall be deemed as recommended approval of the
application for a hearing.
(6) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year with regard to Article VI, Floodplain
Management, shall be included in the annual report to FEMA.
B. Standards and criteria for special exceptions.
(1) The Board may grant a special exception, provided the use meets
the following criteria:
(a) The special exception use shall be specifically authorized in the
zoning district, shall meet the special exception criteria
established in Article IV and shall comply with all zoning
standards for that district.
(b) The special exception use shall be consistent with the duly
adopted Lewisburg Borough Comprehensive Plan and Article I
of this chapter, as well as the general purposes and intent of
this chapter.
(c) The special exception use shall not adversely affect the
character of the district, the conservation of property values,
nor the health and safety of residents or workers on adjacent
properties and in the general neighborhood.
(2) In reviewing applications for special exceptions within any
identified floodplain area, the Board shall consider all the criteria
listed above in § 360-45B(1), Article VI, Floodplain Management,
and the following:
(a) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments in the floodway.
(b) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream causing injury to others.
(c) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions.
§ 360-45 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-45
324:642
(d) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owners.
(e) The importance of the services provided by the facility to the
community.
(f) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
(g) The availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding for
the proposed use.
(h) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable
future.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flooding by
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
(k) Any other factors that are relevant to the purposes of the
floodplain management provisions of this chapter.
(3) The Board may attach any reasonable conditions and safeguards as
it may deem advisable and appropriate to any special exception
permit. Refusal of the applicant to accept such conditions shall
result in the revoking of the special exception permit.
(4) If a special exception use requires a variance from this or any other
Ordinance, the special exception use shall not be granted until such
time as the variance may be authorized.
(5) All applications for special exception shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for review and recommendation. Lack of
recommendation by the Planning Commission shall be deemed as
recommended approval of the application to the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(6) Whenever a special exception use of any land, structure or building
has been discontinued and/or not verifiably marketed for a period
of one year, such use shall thereafter revert to permitted uses of the
applicable zoning district.
C. Standards and criteria for conditional uses.
(1) The Borough Council may grant a conditional use provided the use
meets the following criteria:
(a) The conditional use shall be specifically authorized in the
zoning district, shall meet the conditional use criteria
established in Article IV, and shall comply with all zoning
standards for that district.
§ 360-45 TAXATION § 360-45
324:643
(b) The conditional use is compatible with the provisions
contained in the duly adopted Lewisburg Borough
Comprehensive Plan and Article I of this chapter.
(c) The conditional use will not detract from permitted uses in the
district.
(2) In reviewing applications for conditional uses within any identified
floodplain area, the Borough Council shall consider all the criteria
listed above in § 360-45C(1), Article VI, Floodplain Management,
and the following:
(a) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments in the floodway.
(b) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream, causing injury to others.
(c) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and
unsanitary conditions.
(d) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owners.
(e) The importance of the services provided by the facility to the
community.
(f) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
(g) The availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding for
the proposed use.
(h) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable
future.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flooding by
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site.
(k) Any other factors that are relevant to the purposes of the
floodplain management provisions of this chapter.
(3) The Borough Council may attach to any conditional use permit any
reasonable conditions and safeguards it may deem advisable and
appropriate to implement the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance.
(4) When the Zoning Officer determines that a conditional use requires
a variance(s) from the requirements of this or any other Ordinance,
§ 360-45 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-45
324:644
§ 360-46. Procedures for hearings.
The procedures discussed in this section shall apply to all proceedings
before the Board and, where applicable, shall apply to proceedings before
the Borough Council.
the conditional use hearing shall not be scheduled until such time
as the necessary variances have been granted.
(5) Applications for conditional use shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission for review and recommendation prior to the public
hearing. Lack of recommendation by the Planning Commission
shall be deemed as recommended approval of the application to the
Borough Council.
(6) Whenever a conditional use of any land, structure or building has
been discontinued and/or not verifiably marketed for a period of
one year, such use shall thereafter revert to permitted uses of the
applicable zoning district.
A. All hearings shall be held in strict accordance with the procedures
contained in Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,69 as amended.
B. Filings.
(1) All appeals and applications shall be in writing in a form prescribed
by the Board. Such applications shall contain at a minimum:
(a) The specific ordinance and provision(s) of said ordinance
involved;
(b) The interpretation that is claimed for any challenges to the
validity of said ordinance or of the determination of the Zoning
Officer;
(c) The use for which special exception or conditional use is
sought; or;
(d) The details of the variance that is applied for and the grounds
on which it is claimed that the variance should be granted.
(2) All appeals and applications shall be accompanied by all required
filing fees as may be established by the Borough Council.
(3) Time limitations for appeals to the Board.
(a) No person shall be allowed to file an appeal with the Board
later than 30 days after an application has been approved by
the Zoning Officer or other municipal official, unless such
person alleges and proves that he/she had no notice,
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-45 TAXATION § 360-46
324:645
knowledge or reason to believe that such approval had been
given. If such person has succeeded to his/her interest after
such approval, he/she shall be bound by the knowledge of his
predecessor in interest.
(b) All appeals from determinations adverse to landowners shall
be filed by the landowner within 30 days after the
determination is issued.
(4) Stay of proceedings.
(a) Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in this article, and
while such proceeding is pending before the Board, all
activities pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or
approval of the Zoning Officer or any agency or body and all
official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the Zoning
Officer or any appropriate agency or bodies certifies to the
Board facts indicating that such stay would cause imminent
peril to life or property, in which case the development or
official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order that may be granted by the Board or by a
court of competent jurisdiction on petition, after notice to the
Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body.
(b) When an application for development has been duly approved,
and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are
filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant, the
applicant may petition a court of competent jurisdiction to
order such appellant(s) to post bond as a condition to
continuing the proceedings before the Board. At the hearing it
shall be the burden of the applicant to prove the appeal is
frivolous. The question of whether or not such petition should
be granted and the amount of the bond shall be within the
sound discretion of the court. An order denying a petition for
bond shall not be subject to appeal. An order directing the
responding party to post a bond shall not be subject to appeal.
C. Notice.
(1) Written notice of a hearing shall be provided a minimum of 15 days
prior to the hearing and shall consist of a letter prepared by the
Zoning Officer and given to the following: the applicant; Planning
Commission secretary; adjoining property owners; persons making
a timely request and others as designated by the Board. The
written notice of said hearing shall also be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract at least one week prior to the hearing.
(2) Public notice of a hearing shall also be given and shall consist of an
advertisement published once per week for two successive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality not more
than 30 nor less than seven days from the date of said hearing or
meeting.
§ 360-46 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-46
324:646
(3) Notices of hearings shall state the time, place and purpose of the
hearing; the location of the lot or structure involved and the nature
of the relief sought.
(4) In the event that more than one hearing is required or a hearing is
continued to another date, announcement of the next hearing date
at the hearing to be continued shall be deemed adequate notice of
said continued hearing. In the event that the date or time of the
continued hearing subsequently changed, then public notice must
again be provided, as set forth in § 360-46C(1) through (3). If for
any reason the continued hearing is not held within 45 days of the
prior hearing, then public notice must be provided, as set forth in
§ 360-46C(1) through (3).
D. Scheduling of hearings.
(1) Hearings shall be commenced within 60 days from the date of
receipt of the applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed
in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
(2) Any subsequent hearing shall be held within 45 days of the prior
hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or
on the record. An applicant shall complete the presentation of the
case-in-chief within 100 days of the first hearing. Upon the request
of the applicant, the Board shall assure that the applicant receives
at least seven hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the
first hearing. Persons opposed to the application shall complete the
presentation of their opposition to the application within 100 days
of the first hearing held after the completion of the applicant's
case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon request, be granted
additional hearings to complete the case-in-chief provided the
persons opposed to the application are granted an equal number of
additional hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon
the written consent or consent on record by the applicant and the
Borough, be granted additional hearings to complete their
opposition to the application, provided the applicant is granted an
equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
E. Conduct of hearings.
(1) Hearings shall be conducted by the Board. The Board shall not
appoint a member to serve as a hearing officer.
(2) The parties to any hearing shall be the Borough, the applicant, any
person affected by the application who has made timely
appearance of record before the Board and any other person
including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by
the Board. The Board shall have the power to require that all
persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in
writing in a form acceptable to the Board.
§ 360-46 TAXATION § 360-46
324:647
(3) The chairperson or acting chairperson of the Board shall have the
power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and production of relevant documents and
papers, including any witnesses and/or documents requested by
the parties.
(4) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to present evidence and
argument, to respond and to cross-examine adverse witnesses on
all relevant issues.
(5) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(6) The Board shall keep a stenographic record of the proceeding.
(a) The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally
by the applicant and the Borough.
(b) The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if
the transcript is ordered by the Board.
(c) The cost of the transcript shall be paid by any person or party
who might appeal from the decision of the Board.
(d) Additional copies of the transcript shall be paid for by the
person requesting such copy.
F. The Board shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party
or his/her representatives in connection with any issue involved except
upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate.
(1) The Board shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda or other materials, except advice from its solicitor,
unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the
material so noticed.
(2) The Board shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his/her
representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to be
present.
G. The Board shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called
for, make written findings on the application within 45 days after the
last hearing before the Board.
(1) Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,70 as from time to time reenacted and
70.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-46 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-46
324:648
§ 360-47. Mediation option.
Parties to proceedings authorized in this chapter may utilize mediation
as an aid in completing such proceedings. Mediation shall supplement,
not replace, the procedures delineated in this article once they have been
formally initiated.
amended, or of this chapter or of any other ordinance, rule or
regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and
the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of
the facts found.
(2) If the Board finds that a substantive challenge to the validity of any
land use ordinance has merit, the decision of the Board shall
include recommended amendments to the challenged ordinance
that will cure the defects found. In making its decision, the Board
shall take into consideration the factors listed in § 360-53E of this
chapter.
(3) Where the Board fails to render the decision within the required
forty-five-day period, or fails to hold a hearing within the required
sixty-day period, or fails to complete the hearing within 100 days of
the completion of the applicant's case in chief, unless extended for
good cause upon application to the Court of Common Pleas or
unless no action was taken by the Board due to nonpayment by the
applicant of the required fees, the decision shall be deemed to have
been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has
agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
(4) In such case when a decision has been rendered in favor of the
applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a
decision as herein provided, the Board shall give public notice of
said decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to
render such decision, as provided in this chapter. If the Board
should fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.
(5) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of any party
opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(6) A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings, shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to
him/her not later than the day following its date. To all other
persons who have filed their name and address with the Board not
later than the last day of the hearing, the Board shall provide by
mail or otherwise brief notice of the decision or findings and a
statement of the time and place at which the full decision or
findings may be examined.
A. In proceedings before the Board, in no case shall the Board initiate
mediation or participate as a mediating party.
§ 360-46 TAXATION § 360-47
324:649
§ 360-48. Appeals from decisions of Board.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
appeal to the Union County Court of Common Pleas under the procedure
set forth in Article X-A of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act
of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,72 as from time to time reenacted and amended.
Appeals must be filed within 30 days after the date upon which the decision
was rendered by the Board or, in the case of a deemed decision, within 30
days after the date upon which notice of said deemed decision is given.
§ 360-49. Schedule of fees, charges and expenses.
B. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate.
C. The Borough shall assure that, in each case, the mediating parties,
assisted by the mediator as appropriate, develop terms and conditions
for: funding the mediation; selecting a mediator who, at a minimum,
shall have a working knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision
procedures and demonstrated skills in mediation; completing the
mediation, including time limits; suspending time limits otherwise
authorized in this article, provided there is written consent by the
mediating parties and by the applicant or Borough Council if either is
not a party to the mediation; identifying all parties and affording them
the opportunity to participate; subject to legal restraints, determining
whether some or all of the mediation sessions shall be open or closed to
the public; and assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and
signed by the parties and become subject to review and approval by the
appropriate decision-making body, pursuant to the authorized
procedures set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,71 as amended.
D. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in any
subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
A. The Borough Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses for zoning permits, certificates of zoning compliance, Zoning
Hearing Board hearings and conditional use hearings and any other
matters pertaining to this chapter. Fees for hearings may include
compensation for Zoning Hearing Board members and notice,
advertising and administrative costs but fees shall not include legal
expenses, consultant expenses or expert witness costs, which shall be
borne by the applicant.
71.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
72.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-47 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-49
324:650
§ 360-50. Nonconforming lots, uses, structures and buildings.
B. The schedule of fees shall be available for inspection in the office of the
Zoning Officer and no action shall be taken on any application or appeal
until such time as all fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full.
C. The schedule of fees may be altered or amended by resolution of
Borough Council.
A. Statement of intent. Within the zoning districts established pursuant to
this chapter or subsequent amendments thereto, there exist or will
exist certain nonconformities that, if lawful before this chapter was
enacted or amended, may be continued, subject to certain limitations,
although such nonconformities would be prohibited, regulated or
restricted under the terms of this chapter or subsequent amendments
thereto. In order to avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall
be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated
use of any buildings or structures on which actual construction was
lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment to
this chapter and upon which actual building construction has been
diligently carried on.
B. Nonconforming lots of record.
(1) Undeveloped lots of record existing at the date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that do not conform to the regulations
of the Zoning District in which they are located may be used for
primary structures or dwellings and accessory uses upon
application for and approval by the Zoning Hearing Board of a
special exception. In granting such a special exception, the Zoning
Hearing Board should specify setback requirements that
approximate the predominant setback of the developed lots on the
block.
(2) If two or more undeveloped lots, or combinations of undeveloped
lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single
ownership, are of record at the time of adoption of this chapter or
amendment thereto, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the
requirements established for lot width and/or area, the land shall
be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this
chapter. No portion of said parcel shall be developed or sold in a
manner that diminishes compliance with lot width and/or area
requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of
any parcel be made that creates a lot with width or area below the
minimum requirements established in this chapter.
C. Nonconforming uses.
(1) The lawful use of land or a building or structure that at the effective
date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments
thereto does not conform to the use requirements contained
§ 360-49 TAXATION § 360-50
324:651
therein may be continued by the present or any subsequent owner
so long as such use remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
(a) Whenever a nonconforming use of any land, structure or
building has been discontinued and/or not verifiably marketed
for a period of one year, such land, structure or building or any
portion thereof shall thereafter be used only in a manner in full
compliance with this chapter.
(b) Voluntary removal or destruction of the structure or building in
which any nonconforming use is located shall eliminate the use
of the land upon which the structure or building was erected
for such nonconforming use. "Destruction," for the purpose of
this subsection, is defined as damage to an extent of 75% or
more of the market value of said structure or building
immediately prior to such damage or destruction as appraised
for tax assessment purposes utilizing the State Tax
Equalization Board (STEB) report. The determination of the
extent of damage in terms of percent replacement value due to
damage or destruction shall be made by comparing estimates
made by two certified appraisers appointed by the Borough
and the insurance adjuster's estimate of repair cost. The cost
of such appraisals shall be borne by the property owner of the
affected property.
(c) Should the structure or building in which any nonconforming
use is located be destroyed by fire, flood, wind or other means
not of the owner's decision, the nonconforming use may be
continued in the reconstructed structure or building, but the
structure or building shall not be reconstructed in any manner
that increases the use's nonconformity, except as provided in
§ 360-50D(2). If reconstruction has not commenced within one
year of the date of such destruction, reconstruction and
subsequent use shall be in full compliance with this chapter
and all other applicable regulations.
(2) A nonconforming use may be altered or expanded upon application
for and approval by the Zoning Hearing Board of a special
exception provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) Expansion of the nonconformity shall be confined to the lot on
which it is located on the effective date of this chapter or any
amendment thereto creating the nonconformity.
(b) Extension of any nonconforming use shall be permitted only
once and shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of any
building or, if an outdoor use, 25% of the gross land area
occupied by said nonconforming use at the time of the adoption
and/or amendment of this chapter.
§ 360-50 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-50
324:652
(c) Provision for building height, building area and impervious
surface shall be consistent with the standards required for any
permitted structure or building in the zone in which the
nonconformity in question is located; however, the existing
nonconforming setback may be continued or extended but not
increased.
(3) Any nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, shall not
thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use.
(4) A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use upon application for and approval by the Zoning Hearing Board
of a special exception provided that the Zoning Hearing Board shall
find that the proposed use is equally or more appropriate in the
Zoning District in which the use is located than the existing
nonconforming use and that the proposed use will have no more
adverse effect on adjacent properties than the existing
nonconforming use in relation to signs and lighting, traffic
generation and movement, parking and loading, and any applicable
performance standards.
D. Nonconforming structures or buildings.
(1) Structures or buildings that at the effective date of this chapter or
subsequent amendments thereto do not conform to the
requirements contained therein by reason of restrictions on area,
maximum impervious coverage, height, setbacks, location on the
lot or other requirements concerning the building or structure may
be continued to be used, maintained and repaired so long as such
structure or building remains otherwise lawful. However, no
nonconforming structure or building shall be for any reason moved
any distance unless it shall thereafter conform to the zoning
regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
(2) A nonconforming building or structure may be altered or expanded
subject to the following provisions:
(a) Such alteration or expansion is confined to the lot on which the
nonconforming structure is located on the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment thereto creating the nonconformity.
(b) Such alteration or expansion does not create other or
additional nonconformities or further increase existing
nonconformities, although nonconforming setbacks may be
continued or extended.
(c) Such alteration or expansion is in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter or only extends any existing
nonconformity relative to a setback or setbacks and does not
enlarge said nonconformity. (An example is if a landowner
proposes enlarging his residence along the existing front
§ 360-50 TAXATION § 360-50
324:653
building line which is set back two feet less than the required
20 feet).
(3) There may be additions or improvements to dimensional
nonconformities upon application for and approval of a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board provided that the following
conditions are met:
(a) Such addition or improvement is confined to the lot on which
the nonconforming structure is located on the effective date of
this chapter or any amendment thereto creating the
nonconformity.
(b) The addition or improvement shall not create other or
additional nonconformities.
(c) Appearance is harmonious with surrounding properties.
(d) Landscaping and buffer yards in accordance with applicable
requirements should be provided to protect neighboring
properties.
(4) Should a nonconforming structure or building be destroyed by fire,
flood, wind or other means not of the owner's decision, it shall not
be reconstructed in any manner that increases its nonconformity. If
reconstruction has not commenced within one year of the date of
such destruction, reconstruction shall be in full compliance with
this chapter and all other applicable regulations.
(5) In cases where two or more uses or principal structures, exclusive
of any accessory structures, exist on a single parcel, all such
buildings or uses shall comply with all requirements of this chapter
and subsequent amendments that would normally apply to each
building or use if each were on a separate lot. In cases where
existing multiple uses and/or primary buildings are nonconforming,
any alterations or modifications shall be consistent with § 360-50B
and C of this chapter.
E. Registration of nonconformities. To facilitate the administration of this
chapter, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to prepare and
maintain an accurate listing of all nonconforming uses and structures in
all districts. As far as records make possible, any previous permitted
extensions of any nonconforming uses should be noted in the listing of
those uses. The listing of nonconformities shall be a matter of public
record.
(1) Uses permitted by right, special exception, conditional use and/or
variance shall be so noted on a permanent record of the subject
parcel.
(2) All nonconforming uses and structures shall be registered
separately and an accurate listing maintained. The Zoning Officer
§ 360-50 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-50
324:654
shall submit an annual report to the Planning Commission
regarding the status of all nonconforming uses and structures.
(3) This listing shall constitute sufficient notice of the nonconforming
status of said uses and/or structures and the limitations therein
expressed and implied to any transferee acquiring any right to use
or own such property.
F. Buildings under construction. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed
to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any
building or structure of which the construction or use was lawfully
begun prior to the effective date of adoption of or amendment to this
chapter and of which construction or use has been diligently carried on.
G. Status of subdivision or land development plan.
(1) From the time an application for approval of a plan, whether
preliminary or final, is duly filed as provided for in the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO),73 and while such
application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of the Zoning Ordinance shall affect the decision on
such application adversely to the applicant, and the applicant shall
be entitled to a decision in accordance with the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance as it stood at the time the application was duly
filed. In addition, when a preliminary application has been duly
approved, the applicant shall be entitled to final approval in
accordance with the terms of the approved preliminary application
as hereinafter provided. However, if such an application is properly
and finally denied, any subsequent application shall be subject to
the intervening change in the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) When an application for approval of a SALDO plan, whether
preliminary or final, has been approved without conditions or
approved by the applicant's acceptance of conditions, no
subsequent change or amendment in the zoning shall be applied to
affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to
complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance
with the terms of such approval within five years from such
approval. The five-year period shall be extended for the duration of
any litigation, including appeals, which prevent the
commencement or completion of the development and for the
duration of any sewer or utility moratorium or prohibition which
was imposed subsequent to the filing of an application for
preliminary approval of a plan. In the event of an appeal filed by
any party from the approval or disapproval of a plan, the five-year
period shall be extended by the total time from the date the appeal
was filed until a final order in such matter has been entered and all
appeals have been concluded and any period for filing appeals or
requests for reconsideration have expired, provided, however, that
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 360-50 TAXATION § 360-50
324:655
no extension shall be based upon any water or sewer moratorium
which was in effect as of the date of the filing of a preliminary
application. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary
approval, the five-year period shall be counted from the date of the
preliminary approval.
§ 360-50 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-50
324:656
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
§ 360-51. Statutory authority.
§ 360-52. Procedure for enactment of any and all amendments.
A. The provisions of this chapter and the boundaries of the zoning
districts, as set forth on the Zoning Map, may from time to time be
amended or changed by the Borough Council, in accordance with the
provisions contained in this article and the provisions of Section 609 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805,
No. 247,74 as from time to time reenacted and amended.
B. The provisions of this Article are based on Sections 609 and 610 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247,75 as from time to time reenacted and amended. In any conflict or
discrepancy between the provisions herein and those of the
aforementioned act, the provisions of the act shall prevail.
A. Prior to voting on the enactment of any amendment the Borough
Council shall hold at least one public hearing.
(1) Public notice of this hearing shall be given, as delineated in
§ 360-46C(2) of this chapter.
(2) For rezoning, excluding that associated with the comprehensive
review and updating of the zoning ordinance, the following
notifications shall also occur:
(a) Notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by
the Zoning Officer along the perimeter of the tract(s) to be
affected at least seven days prior to the date of the hearing;
(b) Written notice shall be provided at least 30 days prior to the
date of the hearing by first class mail to the addresses to which
real estate tax bills are sent for real property located within the
area being rezoned, as evidenced by real estate tax records
within the possession of the Borough. The notice shall include
the location, date and time of the public hearing.
B. In the case of an amendment, other than that prepared by the Borough
Planning Commission, the Borough Council shall submit such
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such proposed amendment to provide the planning
commission an opportunity to submit recommendations.
74.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
75.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-51 TAXATION § 360-52
324:657
C. All proposed amendments shall be submitted by the Borough Council to
the Union County Planning Commission for review and
recommendation at least 30 days prior to the public hearing.
D. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include any land
not previously affected by it, the Borough Council shall submit said
amendment back to the Union County Planning Commission for review
and recommendation and hold another public hearing before
proceeding to vote on the amendment.
E. Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless public notice of
proposed enactment is given and the proposed amendment is also made
available for public view.
(1) Content of notice. The notice of proposed enactment of an
amendment shall include:
(a) The time and place of the meeting at which enactment will be
considered;
(b) A reference to where copies of the proposed amendment may
be examined without charge or obtained for a charge not
greater than the cost of preparing the copies.
(2) Public notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation
not more than 30 nor less than seven days prior to the date of
proposed enactment. Such notice shall be printed a minimum of
once a week for two consecutive weeks.
(3) Notice shall be conspicuously posted in the Borough building at
least two weeks prior to the proposed enactment.
(4) In addition to the notice of the enactment, the full text of the
proposed amendment, or a summary thereof prepared by the
Borough Solicitor, shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation not more than 60 nor less than seven days prior to
passage pursuant to Section 610 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,76 as from time to time
reenacted and amended.
(5) In the event that amendments being made to this chapter are
substantial ("substantial" being defined as amending more than
one article of this chapter), before voting upon any enactment the
Borough Council shall, at least 10 days prior to scheduled
enactment, readvertise in one newspaper of general circulation a
brief summary of the amendment setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail.
76.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-52 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-52
324:658
§ 360-53. Procedure for landowner curative amendments.
F. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment shall be
forwarded to the Union County Planning Commission.
G. Zoning amendments shall be incorporated into official ordinance books
by reference with the same force and effect as if duly recorded therein.
A. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive ground the
validity of this chapter or of the Official Map or any provision thereof
that prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he/
she has an interest may choose to submit along with his/her challenge a
proposed amendment(s) to cure the alleged defects therein. A written
request that such a challenge and proposed curative amendment(s) be
heard and decided upon shall be submitted to the Borough Council,
pursuant to the provisions of Section 609.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,77 as
amended. In addition, the landowner shall submit plans and
explanatory material describing the use or development he/she
proposes to cure the alleged defects of the challenged ordinance or
map in order to provide sufficient basis for the Borough Council to
evaluate the challenged ordinance or map.
B. The Borough Council shall commence a hearing thereon within 60 days
of the request, pursuant to public notice in accordance with
§ 360-46C(2) of this chapter, unless the landowner requests or consents
to an extension of time. The public notice shall include notice that the
validity of this chapter or map is in question and the place and time
when a copy of the request, including any plans, explanatory material
or proposed amendments, may be examined by the public.
C. The landowner curative amendment shall be referred by the Borough
Council to the Lewisburg Borough and Union County Planning
Commissions for review and recommendation.
D. The hearing shall be conducted by the Borough Council, in accordance
with § 360-46E, F and G of this chapter and Section 908 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247,78 as amended. All references therein to the Zoning Hearing Board
shall, for the purposes of this section, be references to the Borough
Council. However, the provisions of Section 908 (1.2) and (9) of the Act
shall not apply and the provisions of Section 916.1 of the Act shall
control.
E. Borough Council shall consider the curative amendment, the plans and
explanatory material submitted by landowner and shall also consider:
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
78.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-52 TAXATION § 360-53
324:659
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units to classes of persons otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of this chapter or
map.
(3) The suitability of the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands,
floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural features
for the intensity of the proposed use.
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts.
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agricultural and
other uses that are essential to public health and welfare.
F. The Borough Council shall render its decision within 45 days after the
conclusion of the last hearing. If the Borough Council fails to act on the
landowner's request within this time period, a denial of the request is
deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last
hearing.
G. The landowner curative amendment shall be deemed denied when:
(1) The Borough Council fails to commence the public hearing within
60 days of the request;
(2) The Borough Council notifies the landowner that it will not adopt
the curative amendment;
(3) The Borough Council adopts another curative amendment, which is
unacceptable to the landowner; or
(4) The Borough Council fails to act on the landowner's request within
45 days after the close of the last hearing, unless the time is
extended by mutual consent by the landowner and the Borough.
H. In the event that Borough Council does not accept a landowner's
curative amendment brought in accordance with this subsection, and a
court subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court's
decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for the entire
Zoning Ordinance and map but only for those provisions which
specifically relate to the landowner's curative amendment and
challenge.
§ 360-53 LEWISBURG CODE § 360-54
324:660
§ 360-54. Procedure for municipal curative amendments.
Should the Borough Council determine that this chapter or any portion
thereof is substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
A. The Borough Council shall declare, by formal action, this chapter or
portions thereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days following such
declaration and proposal the Borough Council shall:
(1) By resolution make specific findings setting forth the invalidity of
this chapter or any of its provisions. Such findings may include:
(a) References to those specific uses that are either not permitted
or not permitted in sufficient quantity;
(b) Reference to a class of use or uses that require revision;
(c) Reference to the entire chapter that requires revision.
(2) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
B. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Borough Council shall enact a curative amendment to cure the declared
invalidity.
C. Upon initiation of the procedures set forth above, the Borough Council
shall not be required to consider or entertain any landowner's curative
amendment filed under § 360-53, nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be
required to provide a written decision. Upon completion of the
procedures set forth above no rights to a cure pursuant to the
provisions of § 360-43G or 360-53 shall, from the date of declaration
and proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
invalidity of the unamended chapter.
D. The procedures for a municipal curative amendment may not be utilized
for a period of 36 months following the date of enactment of a municipal
curative amendment. However, if after the date of declaration and
proposal there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon
the Borough by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of an Appellate
Court decision, the Borough may utilize the provisions of this section to
prepare a curative amendment to fulfill said duty or obligation.
§ 360-54 TAXATION § 360-54
324:661

ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 360-55. Reviews and appeals.
Proceedings for securing review and/or appeal of any ordinance, decision,
determination or order of the governing body, its agencies or officers
adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be in strict accordance with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipal Planning Code Act of 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247,79 as amended.
§ 360-56. Remedies.
In case any building, structure or land is, or is proposed to be, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained or
used in violation of this chapter, the governing body, or with their approval
the Zoning Officer, in addition to other remedies, may institute in the name
of the Borough any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such building, structure or use in or about such premises,
or any act, conduct, or business constituting a violation.
§ 360-57. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
this chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so decided
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 360-58. Conflicting provisions.
Ordinance No. 928, enacted December 19, 2000, as amended, is hereby
expressly repealed and all other existing ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent herewith are hereby expressly repealed to the extent necessary
to give this chapter full force and effect.
§ 360-59. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon enactment.
§ 360-60. Zoning Map.
The Zoning Map, for purposes of district identification, shall be the Zoning
Map adopted as part of this chapter and posted in the Offices of the Borough
and Borough Zoning Officer. Any reproductions, reductions or copies of said
map shall be for information purposes only. Amendments to the Zoning Map
shall be made by ordinance and a new Zoning Map prepared within 30 days
of said amendment.
79.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-55 TAXATION § 360-60
324:663
Appendix
Chapter A370
FEES
§ A370-1. Fees established.
The following fees have been established by resolution of Borough Council.
§ A370-2. Circuses and carnivals.
Fees for circuses and carnivals shall be as follows:
§ A370-3. Construction activities.
Fees for construction activities (regulated by BOCA codes) shall be as
follows:
A. Circus or carnival for each day of operation: $100/day.
B. Amusement ride: $10/day; $50/week.
C. See provisions of Chapter 134, Circuses and Carnivals, § 134-2B.
A. New construction and additions.
(1) The permit fee for all new construction and additions to existing
structures shall be determined by the Building Officer by
multiplying gross square footage of the new construction or
addition by the most current regional construction cost data, as
established and published from time to time by BOCA
International, by the permit fee multiplier of .006.
(2) Use Groups shall include the following:
A-1 Assembly, theater (with stage)
A-1 Assembly, theater (without stage)
A-2 Assembly (night clubs)
A-3 Assembly (restaurants)
A-4 Assembly (churches)
B Business
E Educational
F-1 Factory and industrial (moderate hazard)
F-2 Factory and industrial (low hazard)
H High hazard
I-1 Institutional (supervised environment)
I-2 Institutional (incapacitated)
§ 360-60 LEWISBURG CODE § A370-3
324:664
I-3 Institutional (restrained)
M Mercantile
R-1 Residential (hotels)
R-2 Residential (multifamily)
R-3 Residential (one- and two-family)
S-1 Storage (moderate hazard)
S-2 Storage (low hazard)
(3) Types of construction shall include the following: 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B,
2C, 3A, 3B, 4, 5A and 5B, which are defined in the BOCA Basic
Building Code.
B. Other construction.
(1) Alterations and rehabilitation. Except as otherwise provided
hereinafter, the permit fee for construction involving the alteration
and/or rehabilitation of existing structures shall be determined by
the Building Official by multiplying the gross square footage of the
area to be altered or rehabilitated by 1/2 of the most recent
regional construction cost data, as established and published from
time to time by BOCA International, by the permit fee multiplier of
0.006. The minimum fee charged will be the current hourly wage
charge to the Borough of Lewisburg by the Building Codes Official.
Structures included in these fees are:
(a) Freestanding accessory buildings.
(b) Decks more than 18 inches above grade or greater than 50
square feet or with utilities.
(c) Residential roof replacement of entire roof structure.
(d) Commercial-industrial roofing.
(e) Siding.
(f) Residential patio roof-car port.
(g) Mobile home replacement.
(h) Swimming pools/residential and commercial.
(i) Unspecified construction.
(2) Demolition and moving of buildings.
(a) Moving of building: $250.
(b) Demolition of structures with utilities:
[1] Single-family: $200.
§ A370-3 TAXATION § A370-3
324:665
§ A370-4. Code enforcement activities.
All services, inspections, investigations, prosecution preparation, or any
other work performed in the administration of the building codes
enforcement program which are not specifically mentioned hereinabove or
in those situations where the schedule of fees is not reasonably sufficient
to cover the cost of administrating the code enforcement activities shall
be charged at the hourly rate then in effect for services charged by the
Building Codes Officers to the Borough. For complaint investigations which
result in a finding of no violation, no fee shall be charged to the alleged
violator.
§ A370-5. Curb and sidewalk construction. [Amended 8-17-2010 by
Res. No. 10-06]
Pursuant to § 300-5C, the permit fee for sidewalk and curb construction
shall be $25.
§ A370-6. Driveway construction.
Fees for driveway construction shall be as follows:
§ A370-7. Fire escrow.
Fees for fire escrow shall be as follows:
[2] Fees for all other buildings will be charged by multiplying
the gross square footage times 1/2 of the most recent
regional cost data, as established and published from time
to time by BOCA International, by the permit fee multiplier
of 0.006. The minimum fee will be the current hourly rate
charged to the Borough of Lewisburg by the Building
Codes Official.
(3) Periodic inspections.
(a) All inspection fees will be charged at the current hourly rate
charged the Borough of Lewisburg by the Building Codes
Official. The minimum fee charged shall be the rate of 1/2 hour.
This will include apartments, hotels/motels, signs, commercial
and industrial buildings.
(b) For the purpose of the above periodic inspection fees, all
structures owned, leased or used by schools, both public and
private, churches, public or quasi-public bodies shall be
treated as commercial, except for dormitories which shall be
treated as dwellings or rooming units.
A. Inspection fee: $ 25.
A. Administrative fee: $350.
§ A370-3 LEWISBURG CODE § A370-8
324:666
§ A370-8. Municipal parking lots. [Amended 1-16-2007 by Res. No.
07-01; 3-20-2018 by Res. No. 18-05]
§ A370-9. Refuse collection and disposal. [Amended 12-20-2005 by
Res. No. 05-07; 11-18-2008 by Res. No. 08-12; 12-20-2011 by Res.
No. 11-16; 11-19-2013 by Res. No. 13-0880]
Fees for refuse, collection and disposal of (placed at ground level), shall be
as follows:
A. The number of available parking spaces and the monthly permit fee to
be paid for a parking permit in the following off-street municipal
parking lots shall be as follows:
(1) Municipal Parking Lot No. 1: 20 spaces and $35 per month;
(2) Municipal Parking Lot No. 2: 30 spaces and $35 per month;
(3) Municipal Parking Lot No. 6: 48 spaces and $35 per month.
B. A parking permit shall be issued for a period of one month to 12 months
in a calendar year.
C. Applications for parking permits shall not be accepted until after
December 15 of the preceding calendar year and shall be considered in
the order that they are received.
A. From each dwelling unit, a flat fee of $58.50 per quarter, except with
respect to rooming and boarding houses, which shall pay a flat fee of
$58.50 per quarter for each family residing therein, and with respect to
apartment houses and multifamily dwellings, which shall pay a flat fee
of $58.50 per quarter for each dwelling unit therein, less a reduction of
17.5% in the total flat fee to be paid when there are 50 or more units.
B. From each home occupation and/or professional office, a flat fee of
$58.50 per quarter in addition to the fee for any dwelling unit.
C. From each hotel, restaurant, school, church, institution, commercial
and industrial establishment, fraternity and sorority house, etc., with a
bulk container, $10 per pickup for each cubic yard of bulk container.
Bulk containers have a capacity of two, three and four cubic yards and
will be supplied by the Borough. The capacity of the bulk container to
be supplied by the Borough shall be determined by the Borough
Manager.
D. From each hotel, restaurant, school, church, institution, commercial
and industrial establishment, fraternity and sorority house, etc.,
without a bulk container, a flat fee of $58.50 per quarter in addition to
the fee for any dwelling unit.
80.Editor's Note: This resolution stated that the fees would take effect 1-1-2014.
§ A370-8 TAXATION § A370-9
324:667
§ A370-10. Street excavations. [Amended 12-20-2005 by Res. No.
05-07]
Fees for street excavation permits shall be as follows:
§ A370-11. Subdivision of land. [Amended 9-15-2009 by Res. No.
09-07]
E. Any apartment houses, multifamily dwellings, etc., with three or more
dwelling units which desires a bulk container shall pay a service charge
of $15 per month in addition to the fee set forth in Subsection A above.
F. For temporary dumpsters for houses and commercial establishments:
(1) A fee of $25 shall be charged for the placement of a temporary
dumpster for 30 days;
(2) A fee of $25 shall be charged for each additional month the
temporary dumpster is required; and
(3) A dumping fee of $20 for a two-cubic-yard container, $30 for a
three-cubic-yard container, and $40 for a four-cubic-yard container
shall be charged.
A. Fees for street excavations:
(1) Permit application fee: $50.
(2) Fee per 100 linear feet of opening: $40.
(3) Fee per surface opening of less than 36 square feet: $30.
(4) Inspection fee (when required): $90 per hour.
(5) Six-month extension fee: $25.
(6) Amendment to permit fee: $25.
B. Degradation fees for pavement excavations occurring in pavements less
than five years old: [Amended 1-17-2017 by Res. No. 17-01]
(1) Roadway pavement age of less than five years: $1,000.
(2) Roadway pavement age of less than four years: $2,000.
(3) Roadway pavement age of less than three years: $3,000.
(4) Roadway pavement age of less than two years: $4,000.
(5) Roadway pavement age of less than one year $5,000.
A. Plan processing fees. The following fees shall be paid for the
processing, review, and evaluation of proposed subdivision and/or land
development plans under the jurisdiction of the Borough of Lewisburg
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.81 All such fees shall be
§ A370-9 LEWISBURG CODE § A370-11
324:668
§ A370-12. Transient retail merchants.
Fees for transient retail merchants shall be as follows:
paid to the Borough of Lewisburg and shall be paid at the time of
application and plan filing. No plans shall be considered filed until
the appropriate fee is received. [Amended 11-15-2016 by Ord. No.
16-08]
(1) Sketch plans - no charge.
(2) Subdivision Plans:
(a) Add-on Subdivisions (lot additions): $300, plus $25 per lot or
unit beginning with the first lot or unit; and
(b) Subdivisions: $600, plus $25 per lot or unit (includes residual
as lot) beginning with the first lot or unit.
(3) Land development plans: $600.
(4) Combined subdivision/land development plans: $600 plus $25 per
lot or unit beginning with the first lot or unit.
(5) Final plans (if necessary after a preliminary plan): $300.
(6) Preliminary opinion pursuant to PA MPC: $1,000.
(7) Stormwater and/or drainage plans: $600.
B. Reviews by others. The applicant shall reimburse the Borough of
Lewisburg for all reasonable and necessary charges (as per the PA
MPC) by the Borough Engineer or other specialized consultants for
review of subdivision and land development plans where the Planning
Commission deems such review necessary. All engineering or
consulting fees shall be in accordance with the ordinary and customary
charges by the Borough Engineer or consultant for similar service in
the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost
charged by the engineer or consultant to the Borough when fees are not
reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants. Plans will not be
approved nor released for recording until all fees are paid in full.
C. Inspection fees. Where improvements are required by the Borough to
be installed, as a condition of final approval of a subdivision or land
development plan, said improvements must be inspected by the
Borough Engineer at intervals during construction and upon
completion. The applicant shall reimburse the Borough for all
reasonable and necessary expenses associated with the inspection of
improvements by the Borough Engineer.
A. Registration fees:
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ A370-11 TAXATION § A370-12
324:669
§ A370-13. Zoning. [Amended 9-21-2010 by Res. No. 10-07;
11-15-2016 by Res. No. 16-07]
The zoning fee schedule shall be as follows:
(1) One day: $ 10.
(2) One week (or fraction): $ 20.
(3) One month (or fraction): $ 50.
(4) One year (or fraction): $100.
A. Zoning permit fees.
(1) Residential: $70, plus $1 for the first $10,000 of construction costs
and $2 per $1,000 of construction costs in excess of $10,000;
(2) Commercial: $70, plus $2 per $1,000 of construction costs;
(3) Accessory: $70 for the first $10,000 of construction costs and $2
per $1,000 of construction costs in excess of $10,000;
(4) Signs: $70 for the first sign and $35 for each additional sign,
provided it is on the same lot and part of the same application;
(5) Fences/walls: $70;
(6) New business: $70;
(7) Pools: $70 for the first $10,000 of construction costs, plus $2 per
$1,000 of construction costs in excess of $10,000;
(8) Temporary uses: $70; and
(9) Cell towers:
(a) Within the public right-of-way: $1,000, plus a deposit of $1,500
to pay for all costs and expenses incurred, provided that the
applicant shall be responsible for all costs and expenses in
excess of such deposit;
(b) At an existing location not within the public right-of-way:
$1,000, plus a deposit of $2,500 to pay for all costs and
expenses incurred, provided that the applicant shall be
responsible for all costs and expenses in excess of such
deposit; and
(c) At a new location not within the public right-of-way: $1,000,
plus a deposit of $5,000 to pay for all costs and expenses
incurred, provided that the applicant shall be responsible for
all costs and expenses in excess of such deposit.
B. Zoning hearing fees.
§ A370-12 LEWISBURG CODE § A370-13
324:670
§ A370-14. Sewage permits. [Added 12-16-2008 by Res. No. 08-16;
amended 12-15-2009 by Res. No. 09-13; 12-21-2010 by Res. No.
10-14; 12-20-2011 by Res. No. 11-14; 11-20-2012 by Res No. 12-08;
11-19-2013 by Res. No. 13-0982]
§ A370-15. Solid waste special arrangement items. [Added
11-15-2011 by Res. No. 11-10; amended 4-18-2017 by Res. No.
17-08]
The amount of the service charge for items picked up by special
arrangement is hereby established as follows:
Item Service Charge
Bathtubs, plastic or fiberglass $15
Bathtubs, cast iron or steel $25
Radiators $20
Ranges/stoves $15
**Compressors $15 ($25 without refrigerant
removed)
**Refrigerators/freezers $15 ($25 without refrigerant
removed)
**Air conditioners $15 ($25 without refrigerant
removed)
(1) Appeals and requests for special exceptions, variances and
conditional uses: $600, plus $150 for each additional proceeding;
(2) Challenges (validity, substantive and procedural) and curative
amendments: $1,250, plus $150 for each additional proceeding;
(3) Rezoning (map and/or ordinance) amendment: $2,250;
(4) Rezoning (only): $1,250; and
(5) Requests for zoning amendments: $1,000.
A. Sewage application/permit for installation of a new on-lot sewage
system: $812.
B. Investigation of on-site malfunction of an on-lot sewage system (five
hours): $325.
C. Land development and subdivision planning: $682.
D. Sewage permit for holding tank or privy (four hours): $260.
E. Any work performed over and above these services will be charged at
an hourly rate of $65 per hour.
82.Editor’s Note: This resolution stated that the fees would take effect 1-1-2014.
§ A370-13 TAXATION § A370-15
324:671
Item Service Charge
**Humidifiers/dehumidifiers $15 ($25 without refrigerant
removed)
Water heaters $15
Dryers $15
Washing machines $20
Dishwashers $15
Televisions/computer monitors (all
sizes)
$10
Lift chairs $20
Couches $15
Sofa beds/sectionals $20
Recliners/chairs $15
Kitchen chairs $5
Wood and metal furniture $10
Mattress/box springs $10
Commodes/sinks/lavatories $10
Bicycles $6
Large metal toys $6
Rubber passenger vehicle tires $6
Rubber truck tires $10
*Tree and hedge trimmings $2.50
Small electronics $2
Carpets/rugs/pads, 9 feet by 12 feet
or less
$15
Carpets/rugs/pads, over 9 feet by 12
feet
$20
Microwaves $5
Pickup truck load (garbage only) $45
Miscellaneous Price quotes
NOTES:
*Items shall be cut to a length not to exceed four feet and securely tied in
bundles not more than two feet thick or by garbage bag.
**Appliances with compressors containing refrigerants, including, but not
limited to, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, humidifiers and
dehumidifiers, from which all of the refrigerant has not been removed and
for which the Borough does not receive any certification of such removal
prior to being picked up, shall be subject to an additional charge of $25 per
item.
§ A370-15 LEWISBURG CODE § A370-16
324:672
§ A370-16. Regulated social gathering permit. [Added 6-17-2014 by
Res. No. 14-08; amended 7-21-2015 by Res. No. 15-03]
Pursuant to § 100-7B of Article II of Chapter 100 of the Code of the Borough
of Lewisburg, being part of Ordinance No. 2014, enacted June 17, 2014,
the application fee for a regulated social gathering permit shall be $40. The
aforesaid fee shall become effective July 21, 2015, and shall continue in
effect until otherwise changed by further resolution of the Borough Council.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
Legislative Enactments
Chapter A-K
LEGISLATIVE ENACTMENTS
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Res. No.
05-01
1-18-2005 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
05-02
2-15-2005 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
963
4-19-2005 Engine suppressors/
brake retarders
Ch. 219, Art. I
Ord. No.
964
6-21-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
965
7-19-2005 Stormwater
management
Ch. 290
Ord. No.
966
7-19-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
967
8-16-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
1024
§ A370-16 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:673
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
968
9-20-2005 Police Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. I
Ord. No.
969
11-15-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Res. No.
05-03
11-15-2005 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
05-04
11-15-2005 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
05-05
12-20-2005 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
05-06
12-20-2005 2006 tax
reenactment
NCM
Res. No.
05-07
12-20-2005 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Ord. No.
970
12-20-2006 2006 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
971
12-20-2005 Street excavations Ch. 300, Art. V
Ord. No.
972
1-17-2006 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 280, Art. I
Ord. No.
973
1-17-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
974
2-21-2006 2006 tax rate
amendment
NCM
Res. No.
06-01
3-21-2006 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
06-02
3-21-2006 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
06-03
4-18-2006 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
06-04
5-9-2006 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
975
5-9-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
976
5-9-2006 Bond issues and
loans
LE, App. B
Res. No.
06-05
6-20-2006 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
977
7-18-2006 Realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 324, Art. III
§ DL-1 LEWISBURG CODE § DL-1
DT:674
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
978
7-18-2006 Bond issues and
loans amendment
LE, App. B
Res. No.
06-06
8-15-2006 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
06-07
9-19-2006 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
06-08
9-19-2006 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
06-09
9-19-2006 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
979
10-17-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
980
10-17-2006 Streets and
sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 300, Art. II
Ord. No.
981
12-19-2006 2007 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
06-10
12-19-2006 2007 tax
reenactment
NCM
Res. No.
06-11
12-19-2006 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
982
2-20-2007 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No.
983
8-21-2007 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
984
8-21-2007 Floodplain
management
Repealed by Ord. No.
1026
Res. No.
07-01
1-16-2007 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
07-02
1-16-2007 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
07-03
1-16-2007 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
07-04
5-29-2007 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
07-05
10-16-2007 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
07-06
10-16-2007 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:675
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Res. No.
07-07
11-20-2007 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
07-08
12-18-2007 2008 tax
reenactment
NCM
Ord. No.
985
12-18-2007 2008 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
986
12-18-2007 Local services tax Ch. 324, Art. I
Res. No.
08-01
2-19-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
987
3-18-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
08-02
3-18-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
08-03
4-15-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
08-04
4-15-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
08-05
5-20-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
988
6-17-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Res. No.
08-06
6-17-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
989
7-15-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Res. No.
08-07
9-16-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
08-08
9-16-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
08-09
9-16-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
08-10
11-18-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
08-11
11-18-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
08-12
11-18-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Ord. No.
990
12-16-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
§ DL-1 LEWISBURG CODE § DL-1
DT:676
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
991
12-16-2008 2009 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
08-13
12-16-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
08-14
12-16-2008 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
08-15
12-16-2008 2009 tax
reenactment
NCM
Res. No.
08-16
12-16-2008 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Ord. No.
992
4-21-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Res. No.
09-01
4-21-2009 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
09-02
5-19-2009 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
993
7-21-2009 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 315
Ord. No.
994
7-21-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Res. No.
09-03
8-18-2009 Franchises and
services
LE, App. C
Res. No.
09-04
9-15-2009 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
09-05
9-15-2009 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
09-06
9-15-2009 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
09-07
9-15-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
09-08
10-20-2009 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
09-09
10-20-2009 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
09-10
11-17-2009 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
09-11
11-17-2009 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:677
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
995
12-15-2009 2010 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
09-12
12-15-2009 2010 tax
reenactment
NCM
Res. No.
09-13
12-15-2009 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
10-01
1-4-2010 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
996
2-16-2010 Streets and
sidewalks: snow and
ice removal
amendment
Ch. 300, Art. IV
Res. No.
10-02
2-16-2010 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
10-03
3-9-2010 Public property LE, App. F
Res. No.
10-04
3-16-2010 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
997
6-15-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Res. No.
10-05
8-17-2010 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
10-06
8-17-2010 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Ord. No.
998
9-21-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Res. No.
10-07
9-21-2010 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
10-08
9-21-2010 Pensions:
nonuniformed
employees
amendment
See Ch. 72, Art. II
Res. No.
10-09
9-21-2010 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 72, Art. I
Res. No.
10-10
10-19-2010 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
999
11-16-2010 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 72, Art. I
Res. No.
10-11
11-16-2010 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
§ DL-1 LEWISBURG CODE § DL-1
DT:678
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Res. No.
10-12
11-16-2010 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1000
12-21-2010 2011 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
10-13
12-21-2010 2011 tax
reenactment
NCM
Res. No.
10-14
12-21-2010 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
10-15
12-21-2010 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
11-01
1-18-2011 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1001
2-15-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
1002
3-15-2011 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
11-02
3-15-2011 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
11-03
3-15-2011 Franchises and
services
LE, App. C
Res. No.
11-04
4-12-2011 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1003
4-19-2011 Zoning
reclassification
LE, App. J
Res. No.
11-05
4-19-2011 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1004
5-17-2011 Streets and
sidewalks
LE, App. H
Res. No.
11-06
5-17-2011 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
11-07
7-19-2011 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
11-08
7-19-2011 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
11-09
9-20-2011 Pensions:
nonuniformed
employees
amendment
See Ch. 72, Art. II
Ord. No.
1005
11-15-2011 Solid waste: refuse
disposal amendment
Ch. 280, Art. I
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:679
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1006
11-15-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Res. No.
11-10
11-15-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
11-11
11-15-2011 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
11-12
11-15-2011 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1007
12-20-2011 2012 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
1008
12-20-2011 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 72, Art. I
Ord. No.
1009
12-20-2011 Franchises and
services
LE, App. C
Ord. No.
1010
12-20-2011 Zoning Ch. 360
Res. No.
11-13
12-20-2011 Streets and
sidewalks
LE, App. H
Res. No.
11-14
12-20-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
11-15
12-20-2011 2012 tax
reenactment
NCM
Res. No.
11-16
12-20-2011 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
11-17
12-20-2011 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 72, Art. I
Res. No.
12-01
1-17-2012 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1011
2-21-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
1012
4-17-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
1013
4-17-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 360
Ord. No.
1014
4-17-2012 Police Department
repealer;
nomenclature change
Ch. 80; Ch. 106, Art.
III; Ch. 112; Ch. 125;
Ch. 142, Art. III; Ch.
152, Art. V; Ch. 170;
Ch. 208; Ch. 235, Art.
I; Ch. 300, Art. V; Ch.
332; Ch. 345
§ DL-1 LEWISBURG CODE § DL-1
DT:680
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1015
5-15-2012 Lewisburg Area
Sewer Authority
amendment
Ch. 11, Art. I
Res. No.
12-02
6-19-2012 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
12-03
7-17-2012 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
12-04
8-21-2012 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
12-05
8-21-2012 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
12-06
10-16-2012 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1016
11-20-2012 Bicycles amendment Ch. 112
Res. No.
12-07
11-20-2012 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
12-08
11-20-2012 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Ord. No.
1017
12-18-2012 2013 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
12-09
12-18-2012 2013 tax
reenactment
NCM
Ord. No.
1018
2-19-2013 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 230
Res. No.
13-01
2-19-2013 Nomenclature
change: Lewisburg
Area Recreation
Authority to Buffalo
Valley Recreation
Authority
Ch. 11, Art. II
Ord. No.
1019
3-19-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
1020
3-19-2013 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
13-02
3-19-2013 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
13-03
3-19-2013 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:681
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1021
4-16-2013 Termination of
Borough Police
Pension Plan
Ch. 72, Art. I, footnote
only
Res. No.
13-04
5-21-2013 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1022
6-18-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 360
Ord. No.
1023
7-16-2013 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
13-05
9-10-2013 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
13-06
9-17-2013 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1024
11-19-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Res. No.
13-07
11-19-2013 Bond issues and
loans
LE, App. B
Res. No.
13-08
11-19-2013 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
13-09
11-19-2013 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
13-10
11-19-2013 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1025
12-17-2013 2014 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
1026
12-17-2013 Floodplain
management
repealer
Ch. 179, reference
only
Res. No.
13-11
12-17-2013 2014 tax
reenactment
NCM
Res. No.
13-12
12-17-2013 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
13-13
12-17-2013 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
14-01
1-21-2014 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
14-02
3-18-2014 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
14-03
4-8-2014 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
§ DL-1 LEWISBURG CODE § DL-1
DT:682
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Res. No.
14-04
4-8-2014 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
14-05
4-15-2014 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
14-06
5-20-2014 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
14-07
5-20-2014 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1027
6-17-2014 Alcoholic beverages:
permits for social
gatherings
Ch. 100, Art. II
Ord. No.
1028
6-17-2014 Refuse disposal
amendment
Ch. 280, Art. I
Res. No.
14-08
6-17-2014 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
14-09
7-15-2014 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1029
8-19-2014 Historic District
amendment
Ch. 186
Res. No.
14-10
8-19-2014 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
14-11
11-18-2014 Bond issues and
loans
LE, App. B
Res. No.
14-12
11-18-2014 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1030
12-16-2014 2015 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
14-13
12-16-2014 2015 tax
reenactment
NCM
Ord. No.
1031
1-20-2015 2015 tax rate
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
1032
1-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
1033
1-20-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 360
Ord. No.
1034
2-17-2015 Borough Manager
amendment
Ch. 65, Art. III
Res. No.
15-01
2-17-2015 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:683
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Res. No.
15-02
3-17-2015 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1035
7-21-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
1036
7-21-2015 Alcoholic beverages:
permits for social
gatherings
amendment
Ch. 100, Art. II
Res. No.
15-03
7-21-2015 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
15-04
7-21-2015 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
15-05
8-18-2015 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
15-06
9-8-2015 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
15-07
9-29-2015 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
15-08
11-17-2015 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
15-09
11-17-2015 Bond issues and
loans
LE, App. B
Res. No.
15-10
11-17-2015 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1037
12-15-2015 2016 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
1038
12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
1039
12-15-2015 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 230
Res. No.
15-11
12-15-2015 2016 tax
reenactment
NCM
Res. No.
16-01
2-16-2016 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1040
3-15-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Res. No.
16-02
3-15-2016 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
16-03
3-15-2016 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
§ DL-1 LEWISBURG CODE § DL-1
DT:684
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Res. No.
16-04
6-21-2016 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1041
8-16-2016 Ticketing: quality of
life ticketing
Ch. 328, Art. I
Res. No.
16-05
8-16-2016 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1042
11-15-2016 2017 tax rate NCM
Res. No.
16-06
11-15-2016 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
16-07
11-15-2016 Fees amendment A370
Res. No.
16-08
11-15-2016 Fees amendment A370
Res. No.
16-09
11-15-2016 2017 tax
reenactment
NCM
Res. No.
16-10
11-15-2016 Bond issues and
loans
LE, App. B
Ord. No.
1043
12-20-2016 Officers and
employees: Tax
Collector amendment
Ch. 65, Art. IV
Ord. No.
1044
12-20-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 360
Res. No.
16-11
12-20-2016 Zoning
reclassification
LE, App. J
Res. No.
17-01
1-17-2017 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
17-02
2-21-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-03
3-21-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-04
3-21-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-05
3-21-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-06
3-21-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1045
4-18-2017 Solid waste:
recycling amendment
Ch. 280, Art. II
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:685
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Res. No.
17-07
4-18-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-08
4-18-2017 Fees amendment Ch. A370
Ord. No.
1046
5-16-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Ord. No.
1047
5-16-2017 Bond issues and
loans
LE, App. B
Res. No.
17-09
5-16-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-10
5-16-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-11
5-16-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-12
6-20-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-13
8-15-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-14
8-15-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-15
9-19-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-16
10-17-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
17-17
11-21-2017 Governmental affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1048
12-19-2017 2018 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
1049
12-19-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 345
Res. No.
17-18
12-19-2017 2018 tax
reenactment
NCM
Res. No.
18-01
1-2-2018 Governmental Affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1050
1-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 345
Res. No.
18-02
1-16-2018 Governmental Affairs LE, App. D
§ DL-1 LEWISBURG CODE § DL-1
DT:686
Enactment Adoption
Date
Subject Disposition
Res. No.
18-03
2-20-2018 Employees'
Retirement Plan
Amendment
NCM
Res. No.
18-04
2-20-2018 Governmental Affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1051
3-20-2018 Governmental Affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
18-05
3-20-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. A370
Res. No.
18-06
4-17-2018 Governmental Affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
18-07
5-15-2018 Governmental Affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1052
6-19-2018 Subdivision and Land
Development
Amendment
Ch. 315
Ord. No.
1053
6-19-2018 Bond Issues and
Loans
LE, App. B
Res. No.
18-08
7-17-2018 Governmental Affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
18-09
7-17-2018 Governmental Affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
18-10
10-16-2018 Governmental Affairs LE, App. D
Ord. No.
1054
11-20-2018 2019 Tax Rate NCM
Res. No.
18-11
11-20-2018 Governmental Affairs LE, App. D
Res. No.
18-12
11-20-2018 2019 Tax
Reenactment
NCM
Enactment
Adoption
Dage Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
1055
2-19-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 360 14
Ord. No.
1056
2-19-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 300 14
Ord. No.
1057
3-19-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 345 14
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:687
Enactment
Adoption
Dage Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Res. No.
19-03
4-16-2019 Governmental
Affairs
LE, App. D 14
Res. No.
19-06
11-19-2019 Tax Rate NCM 14
§ DL-1 LEWISBURG CODE § DL-1
DT:688