Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-08]
Be it enacted and ordained by the Board of Supervisors of the Township of
Lower Paxton, County of Dauphin, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and it is
enacted and ordained as follows:
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Lower Paxton, County of Dauphin, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 196, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Lower Paxton,
which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the
Township of Lower Paxton," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the day of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Lower Paxton, and it is the
intention of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained
within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said
Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this
Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3
below, add only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below,
shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as
provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Lower Paxton and in force on the date of the
adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code are, hereby repealed as
of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as
to revive any ordinance previously repeal, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to October 5, 1998.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date, of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance, authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, path or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the, boundaries thereof, providing for a
§ 1-4 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein, Attested copies of such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance, or abandonment of any
part of a system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance, or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
S. Any legislation relating to subdivision and development, or zoning.
A. Nonsubstantive, grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as get forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it
is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed have been
previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes and
revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § 1-15.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code, shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinances, resolution
or regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Manager and shall remain
there, for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Manager,
available to persons desiring to examine same during all times while said
Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Manager or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-7 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 1-11
1:6
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Manager for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Manager, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public and the filing
of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required by law,
shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed
until the date of the determination of the violation by the District Justice
and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the
judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any Court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof tendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code, would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after August 17, 1999.
§ 1-14 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 6
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 6-1. Appointments.
The Board of Supervisors as the elected officials of the Township shall
appoint all persons to the various boards, committees and commissions.
§ 6-2. Resignation.
The resignation of a board, committee or commission member shall be
addressed to the Board of Supervisors through the Township Manager.
§ 6-3. Filling vacancy.
When a vacancy exists on any board, committee or commission, the
Chairman of that body shall notify the Township Manager who shall solicit
applications for the vacancy, if necessary, and forward the same to the
Board of Supervisors for its selection to fill the vacancy.1
§ 6-4. Approval of expenditures.
No expenditures shall be made by any board, committee or commission
without final approval from the Township Manager even though moneys
have been appropriated in the Township budget for such expenditures.
§ 6-5. Major expenditures.
Major expenditures shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors through
the Township Manager.
§ 6-6. Advisory capacity; exceptions. [Amended 8-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-08]
All boards, committees and/or commissions appointed by the Board of
Supervisors shall be recommending bodies only, with the exception of the
Zoning Hearing Board and the Board of Appeals.
Chapter 10
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
1. Editor's Note: Former Section 141.04, Changes in property, land use or programming,
which immediately followed this section, was deleted 8-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-08.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1
1:9
§ 10-1. Statutory requirements. [Amended 8-17-1999 by Ord. No.
99-08]
35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7501 et seq. requires that each political subdivision establish
a local organization for civil defense in accordance with the State Civil
Defense Plan and Program.
§ 10-2. Establishment.
Lower Paxton Township, in response to such Act, hereby establishes the
Lower Paxton Township Office of Emergency Preparedness and
Communications.
Chapter 16
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
§ 10-1 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 10-2
1:10
ARTICLE I
Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 6-2-1986 by Ord. No. 86-07]
§ 16-1. Participation authorized.
Lower Paxton Township shall join with other local governmental units in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act by becoming a
settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the "Trust")
and entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference
with the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a
copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this
chapter was adopted.
§ 16-2. Purchase of shares.
Lower Paxton Township is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from
time to time with available funds and to redeem some or all of those shares
from time to time as funds are needed for other purposes. These actions are
to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant to general
or specific instructions by the governing body of Lower Paxton Township.
§ 16-3. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of Lower
Paxton Township's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in
the Trust.
§ 16-4. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 16-1.
B. Lower Paxton Township's participation in the Trust shall be terminable
at any time by ordinance.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing Lower Paxton Township's funds in obligations
which are otherwise legal investments, as part of a pooled arrangement
with other local governmental units, thereby achieving economic and
other advantages of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of Lower Paxton Township except through the purchase of shares
in the Trust.
E. The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-4
1:11
F. Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as Lower
Paxton Township may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet
its cash investment requirement.
§ 16-4 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 16-4
1:12
ARTICLE II
Capital Region Insurance Trust
[Adopted 7-15-1996 by Ord. No. 96-06]
§ 16-5. Incorporation of additional provisions.
The caption and preamble of Ordinance No. 96-16 set forth that the Capital
Region Insurance Trust (CRIT) was established for the purpose of
collectively purchasing employee benefits insurance and the Capital Region
Insurance Trust was established pursuant to an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement and Declaration of Trust (the "Agreement").
§ 16-6. Approval of agreement.
This political subdivision hereby approves entering into the Agreement, a
copy of which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference (and
which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article
was enacted), with the intent and effect that this political subdivision shall
be bound by the Agreement.
§ 16-7. Authorization of specific actions.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman of the governing body, acting alone or
together with the Secretary or Assistant Secretary, are hereby authorized
and directed, on behalf of the political subdivision, to execute and deliver
the Agreement and to execute and deliver such additional instruments
and to take such further actions as may be necessary or appropriate to
carry forth the Agreement and the transactions to be effected under the
Agreement, including payment to the CRIT of such amounts as are due by
the political subdivision pursuant to the Agreement.
§ 16-8. Actions ratified.
All actions of any officer, agent or other representative of this political
subdivision heretofore taken in the pursuit of the establishment of the CRIT
and/or the political subdivision's participation therein are hereby ratified
and approved in all respects.
§ 16-9. Additional actions authorized.
The governing body of the political subdivision is hereby authorized to take
such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the
purposes of this article and of the Agreement.
§ 16-10. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,2 the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
2. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 16-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-10
1:13
A. The conditions of the Agreement are set forth in the Agreement.
B. This political subdivision shall participate in the CRIT for an initial term
of three years; all renewal terms shall be as further set forth therein.
C. The purpose and objectives of the Agreement are as set forth in the
Preamble of Ordinance No. 96-06 and in the Agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing the Agreement are that no
borrowing will be required by the political subdivision, funds to
implement the political subdivision's obligations under the Agreement
shall come from normal and usual budgeted amounts for such matters
and other provisions governing the manner and extent of the financing
of the CRIT shall be as set forth in the Agreement.
E. The CRIT shall be managed by its Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the Agreement.
F. All property, real or personal, of the CRIT shall be acquired, managed,
licensed or disposed of by the CRIT in accordance with the terms of the
Agreement.
G. The CRIT created by the Agreement shall be empowered to enter into
contracts for policies of group insurance and employee benefits
pursuant to the terms of the Agreement.
§ 16-10 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 16-10
1:14
Chapter 23
MANAGER
§ 23-1. Creation of office.
The office of Township Manager be and the same is hereby created by the
Township of Lower Paxton.
§ 23-2. Appointment and removal. [Amended 8-17-1999 by Ord. No.
99-08]
As soon as practicable after the passage of this chapter, the Board of
Supervisors of Lower Paxton Township shall elect by vote of a majority of its
members one person, either male or female, to fill said office, which person
shall serve as Manager until the first Monday of January next and thereafter
until his successor is elected and qualifies. The office shall be filled annually.
In the case of a vacancy in the position of Manager, the Board of Supervisors
shall by a vote of the majority of all the members of said Board fill said
office for the unexpired term. The Manager so appointed may be removed
by a majority vote of all of the members of the Board of Supervisors for just
cause at any time.
§ 23-3. Qualifications. [Amended 8-21-2018 by Ord. No. 18-03]
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to his actual experience in or
his knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of his office as
herein outlined.
§ 23-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to Lower
Paxton Township with a bonding company as surety, said bond to be
approved by the Board of Supervisors and to be in the amount specified by
the auditors of Lower Paxton Township. The premium for said bond shall be
paid by Lower Paxton Township.
§ 23-5. Compensation. [Amended 8-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-08]
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 23-6. Powers and duties.
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township
and he shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors as a whole for
the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township.
His powers and duties shall relate to the general management of all
Township business not expressly by statute, or otherwise by law,
imposed or conferred upon the Board of Supervisors.
§ 16-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-6
1:15
B. Said powers and duties, subject to recall, of the Township Manager
shall include the following:
(1) He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all
municipal departments.
(2) He shall have the authority to hire employees for all vacancies
under his supervision. When just cause exists, the Manager shall
also have the power to suspend or discharge Township employees.
Within 24 hours following any suspension or discharge, the
Manager shall notify the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors by
telephone of the action taken and shall also send all Board
members written notice of the suspension or discharge. [Amended
12-17-1973 by Ord. No. 73-27; 10-25-1976 by Ord. No. 76-22;
5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 79-05]
(3) He shall prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors before the
close of the fiscal year, or on such alternate date as the Board of
Supervisors shall determine, a budget for the next fiscal year and
an explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget the
Manager, or an officer or employee designated by him, shall obtain
from the head of each department, agency, board or officer of the
Township estimates of revenues and expenditures and other
supporting data as he requires and requests. The Manager shall
review such estimates and may revise them before submitting the
budget to the Board of Supervisors.
(4) He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after
its adoption by the Board of Supervisors.
(5) He shall hold such other municipal offices as the Board of
Supervisors may from time to time direct. [Amended 10-8-1970
by Ord. No. 70-06]
(6) He shall attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors with the
right to take part in discussion, and he shall receive notice of all
such meetings. [Amended 12-17-1973 by Ord. No. 73-27]
(7) He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of
Supervisors and supply facts pertinent thereto.
(8) He shall keep the Board of Supervisors informed as to the conduct
of Township affairs; submit periodic reports on the condition of the
Township finances and such other reports as the Board of
Supervisors may from time to time request; and shall make such
recommendations to the Board of Supervisors as he deems
expedient and necessary.
(9) He shall submit to the Board of Supervisors, as soon as possible
after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the financial
and administrative activities of the Township for the preceding
year.
§ 23-6 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 23-6
1:16
(10)He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits
and privileges granted by Lower Paxton Township are observed.
(11)He may employ, by and with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, experts and consultants to perform work and to advise
him in connection with any of the functions of the Township.
(12)He shall attend to the letting of contracts, with prior approval of
the Board of Supervisors, in due form of law, and he shall supervise
the performance and faithful execution of the same.
(13)He shall see that all money owed to the Township is promptly paid
or that proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection
of all Township claims, when not paid.
(14)He shall be the purchasing officer of the Township and he shall
purchase, in accordance with law, all supplies and equipment for
the various agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the
Township. He shall keep an account of all purchases and shall, from
time to time as directed by the Board of Supervisors, make a full
written report thereof. He shall also issue rules and regulations
subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors governing the
requisition and purchase of all municipal supplies and equipment.
Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, the
Township Manager shall not have the power and authority to make
purchases or to enter into contracts where, according to law,
advertising is required, except with the prior approval of the Board
of Supervisors.
(15) All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Township
shall be referred to the Manager. He, or an officer or employee
designated by him, shall investigate and resolve such complaints
where possible, and the Manager shall report thereon to the Board
of Supervisors at its next meeting.
(16) Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Township Supervisors,
commissions and boards and its members shall deal with the
administrative service solely through the Township Manager or
Assistant Township Manager, and neither the Supervisors, except
when acting as a Board or as a duly authorized delegate of the
Board, rather than as individuals, nor any of its commissions,
boards or committees nor any of its individual members shall give
orders publicly or privately to any subordinate of the Manager.
[Added 12-17-1973 by Ord. No. 73-27]
(17) The Township Manager is hereby authorized to declare a local
disaster emergency upon finding that a disaster has occurred or is
imminent in accordance with the provisions of Section 7501(b) of
Act 323 of 1978.3 Within 24 hours following any declaration of
disaster emergency, the Manager shall notify the Chairman of the
Board of Supervisors by telephone of the action taken and shall also
§ 23-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-6
1:17
Chapter 30
PENSIONS
[Current provisions for both the Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan and
the Police Pension Plan are on file in the Township offices.]
Chapter 37
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
send all Board members written notice of the action taken. [Added
5-14-1979 by Ord. No. 79-05]
§ 23-6 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 23-6
1:18
ARTICLE I
Board of Supervisors
[Adopted 12-16-1985 by Ord. No. 85-20]
§ 37-1. Compensation. [Amended 7-7-1999 by Ord. No. 99-15]
Each Supervisor of Lower Paxton Township shall receive compensation as a
Supervisor in the annual amount of $5,000, with such compensation being
paid in monthly installments.
§ 37-2. Insurance benefits.
In addition to the compensation authorized under this article, Supervisors
while in office are eligible for inclusion in Township-paid insurance plans,
as follows:
A. Supervisors and their dependents are eligible for inclusion in group life,
health, hospitalization, medical service and accident insurance plans
paid in whole or in part by the Township. Their inclusion in said plans
requires submission of a letter requesting participation at a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Board of Supervisors before commencing
participation.
B. The insurance referred to in this article shall be uniformly applicable to
those covered and shall not give eligibility preference to or improperly
discriminate in favor of Supervisors.
C. No policy of group life insurance shall contain any provision for a cash
surrender value, loan value or any other benefit beyond the face
amount of insurance. The policy may contain a provision that when the
insurance ceases because of termination of employment or term of
office, the person is entitled to have issued to him by the insurer,
without evidence of insurability, an individual policy of insurance of any
form customarily issued by the insurer at the age and for the amount
applied for if the amount is not in excess of the amount of life insurance
which ceases because of the termination and the application for the
individual policy is made and first premium is paid to the insurer within
31 days after termination.
D. The Township may deduct from any compensation payable to a
Supervisor such part of any insurance premium or charge which is
payable by the Supervisor within the terms of the particular Township's
insurance plan.
§ 37-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 37-2
1:19
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 59
ALARMS
§ 37-2 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 37-2
1:20
ARTICLE I
Police and Fire
[Adopted 5-15-1989 by Ord. No. 89-10]
§ 59-1. Purpose.
The Board of Supervisors finds it to be in the interest of the residents of
Lower Paxton Township and the general public to prevent and deter the
installation, maintenance and use of police and fire alarms that provide
repetitious false alarms.
§ 59-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POLICE ALARM — Includes alarms commonly referred to as "burglar
alarms" and "holdup alarms."
§ 59-3. Alarm regulations.
The use of police or fire alarms, whether audible or direct-line type of
alarms, are expressly permitted subject to the following conditions:
A. Direct-line radio or other electronic police or fire alarms shall be
installed by competent workmen so that such devices shall not emit
false alarms.
B. Any alarm system that produces false alarms shall constitute a public
nuisance if such system activates more than one false alarm in any
thirty-day period, two false alarms in any ninety-day period, three false
alarms in any one-hundred-eighty-day period or four false alarms in any
three-hundred-sixty-five-day period.
C. Any police officer or fire fighter who responds to a false alarm shall
report the same to the Commissioner of Police who shall monitor and
maintain records concerning such false alarms.
D. When any alarm system shall constitute a public nuisance as set forth
hereunder, the Commissioner of Police shall notify the owner of the
system that it has activated more false alarms than is permissible
hereunder and that any future false alarms shall result in the
prosecution for violation of this article.
E. Notice as required by this article shall be given by the Commissioner of
Police by mailing a certified letter with return receipt requested or by
personal service of such notice by handing a copy of the same to the
owner of the subject property or to an adult representative thereof. If
service is made in person, the Commissioner of Police or his or her
designee shall file a proof of service which shall be under oath and
which shall designate the person upon whom service was made.
§ 59-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-3
1:21
§ 59-4. Unlawful to use alarm declared a public nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of property or persons in charge of real
property to use or permit to be used any burglar or fire alarm system that
has previously been declared a public nuisance as provided herein. If any
false alarm shall be given by such system following the date of receipt of
notice as set forth herein, the false alarm shall be unlawful and constitute a
violation of this article.
§ 59-5. Outdoor audible alarms.
All outdoor audible alarms that are activated falsely shall be subject to the
same conditions applicable to direct-line radio or other electronic calls that
result in false alarms.
§ 59-6. Correction of deficiencies.
Following notice by the Commissioner of Police that a police or fire alarm
system constitutes a public nuisance, the owner of such system may file
an affidavit with the Commissioner of Police indicating under oath that the
false alarms previously caused by such system were caused by a known
mechanical or other defect within the system, not to include improper
use. Such owner may verify and shall include a statement by competent
workmen or repairmen in the field that such system was defective and such
deficiency has been corrected. Upon filing of such affidavit with appropriate
exhibits, the false alarm history concerning the premises shall be
considered void and of no legal effect.
§ 59-7. Negligent use.
Where false alarms have originated from negligent use or a combination
of negligent use and a defective system, in order to terminate the finding
that the system is a public nuisance, an owner shall comply with the
provisions of § 59-6 and, in addition, file an affidavit explaining the steps
that have been taken to correct the negligent use which has resulted in
false alarms. Upon acceptance of such affidavits by the Commissioner of
Police, the declaration of the alarm system as a public nuisance shall be
considered void and of no legal effect. Nevertheless, should such a system
be declared a public nuisance as provided in § 59-3 within a period of
one year following reinstatement under this section or § 59-6, use of such
F. For the purpose of this article, the owner of real estate on which an
alarm system is placed and used shall be considered the owner and the
person responsible for its proper maintenance and use.
G. In addition to any penalty provided hereunder, upon notifying the owner
that the police or fire alarm system constitutes a public nuisance, the
Commissioner of Police shall also notify Dauphin County Emergency
Management and any other agency handling the system that the system
has been declared a public nuisance and that the system should be
disconnected and no longer used.
§ 59-3 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 59-7
1:22
system shall terminate for a period of one year before this section shall be
used to reinstate service.
§ 59-8. Alarm systems connected to county control.
Any alarm system whereby police officers or fire fighters are directly
dispatched as a result of an alarm which automatically signals or calls
Dauphin County Emergency Management or any audible signal once
declared to be a nuisance shall require the prior consent of the
Commissioner of Police before it may be utilized.
§ 59-9. Permission to install.
Any permission to install a police or fire alarm system granted by the
Commissioner of Police shall be predicated upon the specific condition
that should such system prove to constitute a public nuisance as defined
hereunder, then the alarm system shall be terminated also as provided
herein.
§ 59-10. False alarm response charge.
Any owner of a police alarm, fire alarm, smoke detector or other type of
alarm, and which alarm has a direct or indirect connection which calls
for a response from the Police or Fire Department, shall be charged a
response charge as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors for each false alarm after the third false alarm responded
to by the Police or Fire Departments within a calendar year. Failure to pay
the response charge within 30 days of written notice from the responding
department shall result in prosecution as prescribed in § 59-11.
§ 59-11. Violations and penalties.
A. This article shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice
in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person, firm
or corporation who or which violates or permits the violation of this
article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable
by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense. Each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute
a separate offense.
B. In any case where the Commissioner of Police has declared an alarm
system to be a public nuisance, the Solicitor may bring legal
proceedings in equity or otherwise to prohibit the continued use of such
system and to collect any and all damages on behalf of the Township
resulting from the use of such system.
§ 59-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-11
1:23
Chapter 63
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 59-11 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 59-11
1:24
ARTICLE I
BYOB Clubs
[Adopted 7-10-1989 by Ord. No. 89-05]
§ 63-1. Purpose.
The Board of Supervisors hereby declares that the purpose of this article is
to regulate the hours of operation of BYOB clubs in order to preserve the
health, safety and general welfare of its citizens and to protect the right of
its citizens to the quiet enjoyment of their property.
§ 63-2. Definitions.
The following words or phrases, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any and all beverages, including malt
beverages, which contain alcohol, liquor or such other intoxicating
substances as are further defined in the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, 47 P.S.
§ 1-101 et seq.
BYOB CLUB — Any business facility such as a dance hall, club or association
existing on the date of enactment of this article or coming into existence
thereafter, and which is not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board, wherein patrons 21 years of age and older may, after payment of an
entry fee, cover charge or membership fee, consume alcoholic beverages
which said patrons have carried onto the premises, also commonly referred
to as "bring your own bottle clubs," provided that a facility which is rented
for a limited period of time, not to exceed 12 hours, by individuals or an
organization for the purpose of a private party in which alcoholic beverages
are carried onto the premises shall not be considered a BYOB club under
the terms of this article.
§ 63-3. Operation.
§ 63-4. Liability.
In the event that any of the unlawful activities specified herein is conducted
by or in the name of a corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, firm or
association, in addition to entity liability, the officers, agents or principals
of said corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, firm or association
shall be deemed in violation of this article, as well as the person or persons
engaged in the unlawful activity.
A. Remain open and/or to transact business between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m., prevailing time, of each day and at any time on
Sundays.
B. Conduct activities to which this article applies without possessing a
valid club permit.
§ 63-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-5
1:25
§ 63-5. Separate offenses.
The unlawful activities specified herein shall constitute separate and
distinct offenses for each and every day in which said activities are
conducted.
§ 63-6. Requirements.
Any and all BYOB clubs to which this article applies shall, at all times,
comply with the following requirements:
§ 63-7. Permit required; application; fees; term.
A. Obtain broad form general liability coverage, $1,000,000 single limit
per occurrence, proof of which shall be filed with the Commissioner of
Police.
B. Possess a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry and the Lower Paxton Township,
Codes Enforcement Office, and prominently display said certificate as
required.
C. Obtain an annual fire inspection of the premises by the Township Codes
Enforcement Officer.
D. Obtain a valid BYOB club permit pursuant to § 63-7 of this article and
prominently display said permit as required.
E. Conspicuously post the hours of operation at the business premises
such that patrons are sufficiently apprised of the same.
A. Any person or persons desiring to operate or continue to operate a
BYOB club shall file with the Commissioner of Police an application for
a BYOB club permit, which application shall include the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the BYOB club;
(2) Should the BYOB club be located within a leased business
premises, then a statement from the lessor shall be provided
acknowledging said BYOB club and agreeing to comply with
appropriate municipal ordinances;
(3) The nature of the ownership of the BYOB club, i.e., corporation,
partnership, joint venture, association;
(4) The names and addresses of any and all persons who possess an
ownership and/or financial interest in the BYOB club; and
(5) A notarized statement that the BYOB club complied with the
requirements of § 63-06 herein.
B. The Commissioner of Police shall determine whether the BYOB club
fully and completely complies with the provisions and requirements of
§ 63-5 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 63-7
1:26
§ 63-8. Violations and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice
in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person, firm or
corporation who or which violates or permits the violation of this article
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.
Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense. Each section of this article that
is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
this article within 10 days following the date on which the application
is received. If the Commissioner of Police determines that the applicant
fully and completely complies with the provisions hereof, he shall issue
a BYOB club permit; if the Commissioner of Police determines that
the applicant does not fully and completely comply with the provisions
hereof, he shall deny the issuance of BYOB club permit and shall
furnish written evidence of the same to the applicant together with the
reason(s) for the denial.
C. The club shall pay an administrative fee as set forth from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors for a BYOB club permit and a
fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors for each renewal thereof. Said BYOB club permit shall be
effective for a period of one year following the date of issuance,
provided that in the event the BYOB club fails to fully and completely
comply with the provisions hereof during the term of the BYOB club
permit so issued, the Commissioner of Police shall have the authority to
revoke the BYOB club permit due to the BYOB club's lack of
compliance.
§ 63-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-8
1:27
Chapter 68
ANIMALS
§ 68-1. Animals running at large. [Added 12-3-1973 by Ord. No.
73-21]
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog, cat, pet or other
livestock owned by him or under his supervision or control to run at large
either upon the public streets or highways of the Township, upon the private
property of any other person or upon any property not belonging to or in
the possession of the owner of such animals or to persons under whose
supervision or control such animals are being kept.
§ 68-2. Licensed animals not excepted from regulations. [Added
12-3-1973 by Ord. No. 73-21]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all dogs and other animals in
the nature of pets found running at large in violation of § 68-1, irrespective
of payment for or issuance of any license in respect to the animal involved.
§ 68-3. Animals disturbing the peace.
No person shall allow any dog or other domestic animal owned by him or
under his control or any nondomesticated animal confined on that person's
premises to make any loud or harsh noise or disturbance which shall
interfere with or deprive the peace, quiet, rest or sleep of any person within
the Township.
§ 68-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1973 by Ord. No.
73-21; 6-5-1978 by Ord. No. 78-7; 11-6-1978 by Ord. No. 78-12;
9-19-2000 by Ord. No. 00-04; 11-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-11]
Sections 68-1 and 68-3 shall be enforced by action brought before a District
Justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person,
firm or corporation who or which violates or permits the violation of this
section shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a
fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 84
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 63-8 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 68-4
1:28
ARTICLE I
Rate Regulation
[Adopted 11-4-2002 by Ord. No. 02-11]
§ 84-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Lower Paxton Township
Cable Rate Regulation Ordinance."
§ 84-2. Legal authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the Federal Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, both of which amended the Federal
Communications Act of 1934. Section 623 of the Communications Act, 47
U.S.C. § 543, states that "any franchising authority may regulate the rates
for the provisions of cable services. . .but only to the extent provided under
this section." This article is also enacted pursuant to the rate regulations
adopted by the FCC contained in Subpart N entitled Cable Rate Regulation,
47 U.S.C. § 76.900 et seq.
§ 84-3. Definitions.
The following terms used in this article shall have the following meanings:
ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT — All equipment in a subscriber's home,
provided and maintained by the operator, that is used to receive the basic
service tier, regardless of whether such equipment is additionally used to
receive other tiers of regulated programming service and/or unregulated
service. Such equipment shall include, but is not limited to:
BASIC SERVICE — At a minimum, all signals of domestic television
broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily
transmitted by satellite regardless of how such signal is ultimately received
by the cable system), any public, educational, and governmental
programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier, and
any additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier
by the cable operator.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The governing body of Lower Paxton
Township.
CABLE OPERATOR or OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons:
A. Converter boxes;
B. Remote control units; and
C. Inside wiring.
That provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system;
or
A.
§ 84-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-3
1:29
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming
or other programming service.
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term
does not include:
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — A governmental or public entity that has
filed a Form 328 with the FCC and is certified by the FCC to regulate basic
service and associated equipment rates, oversee the operations of a cable
operator and its compliance with a franchise agreement.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company,
trust, corporation or governmental entity.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person or entity who contracts with a cable operator
for, and lawfully receives, the video signals and applicable cable services
distributed by the cable system.
§ 84-4. Franchising authority.
The Township has submitted a completed FCC Form 328 with the FCC
and is certified by the FCC as a franchising authority to regulate basic
service and associated equipment rates in accordance with the applicable
regulations of the FCC.
Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a cable system.
B.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
B. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way;
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except that such
facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of
Section 621(c) of the Communications Act) to the extent such facility is
used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers
unless the extent of that use is solely to provide interactive on-demand
services;
C.
An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the
Communications Act; or
D.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
E.
§ 84-3 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 84-5
1:30
§ 84-5. Adoption of regulations.
In addition to the regulations contained in this article, the rate regulations
of the FCC contained in Subpart N entitled Cable Rate Regulation, 47 CFR
76.900 et. seq., as may be amended, are hereby adopted for the review
and determination of reasonable and lawful rates for basic service and
associated equipment.
§ 84-6. Presumption of no effective competition.
Only the rates of cable systems that are not subject to effective competition
may be regulated. In the absence of a demonstration by a cable operator
to the contrary, a cable system is presumed not to be subject to effective
competition.
§ 84-7. Appointment and powers of compliance officer.
§ 84-8. Duties of compliance officer.
The compliance officer shall be responsible for:
A. For the administration of this article, a compliance officer shall be
appointed by the Board of Supervisors, who shall meet such
qualifications as may be established by the Board of Supervisors.
B. The compliance officer shall administer this article in accordance with
its literal terms.
A. Taking such actions on behalf of the Township as may from time to time
be required to obtain or maintain the Township's certification to
regulate basic service and associated equipment rates.
B. Notifying all cable operators serving the Township when the Township
has become certified by the FCC to regulate basic service and
associated equipment rates and has adopted this article.
C. Receiving, filing in the public records of the Township, reviewing for
completeness, and if appropriate, placing on the Board of Supervisors
agenda for consideration, rate regulatory forms and other filings by
cable operators required to be submitted pursuant to applicable federal
law and regulations.
D. Enforcing the provisions of this article and all decisions of the Board of
Supervisors made hereunder to the fullest extent permitted by federal
law and regulations, subject to the oversight and control of the Board of
Supervisors.
E. Taking such other actions as may be necessary from time to time,
subject to the oversight and control of the Board of Supervisors, to
protect the rights of the Township to regulate basic service and
associated equipment rates to the fullest extent permitted by federal
law and regulations.
§ 84-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-9
1:31
§ 84-9. Duties of cable operators.
§ 84-10. Review of basic service rates and associated equipment.
A. A cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the basic service tier
and associated equipment within 30 days of receiving written
notification from the Township that is has been certified as a
franchising authority to regulate rates. The cable operator shall include
rate cards and channel line-ups with its filing and include an
explanation of any discrepancy in the figures provided in these
documents and its rate filing.
B. A cable operator shall provide written notice to each subscriber of any
increase in the rates to be charged for the basic service tier or
associated equipment at least 30 days before any increase becomes
effective.
C. A cable operator shall submit to the Township the rate regulatory forms
required by the FCC, including, but not limited to, FCC Form 1240 and
FCC Form 1205, on a periodic basis and in a timely fashion as required
by applicable federal law and regulations. The deadlines for submission
of such forms are dependent upon the cable operator's election to
employ the annual rate adjustment method or the quarterly rate
adjustment method. Should applicable federal law and/or regulations
be amended to alter the rate adjustment methods, then the cable
operator shall comply with such amendments.
D. A cable operator shall comply with all requests for information, orders
and decisions of the Township. No cable operator shall, in any
information submitted to the Township in making a rate determination
pursuant to an FCC rate regulatory form filing, make any
misrepresentation or willful material omission bearing on any matter
within the Township's jurisdiction.
A. Upon receipt of FCC rate regulatory forms, including, but not limited
to, FCC Form 1240 and FCC Form 1205, from a cable operator
proposing any change in basic service and/or associated equipment
rates, the compliance officer shall review the forms to determine
whether the filing is complete. If the filing is incomplete, the
compliance officer shall notify the cable operator within the applicable
time period required by federal law and regulations and ask the cable
operator to submit such additional information as is necessary to make
the filing complete. The time period for review by the Township shall be
extended for the cable operator to complete the filing in accordance
with applicable federal law and regulations.
B. Upon receipt of completed FCC rate regulatory forms from a cable
operator, the compliance officer shall make an initial determination as
to whether the proposed rate adjustments are reasonable and lawful
pursuant to applicable federal law and regulations. The compliance
§ 84-9 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 84-10
1:32
§ 84-11. Enforcement.
In rendering its decisions, the Board of Supervisors shall have the full
authority to order a cable operator to take any and all enforcement actions
permitted by applicable federal law and regulations, including, but not
limited to, the following:
§ 84-12. Violations and penalties.
In the event that a cable operator does not comply with an order or decision
made pursuant to this article and directed specifically toward the cable
operator, the Township may assess a fine against the cable operator of not
more than $500 per violation. Each day of continuous violation of any of the
provisions of this article shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 84-13. Severability.
If a court of competent jurisdiction or the FCC declares any section or
provision of this article to be illegal, invalid or unenforceable, or is preofficer
may engage the services of an expert in cable rate regulation to
assist in making such initial determination.
C. Should the compliance officer make an initial determination that the
cable operator's proposed rates are unreasonable and unlawful, the
compliance officer shall place the issue on the Board of Supervisors's
agenda for public consideration in the form of a rate-making
proceeding. The Board of Supervisors shall provide a reasonable
opportunity for public comment and for consideration of the views of
interested parties.
D. Upon conclusion of the rate-making proceeding, the Board of
Supervisors shall render a decision on whether the cable operator's
proposed rates are reasonable and lawful. The Board of Supervisors
shall issue a written decision if it disapproves an initial rate for basic
service and/or Associate Equipment in whole or in part, disapproves a
request for a rate increase in whole or in part, or approves a request for
a rate increase in whole or in part over the objections of interested
parties. Public notice shall be given regarding any written decision,
including releasing the text of the written decision to the public.
E. As part of the rate-making proceeding, the Township may require the
production of proprietary information to make a rate determination.
The Township shall state a justification for each item of information
requested and, where related to an FCC form, indicate the question or
section of the form to which the request specifically relates. Upon
request by a cable operator, the parties to a rate proceeding shall have
access to such information subject to the Township's procedures
governing non-disclosure by the parties. Public access to such
proprietary information shall be governed by applicable state and local
law.
§ 84-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-13
1:33
empted by federal or state laws or regulations, such section or provision
shall be deemed to be severable from the remaining portions of this article
and shall not affect the legality, validity or enforceability of the remaining
portions of this article.
§ 84-14. Repealer.
Ordinance 94-05, entitled "Lower Paxton Township Cable Television
Ordinance," is hereby repealed.
§ 84-13 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 84-14
1:34
Chapter 90
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
§ 84-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-14
1:35

ARTICLE I
Beaver Creek Drainage Basin
[The Township has adopted several annual ordinances establishing random
drawings for issuance of permits within the Beaver Creek Drainage Basin.
As the policies are not general and permanent in nature, they are not
included in this volume. Said ordinances may be viewed at the Township
offices.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-14
1:37

ARTICLE II
Smoke Detectors
[Adopted 11-15-1990 by Ord. No. 90-16 (Art. 723 of the 1960 Code)]
§ 90-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
DWELLING UNIT — A structure, or portion thereof, building or portion
thereof, arranged for the use of one or more individuals living together as a
housekeeping unit on a permanent, temporary or transient basis which may
or may not include sanitary facilities or facilities for preparation, storage or
serving of food.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with other persons,
has legal title to any premises. This includes any person who has charge,
care or control over any premises as:
SMOKE DETECTOR — A device which detects visible or invisible particles
of combustion and is capable of providing a suitable audible alarm of at
least 85 decibels at 10 feet, either ionization or photoelectric type.
§ 90-2. Smoke detectors required in dwelling units. [Amended
12-17-1990 by Ord. No. 90-19]
In each dwelling unit or individual apartment within buildings used as
a multiple dwelling, there shall be provided by the owner of the real
estate smoke detector sensing devices which have received Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., approval. The smoke detectors shall be provided in
accordance with the Uniform Construction Code, except that all smoke
detectors need not be connected to a sounding device or other detectors to
provide, when actuated, an alarm which will be audible in all sleeping areas.
§ 90-3. Alarm requirements.
Said smoke detector sensing device shall provide an alarm suitable to warn
occupants within individual dwelling units in the event of fire.
A. An agent, officer, fiduciary or employee of the owners;
The committee, conservator or legal guardian of an owner who is
incompetent, a minor or otherwise under a disability;
B.
A trustee, elected or appointed, or a person required by law to act
as a trustee, other than a trustee under a deed of trust to secure the
payment of money; or
C.
An executor, administrator, receiver, fiduciary, officer appointed by any
court, attorney in fact or other similar representative of the owner of
his or her estate. This does not include a lessee, a sublessee or other
person who merely has the right to occupy or possess a premises.
D.
§ 90-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-4
1:39
§ 90-4. Time of installation.
The smoke detector sensing devices shall be installed as above in all
dwellings by the owner not later than upon change of ownership of the real
estate upon which the dwelling(s) is erected.
§ 90-5. Certification. [Amended 1-28-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1]
At the time of settlement on a change of ownership of real estate upon
which a dwelling(s) is erected, the seller(s) shall certify and the buyer(s)
shall acknowledge, under oath, on a form provided by the Township, that
said dwelling(s) complies with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 90-4 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 90-5
1:40
ARTICLE III
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-063]
§ 90-6. Election to administer and enforce.
The Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 90-7. Adoption of standards; amendments.
§ 90-8. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within the Township shall be
undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township from time to time by resolution:
A. The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the
Township.
B. In addition, the following codes are hereby amended as indicated:
(1) 2015 International Building Code:
(a) Section 1612.3: Insert "Lower Paxton Township" for the name
of the jurisdiction and "August 2, 2012" as the date of issuance.
(2) 2015 International Existing Building Code:
(a) Section 1401.2: Insert "October 1, 2018" as the date.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Township to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the Township;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Township;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the Township;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
3. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. III, Uniform Construction Code,
adopted 6-15-2004 by Ord. No. 04-08, as amended.
§ 90-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-8
1:41
§ 90-9. Effect on other provisions.
§ 90-10. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Township for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be established by the
Board of Supervisors by resolution from time to time.
§ 90-11. Effective date.
This article shall be effective on December 22, 2018.
§ 90-12. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence or clause of this article is held, for any
reason, to be invalid, such decision or decisions shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this article.
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
B. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Township not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 90-8 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 90-12
1:42
Chapter 94
CURFEW
§ 94-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ADULT — Any person 21 years of age or older.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 or, in equivalent phrasing often
herein employed, any person 17 or fewer years of age.
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a minor:
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any park or other property owned by the Township
or the Central Dauphin School District.
STREET — A way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or, in the case of a sidewalk thereof, for
pedestrian travel. The term "street" includes a legal right-of-way, including
but not limited to the cartway of traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks,
whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found
within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term "street" also applies,
for curfew purposes, to ways the public is privileged to use over private
property so long as the owner permits, including sidewalks and grass plots
similarly open at the time to public use, and to parking areas of any type
(residential, municipal or commercial) open to public use or from such
street or any type of street. The term "street" applies irrespective of what it
is called or formally named, whether alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise,
or whether it is maintained by the Township and irrespective of whether it
is open to the use of the public as a matter of right.
TIME OF NIGHT — Based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight-Saving Time, generally
observed at that hour by the public in the Township.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Paxton, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
YEAR OF AGE — Continues from one birthday, such as the 17th, to (but not
including the day of) the next, such as the 18th birthday, making it clear
that 17 or fewer years of age is herein treated as equivalent to the phrase
"under 18 year of age" and so forth.
§ 94-2. Curfew for minors.
A. As a natural or adoptive parent;
B. As a legal guardian;
C. As a person who stands in loco parentis; or
D. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court.
§ 90-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-2
1:43
§ 94-3. Exceptions.
In the following cases, a minor, as described above, on a street or public
property within the Township during the hours for which this chapter is
intended shall not be considered in violation of this chapter:
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor 17 or fewer years of age (under 18) to
be or remain in or upon the streets or public properties within the
Township at night during the period beginning at 12:00 midnight and
ending at 5:00 a.m.
B. It shall be unlawful for any minor 15 or fewer years of age (under 16) to
be or remain in or upon the streets or public properties within the
Township at night during the period beginning at 10:00 p.m. and ending
at 5:00 a.m.
A. When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
B. When accompanied by an adult acting in loco parentis and specifically
authorized by a parent of such minor to take said parent's place in
accompanying said minor for a designated period of time and purpose
within a specified area.
C. When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly and when such activities have been
scheduled with the Township.
D. In case of emergency or unavoidable necessity, but only after such
minor's parent has communicated to the Township police personnel the
facts establishing such reasonable necessity, relating to specified
streets at a designated time for a described purpose, including points of
origin and destination.
E. When the minor is on the sidewalk directly connected to the place
where such minor resides.
F. When returning home, by a direct route from (and within 30 minutes of)
the termination of a school activity or an activity of a religious or other
voluntary association.
G. When the minor is involved in bona fide employment, as documented by
duly certified working papers or work permit or is travelling directly to
or from such employment.
H. When the minor is responding to, returning from or actively engaged in
volunteer firefighting operations and is specifically authorized to
engage in such activities by the respective volunteer fire company Chief
or designee.
I. When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle operated
by an adult or older sibling, for the purpose of normal travel.
§ 94-2 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 94-4
1:44
§ 94-4. Parental responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or remain upon
any street or public property within the Township under circumstances not
constituting an exception to or otherwise beyond the scope of this chapter.
The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably
be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's
legal custody. It shall, a fortiori, be no defense that a parent was completely
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
§ 94-5. Police procedures.
§ 94-6. Violations and penalties.
A. Police officers shall obtain the name, address, date of birth and
telephone number of all minors in prima facie violation of this chapter,
as well as the name, address and telephone number of the minor's
parent, guardian or other adult person having legal care or custody of
said minor.
B. In the absence of clear evidence, such as a driver's license, a police
officer shall make a reasonably objective decision based on the totality
of the circumstances in determining the age of the minor for
enforcement purposes.
C. If a violation has occurred, the police officer should arrange for a parent
to immediately come to the location of the violation; or transport the
minor to the home or other mutually convenient location of the parent
and transfer custody of the minor to the parent or adult concerned for
the welfare of the minor, such as an adult sibling.
D. If no other reasonable alternative is available, the police officer may
take the minor to the police station, where a parent shall immediately
be notified to come and take custody of such minor.
E. When a parent or other adult specifically approved by the parent is
available, the minor shall be released to the custody of such parent or
other adult.
F. It shall be a separate violation for any parent or minor to knowingly
provide false information to any police officer investigating a violation
of this chapter.
A. For the first offense under this chapter, the parent having custody shall
be warned in writing delivered in person or by regular or electronic
mail of the violation and the option of prosecution for subsequent
offenses.
B. For any subsequent violation, any parent of a minor and/or the minor
involved may be cited for violating any of the provisions of this article
§ 94-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 94-6
1:45
§ 94-7. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of this
chapter is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any
remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of the chapter, it
being the intent of the Lower Paxton Township that such remainder shall be
and shall remain in full force and effect and for this purpose the provisions
of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
Chapter 99
DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 99-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA —
and, shall, upon conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, be fined
not less than $25 nor more than $300 and the costs of prosecution.
C. Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter may be
reported by the Public Safety Director or his designee to a society or
organization whose purpose it is to take charge of incorrigibles and
delinquents, and proceedings may then proceed under the Juvenile Act.
All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used,
intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting,
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Controlled Substance, Drug,
Device and Cosmetic Act.
A.
It includes, but is not limited to:
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
(1)
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances.
(2)
Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance.
(3)
B.
§ 94-6 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 99-1
1:46
Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances.
(4)
Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
(5)
Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances.
(6)
Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or
refining marijuana.
(7)
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances.
(8)
Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances.
(9)
Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for
use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
(10)
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use or designed for use in parenterally injected controlled
substances into the human body.
(11)
Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls.
(a)
(b) Water pipes.
(c) Carburetion tubes and devices.
(d) Smoking and carburetion masks.
Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand.
(e)
(f) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
(g) Chamber pipes.
(h) Carburetor pipes.
(i) Electric pipes.
(12)
§ 99-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-1
1:47
§ 99-2. Considerations to determine objects as drug paraphernalia.
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other
authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors,
the following:
(j) Air-driven pipes.
(k) Chillums.
(l) Bongs.
(m) Ice pipes or chillers.
(n) Rolling papers.
A. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
B. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the
object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance.
C. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of
this chapter.
D. The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
E. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
F. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone
in control of the object to deliver it to persons who he knows or should
reasonably know intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this
chapter; the innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the object
as to a direct violation of this chapter should not prevent a finding that
the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
G. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use.
H. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict
its use.
I. National and local advertising concerning its use.
J. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
K. Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
L. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to
the total sales of the business enterprise.
§ 99-1 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 99-2
1:48
§ 99-3. Use or possession for use.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to use or to possess
with intent to use drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow,
harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation
of the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act.
§ 99-4. Delivery; possession or manufacture for delivery.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to deliver, possess with
intent to deliver or manufacture with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia,
knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that
it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Controlled Substance,
Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act.
§ 99-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate the provisions of
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in 35 P.S. § 780-113(i).
Chapter 106
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
M. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
N. Expert testimony concerning its use.
§ 99-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 99-5
1:49

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)4
§ 106-1. through § 106-3. (Reserved)
4. Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Fire Prevention Standards, was superseded by the enactment
of the Uniform Construction Code. See Ch. 90.
§ 106-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-1
1:51

ARTICLE II
Fire Control Regulations
[Adopted 11-16-1981 by Ord. No. 81-15]
§ 106-4. Adoption and purpose.
There is hereby adopted by the Board of Supervisors the fire control
measures and regulations as herein set forth for the purposes of controlling
conditions which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces.
§ 106-5. Authority at fires and other emergencies.
The fire official or duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge at
the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/
or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary
to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other
hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in
the reasonable performance of their duty. The fire official may prohibit any
person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or
cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may
impede or interfere with the operations of the Fire Department. The fire
official may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object
from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall
do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so
by the fire official.
§ 106-6. Interfering with Fire Department operations.
No person shall interfere with, attempt to interfere with, obstruct or restrict
the mobility of or block the path of travel of any Fire Department emergency
vehicle in any way or interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or
hamper any Fire Department operation.
§ 106-7. Compliance with orders.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of the fire official or interfere with the compliance attempts of
another individual.
§ 106-8. Vehicles crossing fire hose.
No person shall drive any vehicle over any unprotected fire hose of the Fire
Department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or any
other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire official in command
of such operation.
§ 106-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 106-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-9
1:53
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES — Restricted to those vehicles
which are defined and authorized as such under the laws of the State of
Pennsylvania.
§ 106-10. Unlawful boarding or tampering with emergency fire
equipment.
No person shall, without proper authorization from the fire official in charge
of such Fire Department emergency equipment, cling to, attach himself to,
climb upon or into, board or swing upon any Fire Department emergency
vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest; or sound the siren, horn,
bell or other sound-producing device thereon; or manipulate or tamper
with or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches,
starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective clothing on
or a part of any such emergency vehicle.
§ 106-11. Blocking fire hydrants and fire connections.
§ 106-12. Hydrant use approval.
No person shall use or operate any fire hydrant intended for the use of
the Fire Department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first
obtains authorization for such use from the fire official and the water
company having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such
hydrants by a person employed by and authorized to make such use by the
water company having jurisdiction.
§ 106-13. Private fire hydrants.
All new and existing shipyards, oil storage plants, lumberyards, amusement
or exhibition parks and educational or institutional complexes and similar
occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards and which are
located more than 150 feet from a public street or which require quantities
of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system
shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants
shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the fire official
and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted
A. No person shall obscure from view or damage, deface, obstruct or
restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department
connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including
fire hydrants and Fire Department connections that are located on
public or private streets, access lanes or private property.
B. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation,
obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the fire official shall
proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the performance of
necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate
of the fire official and with the approval of the Township Manager, and
the Solicitor shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such
costs.
§ 106-9 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 106-13
1:54
engineering practices. The fire official shall designate and approve the
number and location of fire hydrants. The fire official may require the
installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance with
the approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire
brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants
shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the fire
official.
§ 106-14. Maintenance of fire suppression equipment.
No person shall obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any
fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under
the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code except for the purpose of
extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging, making
necessary repairs or when permitted by the fire official. Whenever a fire
appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled
as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished.
Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced
or repaired as directed by the fire official.
§ 106-15. Street obstructions.
No person shall erect, construct, place or maintain any fences, gates,
chains, bars, pipes or any other type of permanent obstruction in or on any
street, within the Township boundaries. The word "street," as used in this
article, means any roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic,
including but not limited to private streets or access lanes, as well as all
public streets and highways within the Township boundaries.
§ 106-16. (Reserved)
§ 106-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-16
1:55

ARTICLE III
Emergency Access Key Boxes
[Adopted 6-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-08, amended 5-4-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-06]
§ 106-17. Affected structures.
All nonresidential and certain multifamily residential structures within
Lower Paxton Township having an automatic fire alarm system or a fire
sprinkler system shall be equipped with a key box. Affected multifamily
structures shall be those having restricted access through locked doors
and have a common corridor for access to living units. Exempt from the
requirements of this article shall be hospitals and nursing homes that
provide professional services 24 hours per day.
§ 106-18. Key box type and location.
The key box shall be a UL type and approved by a Township building code
enforcement officer. The rapid entry key box shall be installed in a location
approved by the Fire Chief representing the service area in which the
structure will be located.
§ 106-19. Key box contents.
The key box must be installed and secured with the Fire Departmentprotected
key, and with all required keys installed, prior to the issuance of
an occupancy permit. The rapid key boxes shall contain the following:
§ 106-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation who or which shall violate any provision of
this article or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall
be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 plus costs, and in default of
payment of such fine and costs to imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
A. Keys to locked points of entry, whether on the interior or exterior of the
structure;
B. Keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
C. Keys to the locked elevator rooms;
D. Keys to the elevator controls;
E. Keys to any fence or secured areas;
F. Keys to any other areas as directed by the representative of the Fire
Chief.
§ 106-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-21
1:57
§ 106-21. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all structures built on or after
July 1, 2001.
§ 106-21 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 106-21
1:58
Chapter 107
FIREWORKS
§ 107-1. Short title.
This Ordinance shall be known as the Lower Paxton Township Fireworks
Ordinance.
§ 107-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Township of Lower Paxton Board of
Supervisors.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS —
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Large fireworks to be used solely by professional
pyrotechnicians and designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects
of combustion, deflagration or detonation. The term includes, but is not
limited to:
FIREWORKS LAW — Pennsylvania Act 43 of 2017.5
MUNICIPALITY — A city, borough, incorporated town or township.
Any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or
combination of substances which is intended to produce visible or
audible effects of combustion, is suitable for use by the public, complies
with the construction, performance, composition and labeling
requirements promulgated by the Consumer Products Safety
Commission in 16 CFR (relating to commercial practices) or any
successor regulation and complies with the provisions for "consumer
fireworks" as defined in APA 87-1 or any successor standard, the sale
possession and use or which shall be permitted throughout this
Commonwealth.
A.
The term does not include devices such as "ground and hand-held
sparkling devices," "novelties" or "toy caps" in APA 87-1 or any
successor standard, the sale, possession and use of which shall be
permitted at all times throughout this Commonwealth.
B.
Salutes that contain more than two grains or 130 milligrams of
explosive materials;
A.
Aerial shells containing more than 60 grams of pyrotechnic
compositions; and
B.
Other display pieces that exceed the limits of explosive materials for
classification as consumer fireworks and are classified as fireworks
UN0333, UN0334 or UN0335 under 49 CFR 172.101 (relating to
purpose and use of hazardous materials table).
C.
§ 106-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-2
1:59
NFPA 1124 — The National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124
Code for the Manufacture, Transportation and Storage of Fireworks and
Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 Edition.
OCCUPIED STRUCTURE — A structure, vehicle or place adapted for
overnight accommodation of persons for conducting business whether or
not a person is actually present.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Paxton.
§ 107-3. Permits.
§ 107-4. Request for extension.
A. Permissible purposes. Display fireworks may be possessed and used by
a person holding a permit from the Township at the display covered by
the permit or when authorized by a permit for any of the following:
(1) For agricultural purposes in connection with the raising of crops
and the protection of crops from bird and animal damage.
(2) By railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or
illumination.
(3) In quarrying or for blasting or other industrial use.
(4) In the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater.
(5) For signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports.
(6) By military organizations or organizations of veterans of the Armed
Forces of the United States.
B. Age limitation. A display fireworks permit may not be issued to a person
under 21 years of age.
C. Application for permit. Discharge of display fireworks shall be by
permit. Applications for permits shall be made in writing at least 30
days in advance of the date of the display. After such privilege has been
granted, sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such
display shall be lawful for that purpose only. The Township may from
time to time adopt an official application and fees by resolution. The
initial application fee shall be $75 per permit.
D. Bond. The Board of Supervisors of the Township hereby requires a bond
deemed adequate by the Township by a permittee in a sum not less than
$50,000 conditioned for the payment of all damages which may be
caused to a person or property by reason of the display and arising from
an act of the permittee or an agent, an employee or a subcontractor of
the permittee.
5. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
§ 107-2 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 107-4
1:60
§ 107-5. Use of consumer fireworks.
A. Authorization. If, because of unfavorable weather, the display for which
a permit has been granted does not occur at the time authorized by the
permit, the person to whom the permit was issued may within 24 hours
apply for a request for extension to the Township.
B. Contents of request. The request for extension shall state under oath
that the display was not made, provide the reason that the display was
not made and request a continuance of the permit for a date designated
within the request, which shall not be later than one week after the date
originally designated in the permit.
C. Determination. Upon receiving the request for extension, the Township,
if it believes the facts stated within the request are true, shall extend
the provisions of the permit to the date designated within the request,
which shall not be later than one week after the date originally
designated in the permit.
D. Conditions. The extension of time shall be granted without the payment
of an additional fee and without requiring a bond other than the bond
given for the original permit, the provisions of which shall extend to and
cover all damages which may be caused by reason of the display
occurring at the date originally designated in the permit.
A. Conditions. A person who is at least 18 years of age and meets the
requirements of this section may purchase, possess and use consumer
fireworks.
B. Prohibitions. A person may not intentionally ignite or discharge:
(1) Consumer fireworks on any property of the Township, including,
but not limited to streets, sidewalks, public parks or public
buildings.
(2) Consumer fireworks on private property without the express,
written permission of the owner.
(3) Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices within, or throw
consumer fireworks or sparkling devices from, a motor vehicle or
building.
(4) Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices into or at a motor vehicle
or building or at another person.
(5) Consumer fireworks or sparkling devices while the person is under
the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance or another drug.
(6) Consumer fireworks within 150 feet of an occupied structure.
(7) Consumer fireworks after 10:00 p.m. prevailing time or before 7:00
a.m. prevailing time unless otherwise permitted by the Township,
§ 107-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 107-5
1:61
§ 107-6. Enforcement.
§ 107-7. Repealer.
Any ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
Chapter 108
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
except on New Years Eve, which shall be until 12:00 midnight, New
Years Day until 12:30 a.m. and July 4 until 11:00 p.m.
(8) Consumer fireworks on a property of less than one acre in area.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any Township police
officer or Code Enforcement Officer as assigned by the Township.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be
issued a citation for each offense with a fine of $100 for each offense.
§ 107-5 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 107-7
1:62
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 108-1. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,6 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of
its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania does hereby order this Flood Plain Management Ordinance as
follows.
6. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 108-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-1
1:63

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 108-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 108-3. Applicability.
§ 108-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance,
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 108-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the Ordinance, which shall remain
in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 108-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within Lower Paxton Township unless a permit
has been obtained from the floodplain administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
§ 108-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-6
1:65
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Lower Paxton
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 108-6 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 108-6
1:66
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 108-7. Designation of floodplain administrator.
The Township Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
chapter and are referred to herein as the floodplain administrator.
§ 108-8. Permit required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of Lower Paxton Township.
§ 108-9. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
A. The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);7 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);8 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);9 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
D. In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
E. In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator shall
7. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
8. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
9. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 108-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-9
1:67
§ 108-10. Application procedures and requirements.
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Township Manager for
whatever action he/she considers necessary.
F. The floodplain administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
G. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC, or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the floodplain
administrator on forms supplied by Lower Paxton Township. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement.
§ 108-9 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 108-10
1:68
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant.
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date.
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available.
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development.
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways.
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988.
(b) The elevation of the base flood.
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2006 IBC or the 2006 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood elevation.
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
§ 108-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-10
1:69
§ 108-11. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the floodplain administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the floodplain administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
development within a special floodplain area (see § 108-19B),
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood elevation. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of floodproofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure
and/or the development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 108-24F, Storage, and § 108-25, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 108-24F and 108-25 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 108-25
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(5) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, as set forth
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the floodplain administrator.
§ 108-10 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 108-12
1:70
§ 108-12. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the floodplain administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 108-13. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for
any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant
to floodplain administrator for consideration.
§ 108-14. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance and be signed by the floodplain administrator.
§ 108-15. Start of construction.
§ 108-16. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire, unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the floodplain
administrator. The actual start of construction means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for
the floodplain administrator to approve such a request.
§ 108-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-16
1:71
§ 108-17. Appeals.
A. Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the floodplain
administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the floodplain
administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of an misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine
to Lower Paxton Township, of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties all other actions
are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Township Manager to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain
administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Board of Supervisors. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the floodplain administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Board of Supervisors shall set a time
and place, within not less than 10 or not more than 30 days, for the
purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at
which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
§ 108-16 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 108-17
1:72
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Supervisors may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.10
10.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 108-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-17
1:73

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 108-18. Identification.
§ 108-19. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of Lower Paxton
Township classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) dated August 2, 2012, and issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision
thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Lower Paxton Township and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. Floodway Area.
(1) Description: the area identified as Floodway in the FIS which
represents the channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by
more than one foot at any point. This term shall also include
floodway areas which have been identified in other available
studies or sources of information for those special floodplain areas
where no floodway has been identified in the FIS.
(2) Special requirements:
(a) Any encroachment that would cause any increase in flood
heights shall be prohibited.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection's regional office.
B. Special Floodplain Area.
(1) Description: the areas identified as Zones AE and A1-30 in the FIS
which are subject to inundation by the one-percent annual chance
flood event determined by detailed methods and have base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown.
(2) Special requirements:
§ 108-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-19
1:75
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse.
(b) In special floodplain areas without a designated floodway, no
new development shall be permitted unless it can be
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of all past and
projected development will not increase the BFE by more than
one foot.
C. Approximate Floodplain Area.
(1) Description: the areas identified as Zone A in the FIS which are
subject to inundation by the one-percent annual chance flood event
determined using approximate methodologies. Because detailed
hydraulic analyses have not been performed, no BFEs or flood
depths are shown.
(2) Special requirements:
(a) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse.
(b) When available, information from other federal, state, and
other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the BFE,
as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other
information is available, the BFE shall be determined by using
a point on the boundary of the identified floodplain area which
is nearest the construction site in question.
(3) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by Lower Paxton Township.
D. Shallow Flooding Area.
(1) Description: the areas identified as Zones AO and AH in the FIS.
These areas are subject to inundation by one-percent annual
chance shallow flooding where average depths are between one
and three feet.
(2) Special requirements. Establish drainage paths to guide
floodwaters around and away from structures on slopes.
§ 108-19 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 108-20
1:76
§ 108-20. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Board of
Supervisors where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as
practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information
becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes by
submitting technical or scientific data.
§ 108-21. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by Lower Paxton Township Planning
Commission, and any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may
appeal to the Board of Supervisors. The burden of proof shall be on the
appellant.
§ 108-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-21
1:77

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 108-22. General requirements.
§ 108-23. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection's
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Technical or scientific data shall be submitted to FEMA for a letter of
map revision (LOMR) within six months of the completion of any new
construction, development, or other activity resulting in changes in the
BFE.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there no base flood elevations specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the
regulatory flood elevation in accordance with § 108-19C(2)(b) of
this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
§ 108-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-23
1:79
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most-recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where there no base flood elevations are specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation in
accordance with § 108-19C(2)(b) of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code,
including the most-recent versions of the International Building
Code (IBC) and International Residential Code (IRC), and ASCE 24
and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended) shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
§ 108-23 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 108-23
1:80
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 1,000 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
§ 108-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-23
1:81
§ 108-24. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet, unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by the floodplain administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
§ 108-23 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 108-24
1:82
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 108-25, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
§ 108-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-24
1:83
§ 108-25. Development which may endanger human life.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405), as amended,
and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the above and
other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they
are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of this
chapter:
(1) The latest edition of the International Building Code (IBC): Sections
801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
(2) The latest edition of the International Residential Building Code
(IRC): Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix AE101,
Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances; shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other
§ 108-24 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 108-25
1:84
applicable provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be prohibited.
C. New or substantially improved structures.
(1) Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved structure of the kind described in
Subsection A above shall be:
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood elevation.
(2) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
§ 108-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-25
1:85
§ 108-26. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision and land development proposals containing at least 50 lots
or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas where
base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported by hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations
and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter
of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal requirements and
processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
§ 108-27. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations (United
States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March
1992), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
D. Within any floodplain area, any new or substantially improved structure
of the kind described in Subsection A above shall be prohibited within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse.
A. Within any FW (Floodway Area), manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
B. Within Approximate Floodplain or special floodplain area,
manufactured homes shall be prohibited within the area measured 50
feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes,
and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
D. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, shall apply and
34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405.
E. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the most-recent revisions thereto, and
34 Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
§ 108-25 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 108-27
1:86
§ 108-28. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the unit's(s') proposed installation.
A. Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(3) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 108-27.
§ 108-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-28
1:87

ARTICLE VI
Activities Prohibited in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 108-29. Prohibited activities.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the commencement of any of the
following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or expansion of any
structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following activities
shall be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. Hospitals.
B. Nursing homes.
C. Jails or prisons.
D. Manufactured home parks or manufactured home subdivisions, or
substantial improvements to existing manufactured home parks or
manufactured home subdivisions.
§ 108-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-29
1:89

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 108-30. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 108-31 shall apply.
§ 108-31. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation
of the base flood elevation.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any special floodplain area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one
foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
§ 108-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-31
1:91

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 108-32. General provisions.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in an
exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner, the
Board of Supervisors of Lower Paxton Township may, upon request, grant
relief from the strict application of the requirements.
§ 108-33. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Board of Supervisors
in accordance with the procedures contained in § 108-17 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any special floodplain area that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development,
increase the BFE than one foot at any point.
(3) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the
other requirements pertaining specifically to development
regulated by special permit (Article VI) or to development which
may endanger human life (§ 108-25).
(4) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(5) In granting any variance, the Board of Supervisors shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(6) Whenever a variance is granted, the Board of Supervisors shall
notify the applicant, in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(7) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Board of Supervisors
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
§ 108-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-33
1:93
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
[2] Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public,
or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(8) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by Lower Paxton Township. In addition, a report of
all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
1% annual chance flood.
§ 108-33 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 108-33
1:94
ARTICLE IX
Terminology
§ 108-34. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 108-35. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
§ 108-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-35
1:95
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 108-35 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 108-35
1:96
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after April 15, 1981, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
§ 108-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-35
1:97
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE).
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown
on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 108-35 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 108-35
1:98
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however include either:
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999, applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's flood plain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 108-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-35
1:99

ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 108-36. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective on August 2, 2012, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by Lower Paxton Township, Dauphin
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 108-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-36
1:101
Chapter 110
HEALTH AND SANITATION
§ 110-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WATERS OF LOWER PAXTON TOWNSHIP — Includes all streams and
springs and all bodies of surface water and of underground water, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the Township.
§ 110-2. Applicability of provisions.
The provisions of this Sanitation and Health Code shall apply in the
Township and shall apply equally to individuals, partnerships, firms and
corporations.
§ 110-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
94-08]
A. Any violation of the provisions of this Sanitation and Health Code, upon
summary conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$100 plus the costs of prosecution. Failure to make the necessary
changes or improvements upon the order of the Township Health
Officer shall, following the first conviction, be considered a new and
separate violation of this section of the code, and rearrest may be made.
In the event of violation, if the parties so violating the code, upon notice
duly received, refused to remedy the situation which constitutes the
violation, they may also be sentenced to pay the costs of having the
violation remedied by employees of the Township.
B. Any person, firm, corporation or partnership who or which shall install
a septic system without having first secured a permit therefor shall,
upon summary conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $100 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
thereof, to a period not exceeding 30 days in the county jail, or both.
Any person, firm, corporation or partnership who or which unlawfully
closes and covers a septic system without prior inspection and approval
by the Health Officer of the Township shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$100 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, to a
period not exceeding 30 days in the county jail, or both, plus the costs of
reopening the septic system for inspection. Any person, firm,
corporation or partnership who or which uses an illegally installed or
closed septic system, whether as property owner or tenant, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of $100 and costs of prosecution and, in default
of payment thereof, to a period not exceeding 30 days in the county jail,
or both.
§ 108-36 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 110-4
1:102
§ 110-4. Keeping out flies.
No privy or other receptacle for human excrement shall be constructed,
maintained or used so that flies have or may have access to the
excrementitious matter contained therein.
§ 110-5. Privies discharging on ground.
No privy, urinal or other receptacle for human excrement shall be
constructed, maintained or used which directly or indirectly drains or
discharges over or upon the surface of the ground or into any waters of the
Township.
§ 110-6. Cleaning of privies.
All privies, urinals or other receptacles for human excrement shall be
cleansed at sufficiently frequent intervals to prevent the contents from
overflowing.
§ 110-7. Containers for transportation of excrement.
The transportation of human excrement shall be effected in watertight
containers with tight-fitting covers. Containers shall be thoroughly cleansed
after each use.
§ 110-8. Deposit of human excrement.
No human excrement or material containing human excrement shall be
placed on the surface of the ground, buried or otherwise disposed of in
such a manner that it is likely directly or indirectly to gain access to
any waters of the Township. This chapter is not intended to prohibit the
use of human excrement for fertilizer where such use is not likely to
contaminate waters as aforesaid and where such use is not permitted
to become a menace to public health; provided, however, that fertilizer
containing human excrement shall not be used in connection with the
production of crops intended for human consumption in a raw state without
cooking.
§ 110-9. Toilet accommodations in public places.
Sufficient and suitable free privy or toilet accommodations, well-lighted
and ventilated and separated for each sex, shall be provided at all public
buildings, public markets, public playgrounds, public bathing beaches,
camp meeting grounds and county fairs.
§ 110-10. Sewer system accessible.
No privy or similar receptacle for human excrement shall be constructed,
maintained or used on premises where a sewer, which is part of a sewer
system from which sewage is discharged into the waters of the
§ 110-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-10
1:103
commonwealth under a permit from the Commonwealth Department of
Health, is accessible.
§ 110-11. Deposit or transportation of wastes.
No garbage, offal, pomace, dead animals, decaying matter or organic waste
substance of any kind shall be thrown or deposited in any ravine, ditch
or gutter on any street or highway or into any waters of the Township
or be permitted to remain exposed upon the surface of the ground. The
transportation of garbage and slaughterhouse offal shall be effected in
watertight vehicles or containers, properly covered to avoid spillage, and
shall be cleansed at sufficient intervals to prevent obnoxious odors.
§ 110-12. Accumulations of manure.
Manure shall not be allowed to accumulate in any place where it can
prejudicially affect any source of drinking water or where, as a source of fly
breeding, it may become a menace to public health.
§ 110-13. Animal carcasses.
§ 110-14. Mosquito-breeding conditions.
No persons shall maintain or permit to be maintained any pond, privy vault,
cesspool, well, cistern, rain barrel or other receptacle containing water in
such a condition that mosquitoes breeding therein may become a menace to
the public health.
§ 110-15. Wash water.
No person shall dispose of wash water on any public street, gutter, stream
or adjoining property.
§ 110-16. Wells.
No owner or occupant of any premises shall maintain any well, spring,
cistern or other source of water supply for drinking or household purposes
to which the public has or may have access and which is polluted or which is
so situated or constructed that it may become polluted in any manner that
may render such water supply injurious to health.
A. The carcass of any dead animal not killed for food shall be removed and
disposed of by burial or incineration or other sanitary method within 24
hours after death. If the carcass is buried, it shall be placed so that
every part shall be covered by at least two feet of earth and at a location
not less than 100 feet from any waters of the Township and not subject
to overflow by said waters.
B. In all cases of death from communicable disease, the carcass shall be
thoroughly enveloped in unslaked lime.
§ 110-10 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 110-17
1:104
§ 110-17. Cesspools and septic tanks.
It is illegal to install cesspools or to direct septic tank effluent into wells,
limestone sink holes, abandoned mines, caves, underground streams or
surface streams or onto the surface of the ground.
§ 110-18. Privies.
§ 110-19. Garbage and rubbish receptacles at drive-through and
take-out restaurants. [Amended 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-08]
A. Earth pit privies. An earth pit privy for temporary use must have
approval of the Health Officer and must be covered by at least three
inches of lime and three feet of earth when abandoned. [Amended
4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 94-08]
B. Concrete vault privies.
(1) Plans for permanent installations of concrete vault privies where
running water does not exist must be filed in triplicate with and
approved by the Health Officer. An inspection fee must be paid at
the time of application. [Amended 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 94-08]
(2) Concrete vault privy specifications. Concrete vault privies must be
at least four feet deep; the concrete vault must be at least four feet
wide at the ground level and at least two feet side at the bottom.
The concrete vault must be of four-inch-thick concrete, which
material must be impervious and free from cracks. The vaults must
be covered at the top with tightly fitted hinged access doors which
may be constructed of wood material or other material.
A. Any person, firm, corporation, or partnership operating a restaurant
that offers services to its customers on a drive-through and/or take-out
basis shall provide an outdoor receptacle(s) for garbage and rubbish
generated directly by its customers. Such receptacle(s) shall be in
addition to any on-site waste dumpsters used in the operation of the
restaurant.
B. A minimum of one receptacle shall be provided for each public entrance
to the restaurant and for each drive-through vehicle lane.
C. Receptacles shall be a minimum of 36 gallons and a maximum of 50
gallons in capacity. Receptacles shall possess a cover that provides for
the deposit or pass-through of garbage and rubbish into the container
without cover removal, while, at the same time, sheltering the contents
of the container from adverse weather and scavenging animals.
D. Receptacles shall be located in close proximity to each public entrance
and, in no case, more that 20 feet there from, unless otherwise
approved by the Township. For drive-through lanes, receptacles shall be
placed at a convenient location for motorists using the drive-through
facility to deposit garbage and rubbish.
§ 110-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-19
1:105
Chapter 119
JUNKYARDS
§ 119-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless otherwise expressly
provided:
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Lower Paxton Township, Dauphin
County, Pennsylvania.
JUNK — Any and all forms of waste, refuse, discarded or salvageable
articles or materials, including but not limited to scrap metal, papers,
rags, glass, containers, structures, junked motor vehicles, junked trailers,
machinery and equipment.
JUNK DEALER — Any person who buys, sells, salvages, stores or in any way
deals in junk or owns, leases, operates or maintains a junkyard within the
Township.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — All types of automobiles, trucks, tractors
and self-propelled machinery of all types, except usable farm machinery,
for which no motor vehicle registration plate or yearly renewable tab is
displayed for the current registration year as issued by the Pennsylvania
Bureau of Motor Vehicles. Junked motor vehicles shall also include any
trailer, semitrailer or any other article which would be classified a motor
vehicle under the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, which does not display
and retain a registration plate or yearly renewable tab for the current
registration year.
JUNKYARD — Any place where junk, as herein defined, is stored or
accumulated. Any premises, as herein defined, having one or more junked
motor vehicles and/or unlicensed trailers thereon shall be deemed to be a
junkyard.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, company, corporation or
other legal entity, including singular and plural, male and female.
PREMISES — Any parcel of land situated in Lower Paxton Township,
Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, having a separate Tax Map parcel number
for county assessment purposes.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Paxton, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania.
TRAILER — Any wheeled vehicle not self-propelled, drawn by a motor
vehicle.
E. Receptacles shall be emptied when full or, when not full, at intervals of
not less than once every 48 hours.
§ 110-19 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 119-2
1:106
§ 119-2. License to operate.
No person shall be a junk dealer or own, lease, operate or maintain a
junkyard, as herein defined, within the Township without first obtaining a
license to operate a junkyard as a junk dealer.
§ 119-3. License application; fee.
Any person desiring to be licensed as a junk dealer in the Township shall
first make written application to the Board. Such application shall be in
the form established by the Board and shall set forth the applicant's name
and address and include an accurate description of the premises on which
the junkyard is to be located including the Dauphin County Tax Map parcel
number(s), a statement that the applicant will comply with this chapter
and any regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter and such other
information as the Board may require. An application fee as set forth from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors shall accompany all
applications and is not returnable should the license be denied.
§ 119-4. License issuance.
An application for license under this chapter shall be examined by the
Board, and such license shall be issued or refused within 30 days of
submission to the Board. When the application is found in compliance with
the provisions herein given, together with the zoning ordinances of the
Township, the Board shall issue a license to the junk dealer applicant for
operation of the junkyard as described in the application. Such license shall
at all times be conspicuously displayed upon the junkyard premises. The
license shall be nontransferable both as to the junkyard premises and junk
dealer.
§ 119-5. Annual fee; term.
The annual fee for such license shall be as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors, and the license shall be effective for
one calendar year only. Each license terminating on December 31 for the
year in which it is issued shall be subject to renewal upon reapplication.
All fees are due, payable to and for the use of the Township, at the time of
application.
§ 119-6. License renewal.
Licenses issued under this chapter are required to be renewed on or before
January 1 of the year in which it is desired to continue operations. Such
application for renewal must be in writing, in such form as may be required
by the Board and accompanied by the license fee. Renewal applications
are subject to complete re-examination and consideration by the Board for
continued compliance with the terms of this chapter. No application fee is
required for the issuance of a renewal license.
§ 119-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-7
1:107
§ 119-7. Operating requirements.
Every junk dealer licensed under this chapter shall maintain the licensed
junkyard and conduct business as hereinafter provided:
A. All junk shall be stored behind a fence, as specified in Subsection B
herein. Such fence shall be set back at least 15 feet from the right-ofway
of the public road and shall be set back at least three feet from all
other property lines.
B. Every junkyard shall be completely fenced with a solid covered fence, of
material such as masonry, corrugated metal or wood, to a height of at
least eight feet. The gate must be of similar material and shall be closed
and locked when closed for business. The fence and gate must be
maintained in such a manner as not to become unsightly. There shall be
no advertising of any form placed on the fence.
C. No junkyard shall cover an area in excess of five acres.
D. No junkyard shall operate on Sunday nor between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except to remove any wrecked automobiles from
any public highway.
E. All junk shall be stored and arranged so as to permit access by firefighting
equipment and to prevent accumulation of stagnant water.
Junked automobiles shall be spaced in rows with at least 15 feet
between each double row to permit movement of fire equipment. Junk
shall not be piled to a height of more than eight feet from the ground.
F. All gasoline and oil shall be drained from any junked automobile into
containers within 12 hours after the arrival of the junked automobile
upon such premises. Gasoline or oil shall be stored at only one location
on the licensed premises, and no more than 20 gallons, in aggregate, of
gasoline and oil shall be stored above ground.
G. All weeds on any junkyard shall be kept mowed and shall not be
permitted to seed.
H. During business hours, an adult attendant shall at all times remain on
the junkyard premises.
I. No garbage or organic waste shall be permitted to be stored on any
junkyard.
J. Paper, rags, plastic materials and rubbish shall not be stored outside
and shall not be accumulated or remain on any junkyard premises for
more than one month.
K. Junkyards shall at all times be maintained in such manner so as not to
cause public or private nuisance, nor cause any menace to the health or
safety of any persons off the premises, nor cause any excessive,
offensive or noxious smoke or odors, nor cause the breeding, harboring
or infesting of rats, rodents or vermin, nor cause a violation of any
§ 119-7 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 119-7
1:108
§ 119-8. Inspection of premises.
Any member of the Board or a duly authorized agent thereof may at any
time enter upon and inspect any premises for which there is a pending
application for a junkyard license or which holds a current junkyard license.
§ 119-9. Legal action; remedy.
The Board or any person may take any appropriate action at law or in equity,
civil or criminal, to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and this chapter
shall in no way restrict any remedies otherwise provided by law.
§ 119-10. Violations and penalties.
This chapter shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice
in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person, firm or
corporation who or which violates or permits the violation of this chapter
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.
Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense. Each section of this chapter
that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 128
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM
§ 128-1. Establishment.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith established in
accordance with provisions of the Second Class Code, in that it rewards
members of the Colonial Park, Paxtonia, and Linglestown Fire Companies
for their loyal, diligent, and devoted volunteer firefighting services to the
residents of Lower Paxton Township; thus providing for the operation and
maintenance of said fire companies, securing fire protection for the
inhabitants of the Township; and thus ensuring that fire services are
provided within the Township by the means and to the extent determined
by the Township, including the appropriate financial and administrative
health or sanitary law, ordinance or regulation of any governmental
body.
L. Records of all junk received or removed from any junkyard shall be kept
for a period of 10 years by the junk dealer on the premises and shall
contain the names and addresses of persons from whom junk was
received or delivered, the date thereof and a description of the junk.
Such records shall at all times be open to inspection by any member of
the Board or its duly authorized agent or any law enforcement officer.
§ 119-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-1
1:109
assistance for these services, as per consultations with the Township's three
Fire Companies.
§ 128-2. Defined benefit stipend.
The LOSAP shall provide for a defined benefit stipend for each volunteer
firefighter and/or fire police officer who meets the criteria set forth herein;
that such benefit shall be provided in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Lower Paxton Township; and that such plan shall be
administered in accordance with the U.S. Internal Revenue Code and this
chapter.
§ 128-3. Calculation of years of service.
All years of service referenced herein shall be calculated on a calendar-year
basis. To receive credit for a year of service as a volunteer firefighter and
fire police officer, the LOSAP plan shall require that volunteers:
§ 128-4. Funding.
The LOSAP shall be funded by Lower Paxton Township using proceeds from
its dedicated real estate tax levy for fire protection. The amount of funding
shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors as part of its budget
process for an upcoming fiscal year and in general conformance with an
actuarial valuation for the LOSAP. In no event, shall the Township's annual
allocation of real estate tax revenues to fund the LOSAP exceed $60,000.
§ 128-5. Actuarial valuation.
Lower Paxton Township shall cause to be prepared an actuarial valuation
for the LOSAP not less than once every three years. An actuarial valuation
shall also be prepared prior to any amendment of the LOSAP to determine
the effect of the proposed amendment on the financial status and annual
funding of the LOSAP. The cost of preparation of these referenced actuarial
valuations shall be an eligible expenditure of LOSAP funds held on account
by the Township.
A. Be members in good standing with Colonial Park, Paxtonia, or
Linglestown Fire Companies and shall meet any additional
requirements established by said fire companies for active membership
as a firefighter and/or a fire police officers.
B. Meet the qualifications of "active volunteers" as defined by PA Act 66 of
2008, except that said qualification must be earned through service
only to the Colonial Park, Paxtonia, and Linglestown Fire Companies.
C. In accordance with PA Act 66 of 2008, earn at least five points in
response to fire and rescue responses.
§ 128-1 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 128-6
1:110
§ 128-6. Eligibility.
The LOSAP shall provide that eligible volunteer firefighters and fire police
officers must be members of the Colonial Park, Paxtonia, or Linglestown
Fire Companies and be between the ages of 18 and 65. Years of service
as a volunteer firefighter and/or fire police officer before age 18, after age
65, or with a fire company or fire department not located in Lower Paxton
Township shall not shall not be considered as service time as an eligible
volunteer firefighter for purposes of this LOSAP.
§ 128-7. Monthly stipend.
The LOSAP shall provide for a monthly stipend of up to $10 per month,
per year of service, to eligible volunteer firefighters and fire police officers,
to a maximum total of up to $250 per month at a maximum of 25 years
of service. In no event shall the maximum benefit provided to a volunteer
firefighter exceed $250 per month.
§ 128-8. Vesting.
The LOSAP shall provide for 100% vesting of benefits after completion
of five years of service from the effective date of this chapter and after
attaining age 40. The LOSAP stipend is payable after a firefighter and/or fire
police officer has attained age 65 and has completed five years of service.
The LOSAP stipend shall be payable for the life of a firefighter and/or fire
police officer and shall terminate upon the member's death.
§ 128-9. Credit for prior service.
The LOSAP shall provide for credit of up to 20 years service as an eligible
volunteer firefighter and/or fire police officer prior to the establishment
of the LOSAP, with said date of establishment being January 1, 2008.
Prior years of service credit shall only be provided to firefighters and
fire police officers for years before January 1, 2008, that firefighters and
fire police officers have met the criteria established in § 128-3 above, as
can be demonstrated by the records of the Colonial Park, Paxtonia, and
Linglestown Fire Companies, or as can be certified by the Fire Chiefs
and Presidents of said Companies, notarized under oath by the Fire Chief,
President, and the firefighter and/or fire police officer, based upon the
best information that exists at the time of prior years certification. The
Fire Chiefs and Presidents of the Colonial Park, Paxtonia, and Linglestown
Fire Companies shall furnish to the Township said list of firefighters and
fire police officers who have qualified for prior years service credit by no
later than March 31, 2009. The Township shall review the certifications
of prior years service credit furnished as required herein and approve the
certification thereof by no later than May 15, 2009.
A. Eligibility shall also include an exception to the age limitation of 65 as a
one-time event limited to individuals with qualifying age and years of
service prior to December 31, 2008, and who attain the age of 65 on or
before December 31, 2012.
§ 128-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-10
1:111
§ 128-10. Annual certification list.
In accordance with this chapter the Fire Chiefs and Presidents of the
Colonial Park, Paxtonia, or Linglestown Fire Companies shall furnish to
the Township, notarized under oath, by no later than January 31 of the
new year, an annual certification list of all volunteer firefighters and fire
police officers who have qualified for service credit under the LOSAP for the
prior year. In addition, all firefighters and fire police officers, certified as
required herein by their Fire Chief and President, shall provide a notarized
statement indicating that they have fulfilled the annual LOSAP criteria,
as herein stated. The Township shall review the annual certification lists
and individual firefighter and fire police officer certifications, furnished as
required herein, and approve the final annual certifications by no later than
February 15 of the current year.
§ 128-11. Records.
The Colonial Park, Paxtonia, and Linglestown Fire Companies shall create
and maintain sufficient records, suitable to the Township to provide for the
maintenance of the LOSAP and to ensure accurate and complete reporting
of firefighter and fire police officer credit for years of volunteer service.
§ 128-12. LOSAP fund.
The Township shall cause to be created a LOSAP fund in which it will
deposit its annual LOSAP contribution, as referenced in § 128-4 above. Said
LOSAP contribution shall be deposited on account by the Township on or
before June 30 of each year. LOSAP funds, once deposited in the LOSAP
fund, shall be invested in accordance with the Pennsylvania Fiduciaries Act.
§ 128-13. LOSAP Committee.
A LOSAP Committee, consisting of six members, is hereby established and
shall be maintained to provide for the review of the LOSAP Program and to
provide advice on the investment of LOSAP funds. Said Committee shall be
composed of the Township's Manager, Public Safety Director, and Finance
Director, and one representative each, appointed by the Colonial Park,
Paxtonia, and Linglestown Fire Companies. The LOSAP Committee shall
serve in a fiduciary capacity to the LOSAP fund and shall report directly to
the Board of Supervisors. The LOSAP Committee shall meet as needed, but
no less frequently then on an annual basis. The Township's Finance Director
shall serve as the chairman of the LOSAP Committee.
§ 128-14. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter shall be January 1, 2008.
Chapter 132
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 128-10 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 128-14
1:112
ARTICLE I
Regulations
[Adopted 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-11]
§ 132-1. Purpose.
It is the intent, purpose and scope of this article to ensure the preservation
of public park lands, recreation facilities and conservation areas for the
residents of the Township, to regulate activities within these areas
consistent with the enjoyment of unspoiled natural settings or park facilities
and to prevent any nuisances to the residents of the Township in the use of
such public park lands, recreation facilities and conservation areas or in the
enjoyment of private property adjacent to such areas.
§ 132-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words/terms shall have the
meanings herein indicated.
BUSINESS ACTIVITY — Offering an article, thing, or service for sale or hire.
GAMBLING — To play a game for money or property.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — An organization whose service or purpose
is not conducted or maintained for the purpose of making a profit.
VENDOR — An individual, partnership, business, company, group of
individuals, or other entity that has a product, information or service for
sale or distribution to others.
§ 132-3. Preservation of property, natural resources and wildlife.
No persons except those authorized by the Township and conducting
Township business shall, in recreation, park or conservation areas:
A. Injure, deface, disturb, befoul nor in any manner destroy or cause to be
destroyed any part of any recreation, park or conservancy site owned
by the Township, nor any building, sign structure, equipment, utility or
other property found therein.
B. Remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing
thing or any rock or other mineral.
C. Kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner deliberately disturb or cause to
be disturbed any wild bird or animal within the recreation, park and
conservancy sites owned by the Township, except as permitted in
§ 132-7C.
D. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake or other body of water or adjacent to any
park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such
waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may result
in the pollution of such waters, nor dump, deposit or leave any bottles,
§ 132-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-3
1:113
§ 132-4. Operating policies; fees.
broken glass, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, pet waste, garbage, refuse or
trash anywhere within the park and conservancy sites owned by the
Township, but rather make use of proper receptacles where these
are provided; and where receptacles are not so provided, all such
materials shall be carried away from the park by the person or persons
responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.
A. Hours of operation. Recreation, park and conservation areas shall be
open daily to the public from official sunrise to official sunset, except for
lighted courts and fields which shall be open from official sunrise until
10:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time and Daylight Saving Time; and it
shall be unlawful for any person or persons, other than Township
personnel conducting Township business therein, to occupy or to be
present in such park during any hours in which the park is not open to
the public. Permits must be obtained for use after official sunset or
10:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or Daylight Saving Time closing
times for specific activities. Any section or part of the recreation, park
and conservation areas may be declared closed to the public any time
and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated
intervals. During such periods of time, it shall be unlawful to enter upon
or occupy such areas or portions thereof contrary to posted regulations.
B. All individuals or groups who desire to reserve Township owned park
facilities are required to obtain a permit for such use and to carry the
permit at the facility during the effective dates and times. The following
Application Procedure shall be followed to obtain a permit.
(1) An appropriate application along with the rental fee and deposit
required shall be submitted to the Parks and Recreation
Department in order to obtain a permit for such use in the
designated park area. Appropriate permit applications are:
(a) Park pavilion reservation.
(b) Park ball field/court reservation.
(c) Heroes Grove Amphitheater reservation.
(d) Special event permit application.
(e) Park vending permit application.
(2) All applications shall be reviewed by Township staff and upon
approval, a permit shall be issued as confirmation of the
reservation. Use of the facility shall be restricted to the terms
specified on the permit issued to the individual or group.
(3) Refundable cancellations are those requested more than two weeks
in advance of the reserved time; cancellations within two weeks of
the reserved time are non-refundable. In case of inclement
§ 132-3 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 132-4
1:114
weather, a reservation may be rescheduled based upon availability
by contacting the Parks and Recreation Department. A rain date
may be scheduled in advance along with the appropriate fee.
C. All individuals or groups who receive a permit to reserve Township
owned park facilities are required to adhere to the following general
guidelines.
(1) All posted rules and regulations of the park facility shall be
applicable to the permittee. All Township ordinances within the
Lower Paxton Code of Ordinances, Chapter 132, Parks and
Recreation, along with all amendments and resolutions shall be
applicable to the permittee.
(2) A security deposit may be required for the use of Township park
facilities, as determined by Manager of Parks and Recreation.
(3) All persons using Township park facilities shall be responsible for
cleaning the facility before leaving. Tables shall be wiped off and
placed in the locations in which they were found. If necessary,
floors shall be swept. All refuse shall be gathered and placed in the
proper containers.
(4) Any additional equipment (such as entertainment systems, animals,
carnival and water activities, etc.) to be brought onto park property
in conjunction with a reservation shall be pre-approved, in writing,
by the Parks and Recreation Department and noted on the permit.
A signed certificate of liability insurance, naming Lower Paxton
Township as an additionally insured and carrying a minimum of
$1,000,000 per occurrence, may be required for reservation
approval and permit issuance.
D. Facilities and areas in Township recreation, park or conservancy sites
shall be used only for the purposes designated or implicit in their
character. Special activities including flying model airplanes and
drones, games, picnics, the operation of motor scooters, motorcycles,
minibikes, go-carts, snowmobiles and similar vehicles shall be
permitted only at locations or trails specifically designated for such use
and at times established.
E. Licensed motor vehicles shall be permitted only on designated
roadways. The speed limit for such vehicles on such roadways shall be
15 miles per hour. Motor scooters, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts and
snowmobiles shall not be permitted on roadways designated for
licensed vehicular traffic, unless licensed for travel on the public roads
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All vehicles shall be parked in
areas or places so provided and designated. Parking in places contrary
to posted regulations and times is prohibited, and such vehicles may be
removed by the Township at the owner's expense. All parking is
prohibited after regular closing time. It shall be unlawful to clean,
wash, repair or do any work whatsoever on private vehicles within
recreation, park and conservation areas, except for emergency repairs.
§ 132-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-4
1:115
§ 132-5. Merchandising and vending.
The sale of articles, items, or things by the Township or nonprofit
organizations, including private vendors working as a subcontractor to/
working with the Township or nonprofit organizations to further the mission
of said organizations, shall be permitted if approved through a park vending
permit. Nonprofit athletic organizations shall, with the approval of the
Parks and Recreation Manager, be permitted to utilize municipally owned
concession stands for the sale of articles or things.
§ 132-6. Signs, banners and scoreboards.
§ 132-7. Prohibited acts.
F. Fees shall be set by separate resolution, from time to time, of the Park
and Recreation Board.
A. Signs, banners, and other forms of recognition of private businesses
shall only be permitted in accordance with the Township's policy on
advertising, sponsorship, and naming rights.11
B. One freestanding scoreboard is permitted per playing field, provided
that it shall not exceed 200 square feet in area and 20 feet in height at
the top. Commercial messages shall only be permitted in accordance
with the Township's policy on advertising, sponsorship, and naming
rights. The face of a scoreboard, including any attached commercial
signs and panels, shall be permanently oriented toward the recreation
and spectator area.
A. Fires shall not be built or allowed anywhere in recreation, park or
conservation areas, except in stoves, fireplaces or designated areas
provided for that purpose.
B. Fireworks shall be prohibited on recreation, park and conservation
lands. Fireworks displays may be permitted with the approval of the
Board of Supervisors after receiving recommendations from the
Manager of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
C. It shall be unlawful for owners of domesticated animals to allow same
within recreation, park or conservation areas without being controlled
by a leash not more than six feet long, except within a designated dog
park. A permit shall be obtained for the training and/or exhibition of
animals in designated areas. It shall be unlawful to bring any dangerous
animal into any recreation, park or conservation area.
D. Gambling is prohibited on recreation, park and conservation lands.
E. Private, for-profit business activities, separate from an approved
fundraising event of the Township or a nonprofit organization, and
signs, banners, and other forms of business recognition that are not
11.Editor's Note: See Art. II, Sponsorship and Naming Rights, of this article.
§ 132-4 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 132-7
1:116
§ 132-8. Enforcement authority.
The Township Manager and agents designated by him, primarily the
Manager of Parks and Recreation, shall administer the provisions of this
article, including the establishment and collecting of fees, preparation of
application forms, issuance and revocation of permits, promulgation of rules
conducted in accordance with the Township's policy on advertising,
sponsorship, and naming rights are prohibited.
F. Private, for-profit business activities shall not be announced, advertised
or called to the public attention in any way except in accordance with
the Township's policy on advertising, sponsorship, and naming rights.
G. It shall be unlawful to post, fasten, paint, write, carve, or affix any
notice, sign, advertisement or any inscription whatever upon any
structure, tree, stone, fence, thing or enclosure within any recreation,
park or conservation area or on any public lands or highways or roads
adjacent to any recreation, park or conservation area, except in
accordance with the Township's policy on advertising, sponsorship, and
naming rights.
H. It shall be unlawful to land a private or commercial airplane or
helicopter on recreation, park and conservation lands.
I. Bicycles, skateboards, roller blades, etc. are not permitted on the park's
ballfields, ball courts, pavilions, benches and tables, or Heroes Grove
Amphitheater.
J. Smoking, vaping, juuling and the use of any other form of e-cigarettes is
prohibited on any recreation, park and conservation lands, including,
but not limited to the Friendship Center. [Amended 3-5-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-02]
K. It shall be unlawful for any person in any recreation, park or
conservation area to:
(1) Disturb the peace or use profane or obscene language.
(2) Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
(3) Commit any assault, battery or engage in fighting.
(4) Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic beverages.
(5) Violate any rule for the use of the park made or approved by the
Department of Parks and Recreation.
(6) Prevent any person from using any park or any facilities, or
interfere with such use in compliance with this article and the rules
applicable to such use.
(7) Act in an unlawful, disorderly or disruptive manner or against the
best interest of the areas or other people.
§ 132-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-8
1:117
and regulations to implement the provisions of this article and all other
decisions relative thereto. When acts or conduct of individuals or groups
is determined to be in violation of this article or rules and regulations
promulgated by the authority of this article or not to be in the best interests
of the recreation, park and conservancy area, or when such acts of conduct
endanger other people, private or public property, or when such acts are
deemed to be disruptive to the surrounding neighborhood, the Township
Police, Manager of Parks and Recreation or his agent assigned to such area
or program shall have the authority to cause such acts to be terminated
or to expel the perpetrators of such acts from the area or to call the
Township Police to arrest and detain such individual or individuals or to file
a complaint for the violation of this article with a District Magisterial Judge.
§ 132-9. Violations and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice
in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person, firm or
corporation who or which violates or permits the violation of this section
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.
Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 132-8 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 132-9
1:118
ARTICLE II
Advertising, Sponsorship and Naming Rights
[Adopted 6-20-2017 by Res. No. 17-26]
§ 132-10. Statement of policy.
§ 132-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISING — The activity of attracting the public's attention to a
particular product or service.
COMMUNITY EVENT — Programs, activities, or functions that are held in
facilities or on properties owned or leased by Lower Paxton Township for
parks and recreation.
DONATIONS — The provision of in-kind goods and/or money for which no
benefits are sought.
LOGO — A symbol or name that is used to brand an organization.
NAMING RIGHT — A type of sponsorship in which an individual,
corporation, or other entity purchases the exclusive right to name an asset
or venue (i.e., athletic field, sports complex, parks and recreation amenity,
or community facility) for a fixed period of time. Usually, naming rights are
considered in a commercial context, in which the naming right is sold or
exchanged for significant cash and/or other considerations under a longterm
agreement.
A. Lower Paxton Township may seek to establish revenue streams that will
enhance its ability to deliver services and facilities to the community
beyond the core levels funded from the Township's General Fund. This
support shall further the Township's mission by providing monetary or
in-kind support of the Parks and Recreation Department and its
facilities in a manner that respects the noncommercial nature of
Township properties and services.
B. In appreciation of such support, it is the policy of Lower Paxton
Township to provide sponsors with suitable acknowledgement of their
contributions. However, such recognition shall adhere to the aesthetic
values and purposes of the Department's parks, facilities, and services.
In addition, acknowledgement does not constitute an endorsement by
the Township or its Parks and Recreation Department of the sponsor, its
organization, products, or services.
C. This policy is not applicable to gifts, grants, or unsolicited donations in
which no benefits are granted to the donor and where no business
relationship exists between the donor and the Township.
§ 132-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-11
1:119
SPONSORSHIP — Financial or in-kind support from an individual,
corporation, or other entity for a specific Township service, program,
facility, park, or event in return for certain benefits.
SPONSORSHIP AGREEMENT — The legal instrument that sets forth the
terms and conditions the parties have agreed to.
TOWNSHIP — Lower Paxton Township.
§ 132-12. Authority and approvals.
§ 132-13. Sponsorship guidelines.
A. The Board of Supervisors of Lower Paxton Township shall approve all
sponsorships meeting the following criteria:
(1) Sponsorships of $10,000 or more.
(2) Naming rights.
(3) Agreements that exceed three years in term.
B. The Friendship Center Operating Board shall approve all sponsorships
related to the Friendship Center, provided that approval by the Board of
Supervisors is not otherwise required.
C. The Parks and Recreation Board shall approve all sponsorships related
to the following, provided that approval by the Board of Supervisors is
not otherwise required:
(1) Sponsorships less than $10,000.
(2) Community events.
A. Sponsorship agreements may be negotiated for community events.
B. All proposed sponsorship agreements shall be considered on a case-bycase
basis, and shall be consistent with the Township's vision, mission,
and strategic plan.
C. Ineligible sponsorships include, but are not limited to, any potential
sponsor whose primary products or services are the sale of alcohol,
tobacco, firearms, sexually explicit materials, or inappropriate
materials.
D. A sponsorship agreement shall not obligate the Township to any single
entity, product or service nor imply the Township's endorsement of
same.
E. Sponsorship shall not confer or transfer any right of control,
decisionmaking, or influence over the Township or its facilities.
F. All funds accepted shall by the Township be administered in accordance
with the Township's financial management policies and procedures.
§ 132-11 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 132-13
1:120
§ 132-14. Recognition of sponsors.
G. Sponsorship agreements shall not limit the Township's ability to seek
other sponsors.
H. Recognition benefits to be offered shall not compromise the design
standards and visual integrity of Township property, as determined by
the Parks and Recreation Board or the Friendship Center Operating
Board.
A. In recognition of a sponsor's contribution, preference shall be given to
providing an off-site form of recognition that may include one or more of
the following:
(1) A thank you letter.
(2) Publicity through the Township's website, newsletters, media
releases and/or other promotional materials.
(3) Events, such as a press conference, photo opportunity, ground
breaking or ribbon cutting ceremony.
(4) Acknowledgement at a televised Board of Supervisors public
meeting.
(5) Commemorative items, such as a framed picture or plaque.
(6) Inclusion on a sponsorship recognition board/wall at municipal
offices.
(7) Inclusion on a register of sponsors that is accessible to the public
online.
B. Where on-site recognition is to be provided, types of recognition may
include:
(1) Temporary signs, which may include logos, acknowledging a
sponsor during the construction or restoration of a particular park
facility or during an event.
(2) Permanent (permanency is limited to the life of the asset) plaque or
paver, if applicable.
(3) Signs or banners used for nonprofit, youth sports organizations'
fundraising at recreation and sporting facilities may be permitted
provided that the following criteria are met:
(a) Signs shall be on the interior walls or fence of an open stadium
or field and shall be designed to be viewed from the inside of
the stadium only. They shall be removed at the end of each
sports' season.
(b) Signs shall not be greater than 32 square feet in size.
§ 132-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-14
1:121
§ 132-15. Other potentially acceptable sponsorship opportunities.
Potential sponsorship opportunities that are more interactive than those
described above may also be permissible for certain facilities or services
under this policy. These sponsorship opportunities shall be subject to the
approval of Township management staff, provided that a higher level of
approval is not required by this policy. Other potentially acceptable
sponsorship opportunities include, but are not limited to:
§ 132-16. Naming rights guidelines.
(c) Signs shall not be illuminated.
(d) Signs shall have a green background with white lettering.
(4) Scoreboards within Township parks shall adhere to the following
criteria:
(a) Scoreboards shall not exceed 200 square feet in area, and the
top of the scoreboard shall be not more than 20 feet above
ground level.
(b) Commercial messages, including logos, shall not exceed 30%
of the front face of the scoreboard.
(c) The face of all scoreboards, including any attached commercial
signs and panels, shall be permanently oriented toward the
recreation and spectator area.
(d) Any digital display shall not exceed 30% of the total scoreboard
area.
(5) The on-site recognition referenced in this section shall not possess
logos or verbiage that reference or promote the sale of alcohol,
tobacco, firearms, sexually explicit materials, or inappropriate
materials.
C. Naming of an asset or venue in a Township park or the Friendship
Center, as per the Naming Rights Guidelines, as stated in § 132-16 of
this article.
A. Giveaway items, coupons, or other sponsorship related marketing
materials.
B. Event booth space.
C. Contest, drawings, or other activities that request a response.
A. Attributing naming rights to a community facility shall be undertaken in
a well-thought-out manner to ensure that the name, facility function,
and reputation of all complement each other and do not detract from
the public perception and use of the facility.
§ 132-14 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 132-16
1:122
B. Naming rights agreements shall be approved by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors.
C. Naming rights for a community property or facility shall only be
considered where a "significant" contribution has been offered toward
the procurement or construction of a property or facility, or ongoing
operating expense of same.
D. All naming rights shall be approved for a specific term as determined by
the Township.
E. Naming rights term renewals, extensions, and incumbency rights shall
be subject to the mutual agreement of all parties, as established in the
original agreement.
F. The naming rights entity shall have ongoing responsibilities to adhere
to the standards set forth herein and in the naming rights agreement,
which shall have termination provisions in the event of the failure to
comply therewith.
G. Naming rights opportunities shall be solicited using an open and
competitive process. If a request for proposal (RFP) or competitive bid
is issued, it shall be subject to the normal approval processes of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 132-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132-16
1:123
Chapter 137
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 132-16 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 132-16
1:124
ARTICLE I
Peddlers and Solicitors
§ 137-1. Definitions; word usage.
In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter. Certain terms are defined as follows:
PEDDLER — Any person who shall engage in peddling, as herein defined.
PEDDLING — The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares, services,
including financial services, damage or fire restoration services or
merchandise for immediate delivery, which the person selling or offering for
sale carries with him in traveling or has in his possession or control, upon
any of the streets or sidewalks, from house to house, by visitation to private
residences or by entering in or upon private property within the Township.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm, organization
or corporation
SOLICITING — The seeking or taking of contracts or orders for any goods,
wares, services, including financial services, damage or fire restoration
services or merchandise for future delivery, or for subscriptions or
contributions, upon any of the streets or sidewalks, from house to house, by
visitation to private residences or by entering in or upon private property
within the Township, and shall further mean the seeking or taking of
contracts or orders for home or other building repairs, improvement and
alterations, and also orders or contracts for any mechanical, electrical,
plumbing or heating device, services or equipment for houses or other
building improvements or repairs upon or from the places aforesaid within
the Township.
SOLICITOR — Any person who shall engage in soliciting, as hereinabove
defined.
§ 137-2. License required.
A. No person shall engage in soliciting or peddling in the Township
without first having obtained a valid license as herein provided.
Notwithstanding possession of a valid license, no person shall peddle or
solicit or attempt same at any residence that displays a "Do Not Solicit"
sign and the name and address is listed on Do Not Solicit List provided
by Police Department.
B. Soliciting and peddling shall not apply to:
(1) Farmers seeking or taking orders for the sale of their own products;
(2) The seeking or taking of orders by any manufacturer or producer
for the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products
or milk and milk products;
§ 137-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-2
1:125
§ 137-3. License application.
(3) The sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose;
(4) The seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers
licensed under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for insurance;
(5) Persons, corporations, partnerships and associations, their agents
or employees, who have complied with the provisions of the Act of
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of 1935, P.L. 644,
as amended, governing solicitations for charitable, benevolent,
patriotic or other purposes; or
(6) Any person taking orders for merchandise from dealers or
merchants, for resale to an ultimate consumer.
A. Every person desiring to engage in soliciting or peddling in the
Township shall first make application to the Secretary of the Board of
Supervisors or his designee for a license. If such person shall also be
required to obtain a license from any county officer, he shall, on making
such application, exhibit and provide a copy of any valid county license.
(1) The application shall be upon a blank provided by the Police
Department and shall contain at least the following information
verified by oath or affirmation:
(a) Full name of the applicant and local address, if any.
(b) Permanent address of the applicant.
(c) Cellular telephone number or other number for immediate
contact of the applicant.
(d) Name and contact number of immediate supervisor of
applicant, if any.
(e) Name, address and primary contact number of employer or a
statement that such applicant is self-employed.
(f) The nature of the goods, wares, services or merchandise
offered for sale.
(g) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any crime and, if the answer is in the affirmative,
the nature of the offense or offenses and the punishment or
punishments imposed there.
(h) The type, description and registration number of vehicle(s) to
be used, if any.
§ 137-2 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 137-3
1:126
§ 137-4. License fee.
No license shall be issued under this article until the sum as set forth from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors shall be paid to the
Township Secretary, and it shall be for the use of the Township. A separate
application shall be filed and a separate permit fee shall be paid by each
person who shall actually conduct the soliciting or peddling and shall apply
where an employer desires to secure licenses for his employees, agents or
servants.
§ 137-5. License term; new license.
The license granted pursuant to this article shall be valid for 30 days after
the date of such license and, upon the expiration of any license, if the person
holding the same shall desire to continue or renew soliciting or peddling,
he shall be required to file a new application for a permit and pay a new
license fee. Such licenses may be issued, in advance, for consecutive thirtyday
periods not exceeding two in number, upon payment, in advance, of the
license fee for each thirty-day period provided in § 137-4.
§ 137-6. License exhibition.
Such license, when issued, shall state, inter alia, the products to be sold or
services to be rendered by the licensee. Every solicitor or peddler shall at
all times, when engaged in soliciting or peddling in the Township, carry and
prominently display such license upon his person and shall exhibit it upon
request to all police officers, Township officials and citizens. No solicitor
(i) The previous municipalities in which the applicant has
conducted such business.
(2) The applicant shall furnish a Pennsylvania criminal history check
dated within 30 days of the date of application. An application for a
license may be refused for criminal activity that constitutes a felony
or for any crime, regardless of grading, that involves any type of
theft, fraud, misappropriation of public trust or computer or
electronic devices; or for prior validated complaints regarding
violations of this ordinance or similar ordinances in other
municipalities. Should issuance of license be denied based upon the
criteria above, the applicant may appeal such denial in writing to
the Director of Public Safety for the Township within five days of
notice of denial of application.
(3) Upon request, the applicant shall also submit to fingerprinting and
furnish a photograph.
B. Where a person makes application for himself and one or more helpers,
all applicable personal information specified above shall be given for
each helper and verified or affirmed by oath or affirmation by him, and
an individual license shall be required for each helper. No license under
this article shall be transferable from one person to another.
§ 137-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-6
1:127
or peddler shall engage in selling any product or service not mentioned on
such license.
§ 137-7. Hours.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this article shall engage
in soliciting or peddling on any day of the week before 8:00 a.m. or after
7:00 p.m., or at any time on Sundays or Holidays recognized by the
Township. During the time of the year when Eastern Standard Time is
effective, the aforesaid hours shall be Eastern Standard Time, and during
the time of the year when daylight saving time is effective, the aforesaid
hours shall be daylight saving time.
§ 137-8. Parking vehicle on street; littering.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this article shall park
any vehicle upon any of the streets, highways or alleys of the Township
in order to sort, rearrange or clean any of his goods, wares, services or
merchandise. No such person shall place or deposit any refuse on any such
streets, highways or alleys. No such person shall maintain or keep a street
or curbstone market by parking any vehicle upon any street or alley in the
Township for any longer than necessary in order to sell therefrom to persons
residing in the immediate vicinity.
§ 137-9. Fixed location prohibited.
No person licensed as a solicitor or peddler under this article shall occupy
any fixed location upon any of the sidewalks of the streets, highways, alleys
or sidewalks of the Township for the purpose of soliciting or peddling with
or without any stand or counter.
§ 137-10. Record of licenses.
The Secretary or his designee shall keep a record of all licenses issued
under this article, and the Director of Public Safety for the Township,
through the police department, shall supervise the activities of all holders
of such licenses and shall have the authority to refuse an application or
suspend or revoke a license as specified in § 137-11.
§ 137-11. License suspension or revocation.
Any application may be rejected or any license issued under this article may
be suspended or revoked at any time by the Manager or his designee upon
proof being furnished to him that the application for the license contained
false, misleading or omitted material information or that the applicant or
licensee was ineligible for a license based on the criteria in § 137-4 above.
Further, a license may be suspended or revoked for a person who is cited
for any of the prohibited activities listed in § 137-12 below.
§ 137-6 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 137-12
1:128
§ 137-12. Prohibited activities.
No person shall:
§ 137-13. Violations and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department in an action brought
before a Magisterial District Justice in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure. Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates or permits
the violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding,
be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
A. Peddle or solicit in the Township without a valid license or fail to
prominently display such license on their person when peddling or
soliciting;
B. Peddle or solicit any product or type of product not mentioned in
applicant's license;
C. Hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds in the Township or use any loudspeaker or horn or any
other devise for announcing his presence by which the public may be
annoyed;
D. Peddle or solicit from a vehicle, or park such vehicle upon any of the
streets or alleys in the Township longer than necessary to deliver
products, goods or wares actually sold;
E. Park any vehicle on any of the streets or alleys of the Township for the
purpose of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of the applicant's
goods, wares or merchandise or for disposing of any carton, wrapping
material or any stock or wares or of foodstuffs which may have been
unsalable through handling, age or otherwise;
F. Occupy any fixed location upon any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks or
elsewhere out-of-doors within the Township, for purpose of the sale,
storage, display of any goods, wares or merchandise, with or without a
stand or counter;
G. Conduct any business, peddling or soliciting during prohibited hours;
H. Engage in hard-sell tactics, generally defined as a method of
advertising or selling that is direct, forceful, and insistent or highpressure
salesmanship, to sell any product or service or solicit funds; or
refuses to cease efforts to peddle or solicit after being personally
advised by a resident that they are not interested; and/or
I. Solicit or peddle or attempt same to residents who display "Do Not
Solicit" signage and whose name and address is listed on Do Not Solicit
List provided by Police Department.
§ 137-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-13
1:129
Each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
§ 137-13 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 137-13
1:130
ARTICLE II
Transient Retail Merchants
§ 137-14. Definitions; word usage.
In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter. Certain terms are defined as follows:
FLEA MARKET — Any location where two or more transient retail
merchants or transient retail businesses are located for the purposes of
principally selling secondhand goods and antiques.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm, organization
or corporation.
TEMPORARY BASIS — Any business which operates for less than three days
per week on a monthly basis.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — Includes the following:
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANT — Every person, whether principal or
agent, entering into, beginning or desiring to begin a transient retail
business in the Township for the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise
whatsoever and who hires, leases, occupies or uses any room, apartment,
store, shop, building, vehicles or other place or structure for the exhibition
and sale of such goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 137-15. License required.
No person shall engage in a transient retail business in the Township
without first having obtained a license as herein provided, except that no
license shall be required for the following:
Engaging in peddling, canvassing, soliciting and taking orders, either
by sample or otherwise, for any goods, wares or merchandise, upon
any of the streets or alleys, sidewalks or public grounds within the
Township, but does not include the sale or delivery of products house to
house; and
A.
Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or merchandise
from a fixed location within the Township, on a temporary basis, which
includes, but shall not be limited to, such activities conducted at the
time of special occasions or celebrations, for seasonal purposes or for
or in advance of specific yearly holidays.
B.
A. Farmers selling their own produce.
B. The sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds of which are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose.
C. Any individual employed by or representing a church, Township civic
association, scouting organization or school.
§ 137-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-15
1:131
§ 137-16. License application.
Every person desiring to engage in a transient retail business in the
Township shall first make application to the Police Department. If such
person shall also be required to obtain a license from any county officer, he
or she shall, on making such application, exhibit and provide a copy of any
valid county license.
D. Individuals selling goods, wares and merchandise at a licensed flea
market.
A. The application shall be provided by the Police Department.
(1) The application shall contain at least the following information
verified by oath or affirmation:
(a) Full name of the applicant and local address, if any.
(b) Permanent address of the applicant.
(c) Cellular telephone number or other number for immediate
contact of the applicant.
(d) Name and contact number of immediate supervisor of
applicant, if any.
(e) Name, address and primary contact number of employer or a
statement that such applicant is self-employed.
(f) The nature of the goods, wares, services or merchandise
offered for sale.
(g) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of any crime and, if the answer is in the affirmative,
the nature of the offense or offenses and the punishment or
punishments imposed there.
(h) The type, description and registration number of vehicle(s) to
be used, if any.
(i) The previous municipalities in which the applicant has
conducted such business.
(2) The applicant shall furnish a Pennsylvania Criminal History Check
dated within 30 days of the date of application. An application for a
license may be refused for criminal activity that constitutes a felony
or for any crime, regardless of grading, that involves any type of
theft, fraud, misappropriation of public trust or computer or
electronic devices; or for prior validated complaints regarding
violations of this ordinance or similar ordinances in other
municipalities. Should issuance of license be denied based upon the
criteria above, the applicant may appeal such denial to the Director
§ 137-15 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 137-16
1:132
§ 137-17. License application for flea markets.
Every person desiring to operate a flea market in the Township shall first
make application to the Police Department providing the information
referred to in § 137-16A(1) and B. In addition, the operator of the flea
market shall require each individual selling at the flea market to complete
an application form upon a blank provided by the Township which shall
contain the information set forth in § 137-16A(1). The Township may require
a copy of each individual seller's information as a prerequisite for issuing
a license. If copies are not provided with the application, such records of
individual sellers shall be maintained by the owner or operator of the flea
market for at least 120 days after the expiration of said license and shall be
available for inspection upon demand by the Township.
§ 137-18. Initial license fee and monthly term.
The sum as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors shall cover the cost of processing the application and the whole
or any part of the first day of operation as a retail merchant. The whole or
any part of the second day or any subsequent days within the month shall
be as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors
per day up to a maximum per month of as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 137-19. License renewal and fee.
Transient retail merchant licenses shall be renewed each month. A fee as
set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors shall be
required for each renewal license. The fee starting with the second day, as
set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, shall
also prevail with each renewal.
§ 137-20. Annual license as alternative.
In lieu of a monthly license, a transient retail merchant license for a
calendar year shall be available upon payment of the sum as set forth from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. Such license shall be
renewed annually.
§ 137-21. Property owner's permission required.
Before any transient retail merchant license is issued, the owner or agent
of such property where the transient retail business is to be located shall
grant written permission for the transient retail business to be conducted
on his property. Permission shall be granted by the property owner to the
of Public Safety for the Township at any time within 10 days of
notice of denial of application.
B. Upon request, the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting and
photographing.
§ 137-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-21
1:133
operator of the transient retail business prior to approval of the application
for a transient retail merchants license. In such a case, a copy of the written
permission of the property owner shall be submitted with the application.
§ 137-22. License exhibition.
Transient retail merchant licenses, when issued, shall list the license
number, the person or organization to whom it has been issued and the
date issued. Every person conducting a transient retail merchant business
shall have their transient retail merchant license displayed in a prominent
location in the room, apartment, store, shop, building, vehicle or other
place or structure where the sale of their goods, wares or merchandise is
conducted. No transient retail merchant shall engage in selling any product
or service not mentioned on such license.
§ 137-23. Prohibited acts.
No person engaged in any transient retail business shall:
§ 137-24. Use of streets or sidewalks.
No person engaged in a transient retail business shall:
A. Sell or offer for sale any product without a valid license;
B. Sell or offer for sale any product from any location not approved in the
license;
C. Sell or offer for sale any product or type of product not mentioned on
his license;
D. Hawk or cry his wares upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public place in
the Township or use any sound device, including any loudspeaker or
sound-amplifying device upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public place
or upon any private premises where sound of sufficient volume is
emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard
upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public place for the purpose of
attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise that he
proposes to sell;
E. Sell or offer for sale any product from a vehicle not approved in the
license; or to stop or park such vehicle upon any street or alley for
longer than necessary in order to sell therefrom to persons residing or
working in the immediate vicinity; or
F. Engage in such business before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m.
A. Have any exclusive right to any location on any of the streets, alleys or
sidewalks in the Township;
B. Be permitted a stationary location; or
§ 137-21 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 137-24
1:134
§ 137-25. License revocation.
§ 137-26. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the denial of an application for license or in a
decision with reference to the revocation of a license shall have the right
of appeal to the Board of Supervisors. Such appeal shall be taken by filing
with the Board, within 10 days after notice of the action complained of shall
have been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Board shall set a time and
place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given
to the appellant in the same manner as provided in this article for notice of
hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the Board on such appeal
shall be final and conclusive.
C. Be permitted to operate in a congested area where his operations might
impede traffic or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this
section, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be
deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested, the traffic
impeded or the public inconvenienced.
A. Any application may be rejected and any licenses issued under the
provisions of this article may be revoked by the Township Manager or
his designee for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, material omission or false statement
contained in the application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, material omission or false statement
made in the course of carrying on such licensed business.
(3) Any violation of this article.
(4) Conduct specified in § 137-16A(2).
(5) Conduct of the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner
as to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the Township. If unlawful operations are present, upon approval of
the Township Manager, the Police Department may confiscate the
license and suspend operations until a hearing is held.
B. Should issuance of license be denied based upon the criteria listed in
§ 137-16A(2), the applicant may appeal such denial in writing to the
Township Manager within five days of notice of denial of application.
C. For revocation of a license issued under this article, notice of a the
hearing before the Township Manager for revocation of a license shall
be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint
and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, to the license holder at the address set forth in the
application at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 137-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-27
1:135
§ 137-27. Violations and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department in an action brought
before a Magisterial District Justice in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure. Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates or permits
the violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding,
be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
§ 137-27 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 137-27
1:136
ARTICLE III
Pawnbrokers
§ 137-28. Definitions.
In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter. Certain terms are defined as follows:
ANTIQUE DEALER or SECONDHAND DEALER — Whether transient or
permanent, any person who either wholly or in part engages in or operates
the trade or business of buying and/or selling used goods such as
collectibles, coins, currency, rare articles, antiques, precious stones, stained
glass, metals, jewelry, any tools, any electrical devices, fixtures, appliances,
household goods, firearms and bric-a-brac. The foregoing enumeration of
articles, goods and property shall not be deemed to be exclusive or allinclusive,
and includes all articles and goods that are purchased, salvaged
or received from any person, association, business, partnership, corporation
or similar entity. This definition shall not be deemed to include:
JUNK DEALER — Whether transient or permanent, includes any person who
carries on the business of buying or selling and dealing in junk, scrap iron,
brass, lead, copper, aluminum and other metals or alloys or other materials
commonly referred to as "junk."
PAWNBROKER — Whether transient or permanent, includes any person
who engages in the business of accepting money on the deposit or pledge
of personal property other than choses in action, securities or written
evidence of indebtedness; or purchases personal property with an express
or implied agreement or understanding to sell it back at a subsequent time
at a stipulated price; or accepts money for goods, wares or merchandise
pledged, stored or deposited as collateral security.
PLEDGE — An article or articles deposited with a pawnbroker as security
for a loan or for the actual sale in the course of his business as defined as a
pawnbroker.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Paxton.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person who occupies a room, apartment,
store, shop, building, private lot or other fixed location for the purpose of
purchasing and/or selling goods, wares or merchandise of any description
with the intention of not remaining more than 100 days. Regardless of
A. Judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators;
Sales of unredeemed pledges by or on behalf of licensed pawnbrokers
in the manner prescribed by law;
B.
Occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from private
homes;
C.
D. Auctions of real estate; or
E. Auctions conducted by licensed auctioneers.
§ 137-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-28
1:137
the type of business, all transient merchants are subject to the provisions
of Article II. Transient merchants engaging in business described in this
article are also subject to all requirements of this article.
§ 137-29. Records required.
Every pawnbroker, junk dealer, antique dealer and secondhand dealer shall
keep a digital record or book legibly written in the English language in
which shall be recorded, where applicable:
§ 137-30. Police reports required.
All pawnbrokers, junk dealers, antique dealers and secondhand dealers
shall, daily, before 12:00 noon of the following day of business, provide a
written report to the Police Department containing a complete description
of all articles received in the course of his respective business during the
previous business day, together with the number of tickets and a description
of the persons making such sale or pledge, including such personal name,
address, date of birth, race, sex and operator's number. Forms for this
purpose are to be provided by the Police Department and shall be
transmitted digitally in a manner prescribed by the Police Department
unless specific authorization is given by the Police Department for another
method of transmission.
§ 137-31. Prohibited clients.
No pawnbroker, junk dealer, antique dealer or secondhand dealer shall
accept a pledge, article or goods from a person under the age of 18 years,
any intoxicated person or any known thief.
§ 137-32. Retention of articles by pawnbrokers.
No pawnbroker shall sell or dispose of in any way to a person any article
received by him in the course of his business until seven days have elapsed
A. A full and accurate description of all articles purchased or left in pawn,
salvaged or received, including brand names, model number, serial
number, inscribed initials, dates or names of any other forms of
identification.
B. The date and time of pledging, pawning, purchasing, salvaging or
receiving the same.
C. The date and time within which such pawned or pledged article is to be
redeemed.
D. The amount of money lent or paid therefor.
E. The description of the person or persons making the pledge, selling
such articles or from whom the article was purchased, salvaged or
received, including such person's name, address, date of birth, sex, race
and operator's number.
§ 137-28 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 137-32
1:138
from the time of furnishing to the police a form containing the information
on such articles as required by § 137-30.
§ 137-33. Retention of articles by secondhand dealers.
All junk dealers, antique dealers and secondhand dealers shall keep and
retain on their premises all articles purchased or received in the course
of their business, in the original form, shape and condition in which they
were received, and shall not sell or dispose of the same in any way until
seven days have elapsed from the time of furnishing to the police the form
containing the information required in § 137-30.
§ 137-34. Transient merchant records required.
Every transient merchant shall keep a digital record or book legibly written
in the English language in which shall be recorded:
§ 137-35. Transient merchant police reports required.
All transient merchants shall, within two hours of the close of their business
day, provide a written report to the Police Department containing a full and
accurate description of all articles received in the course of the business
during that immediate business day, the amount of money paid therefor
and a description of the persons from whom such goods were in any way
received, including that person's name, address, date of birth, sex, race and
operator's number. Forms for this purpose are to be provided by the Police
Department and shall be transmitted digitally in a manner prescribed by
the Police Department unless specific authorization is given by the Police
Department for another method of transmission.
§ 137-36. Transient merchant termination notice.
Notification shall be provided to the Police Department that the transient
merchant intends to terminate his business operation within 48 hours of
such termination. Such notification shall include contact information and an
address at which the transient merchant may be reached for the 10 days
immediately following the termination. Such termination notice does not
relieve said merchant of the requirement to retain and maintain property as
specified in § 137-32 or § 137-33 or § 137-37.
A. A full and accurate description of all articles received in any way in the
course of business.
B. The date and time of such transaction.
C. The description of the persons with whom such a transaction was
completed, including that person's name, address, date of birth, sex,
race and operator's number.
§ 137-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-37
1:139
§ 137-37. Retention of articles by transient merchants.
All transient merchants shall retain, at their immediate local place of
business, any goods received in the course of business, in the original
shape, form and condition in which they were received, and shall not sell
or dispose of such goods in any way until seven days have elapsed from the
time of furnishing to the police a form containing the information on such
articles as required by § 137-35.
§ 137-38. Transient merchant prohibited clients.
No transient merchant shall accept merchandise, goods or wares from a
person under the age of 18 years nor from any intoxicated person or any
known thief.
§ 137-39. Defense for nonretention of articles.
It shall be an affirmative defense to any prosecution or administrative
proceeding brought for the violation of any section of this article pertaining
to the retention of articles or goods obtained in the course of business
operations that, in the case of precious metals, retention for the time period
required would have resulted in serious and substantial economic losses
to the dealer or the probability of such losses was significant due to rapid
and highly fluctuating market conditions, provided that the persons so
charged shall prove the existence of the market conditions giving rise to the
aforesaid defense by a preponderance of the evidence. Market conditions
in order to be a defense hereunder shall be such that financial analysts
would characterize trading as at or approaching a level or occurrence in
an atmosphere of panic so as to clearly distinguish trading conditions from
normal variations in market movement in response to economic news or
other events.
§ 137-40. Records open to police.
Any police officer, upon showing a badge and proper identification, shall be
given any information from all of the above classes of businesses that is
legitimately required in the execution of his duties. This shall include but
not be limited to names of employees and any and all records concerning
transactions over the past 24 months. Failure to do so shall result in any and
all licenses being revoked by the Police Department for operation of such
business in addition to the penalties as stated in § 137-41.
§ 137-41. Violations and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by action brought by the Police Department
before a Magisterial District Justice in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure. Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates or permits
the violation of this article shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding,
be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
§ 137-37 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 137-41
1:140
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Each section of this article that is violated shall also constitute a separate
offense.
§ 137-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 137-41
1:141
Chapter 148
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 148-1. Adoption of standards.
That a certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of
Lower Paxton Township, being marked as the 2009 International Property
Maintenance Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of Lower
Paxton Township, in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided; and each of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance
Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in § 148-2 of this chapter.
§ 148-2. Modifications to standards.
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: "Lower Paxton Township."
Section 103.5 Insert: "The schedule of fees shall be adopted and revised
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Lower Paxton
Township."
Section 106.4 Shall read as follows: "Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be subject to action brought before a district
justice in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Criminal
fines not to exceed $1,000 per violation and/or imprisonment to the extent
allowed by law for the punishment of summary offenses may be imposed
for violations under this section. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense."
Section 112.4 Shall read as follows: "Any person who shall continue any
work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work
as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be subject to action brought before a district justice in the
same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Criminal fines not to exceed
$1,000 per violation and/or imprisonment to the extent allowed by law for
the punishment of summary offenses may be imposed for violations under
this section. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 302.4 Insert: "10 inches."
Section 304.14 Insert: "May 1 to November 1."
Section 602.3 Insert: "October 1 to April 30."
§ 137-41 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 148-2
1:142
Section 602.4 Insert: "October 1 to April 30."
Section 111: In accordance with Section 111 of the 2009 International
Property Maintenance Code, the Zoning Hearing Board of Lower Paxton
Township is authorized to hear appeals of decisions of codes officials, or to
hear appeals of notices or orders issued by codes officials under the 2009
International Property Maintenance Code. The application fee for such
appeals shall be the same fee charged by the Township for applications for
zoning variance that are heard before the Zoning Hearing Board.
Section 302.8.1, Vehicle parking, shall read as follows: "No vehicle,
regardless of condition, shall be parked or stored in the front yard of any
premise in an area zoned R-1, R-2 or RC, as defined by the Lower Paxton
Township Zoning Ordinance. Said prohibition shall not apply to parking
on a driveway that exists in the front yard, which has been established in
accordance with the terms of said Zoning Ordinance."
Section 302.4, Weeds, shall read as follows: "All premises and exterior
property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of
10 inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined
as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs
provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and
gardens.
"For purposes of Section 302.4, all premises and exterior property shall be
limited to the minimum lot area as required by the Lower Paxton Township
Zoning Ordinance and to a setback of 10 feet outside the minimum lot area.
Any part of the premises and exterior property in excess of the minimum lot
area and the ten-foot setback area shall be exempt from the requirements
of Section 302.4.
"Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and
destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject
to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the
authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of
violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor
hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in
violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs
of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the
property."
Section 302.4, paragraph 1, shall read as follows: "All premises and
exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in
excess of 10 inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be
defined as all grasses annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or
shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers
and gardens. Noxious weeds shall be defined as those weeds listed as
noxious by the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture, as well as bamboo,
poison ivy, poison oak, and poison sumac."
Chapter 152
REGISTRATION OF DEFAULT MORTGAGE PROPERTY
§ 148-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-1
1:143
§ 152-1. Purpose.
§ 152-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — A property that is accessible
through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure that
is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior
space by unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE CODES — To include, but not be limited to, Lower Paxton
Township's Zoning Ordinance, Property Maintenance Code, Solid Waste
and Recyclables Ordinance, and the State and Township Building and Fire
Codes.
DEFAULT — That the mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the
mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of the
debt, referred to in the mortgage.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any law enforcement officer, Building Official,
Zoning Officer, Codes Enforcement Officer, Fire Marshal, or other person
authorized by Lower Paxton Township to enforce the applicable code(s).
FORECLOSURE — The legal process by which a mortgagee, or other lien
holder, terminates a property owner's equitable right of redemption to
obtain legal and equitable title to the real property pledged as security for a
debt or the real property subject to the lien. This definition shall include, but
is not limited to, public notice of default, a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure, sale
A. It is the purpose and intent of the Board of Supervisors to establish a
process to address the deterioration, crime and decline in value of
neighborhoods caused by property with defaulted mortgages located
within the Township, and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the
number of these properties located within the Township. It is the
Supervisors' further intent to establish a registration requirement as a
mechanism to protect neighborhoods from the negative impact and
conditions that occur as a result of vacancy, absentee ownership lack of
adequate maintenance and security and will provide a method to
expeditiously identify contact persons for each property responsible for
this protection.
B. It is not the intent of this chapter to determine the rights and liabilities
of persons under agreements to which Lower Paxton Township is not a
party. This chapter shall not be construed to alter the terms of any lease
or other agreement between a landlord and a tenant or others relating
to property that is the subject of this chapter; provided that no
provision of any lease or other agreement shall be construed to excuse
compliance with this chapter. Additionally, a violation of this chapter
shall not in and of itself create negligence per se standard or otherwise
expand existing liability in tort for either a landlord or a tenant.
§ 152-1 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 152-2
1:144
to the mortgagee or lien holder, certificate of title and all other processes,
activities and actions, by whatever name, associated with the described
process. The process is not concluded until the property obtained by the
mortgagee, lien holder, or their designee, by certificate of title, or any
other means, is sold to a nonrelated bona fide purchaser in an arm's length
transaction to satisfy the debt or lien.
MORTGAGEE — The creditor, including but not limited to, trustees;
mortgage servicing companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any
agent, servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or
any assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the
mortgage agreement.
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who,
individually or jointly or severally with others, holds the legal or beneficial
title to any building, facilities, equipment or premises subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
REAL PROPERTY — Any improved residential or commercial land,
buildings, leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or
portion thereof identified by a property parcel identification number,
located in Lower Paxton Township. Developed lots are considered improved
land.
REGISTRABLE PROPERTY — Any real property located in Lower Paxton
Township, whether vacant or occupied, that is encumbered by a mortgage
in default, is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the mortgagee
or trustee, has been the subject of a foreclosure action by a mortgagee
or trustee and a judgment has been entered, or has been the subject of
a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under
a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
SEMIANNUAL REGISTRATION — Six months from the date of the first
action that requires registration, as determined by Lower Paxton Township,
or its designee, and every subsequent six months. The date of the initial
registration may be different than the date of the first action that required
registration.
VACANT — Any parcel of land in Lower Paxton Township that is not legally
occupied. Vacant property does not mean property that is temporarily
unoccupied while the residents are away on vacation, personal matters or
business, or is not intended by the owner to be left vacant, so long as the
period does not exceed 30 days.
The designation of a "default/foreclosure" property as "registrable"
shall remain in place until such time as the property is sold to a
nonrelated bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction or the
foreclosure action has been dismissed and any default on the mortgage
has been cured.
A.
§ 152-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-3
1:145
§ 152-3. Applicability.
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or
subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather be an additional
remedy available to Lower Paxton Township above and beyond any other
state or Township provisions for same.
§ 152-4. Establishment of a registry.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 152-5, Lower Paxton Township, or its
designee, shall establish a registry cataloging each registrable property
within the Township, containing the information required by this chapter.
§ 152-5. Registration of defaulted mortgage real property.
A. Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
Lower Paxton Township shall perform an inspection of the property to
determine vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor. The
mortgagee shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property
with the Code Enforcement Department, or its designee, on forms or
other manner as directed, and indicate whether the property is vacant
or occupied. A separate registration is required for each property,
whether it is found to be vacant or occupied.
B. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name, direct
mailing address, a direct contact name, telephone number, and e-mail
address for the mortgagee/trustee, and the mortgage servicer, and the
name and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the local property
management company responsible for the security and maintenance of
the property who has the authority to make decisions concerning the
abatement of nuisance conditions at the property, as well as any
expenditure in connection therewith.
C. Mortgagees who have existing registrable property on the effective
date of this chapter have 30 calendar days from the effective date to
register the property with the Code Enforcement Department, or its
designee, on forms or other manner as directed, and indicate whether
the property is vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required
for each property, whether it is vacant or occupied.
D. Any previous unpaid registration fees are the responsibility of the new
mortgagee or trustee and are due and payable with their initial
registration. Except if it is determined that the transferee is exempt
from paying fees then the previous mortgagee will not be released from
the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees and fines,
regardless of who the mortgagee was at the time when registration was
required, including but not limited to unregistered periods during the
foreclosure process. The provisions of this section are cumulative with
and in addition to other available remedies.
§ 152-3 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 152-5
1:146
E. If the servicing rights for a mortgage on a registrable property are sold
or transferred, the registration must be updated to include all the new
servicer information within 10 days of the servicing transfer.
F. Any previous unpaid registration fees are the responsibility of the new
registrable property owner and are due and payable with their initial
registration. Except if it is determined that the transferee is exempt
from paying fees then the previous mortgagee will not be released from
the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees and fines,
regardless of who the mortgagee was at the time when registration was
required, including but not limited to unregistered periods during the
foreclosure process. The provisions of this section are cumulative with
and in addition to other available remedies.
G. As long as the property is registrable it shall be inspected by the
mortgagee, or designee, monthly. If an inspection shows a change in the
property's occupancy status the mortgagee shall, within 10 days of that
inspection, update the occupancy status of the property registration.
H. A nonrefundable semiannual registration fee of $300 shall accompany
each registration pursuant to this section.
I. If a lis pendens, deed-in-lieu of foreclosure, or other public notice of
foreclosure is filed on a property and the property was not registered
and the registration fee paid at least 30 days prior to the filing date, a
late fee shall be charged. The late fee shall be the equivalent to 10% of
the registration fee and shall be charged for every 30 days period, or
portion thereof, the property is not registered and shall be due and
payable with the registration. This section shall apply to the initial
registration and thirty-day delinquent registration renewals.
Registrations delinquent greater than 30 days are also subject to
additional fines as described herein.
J. All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee, trustee,
servicer, or owner. Third-party registration fees are not allowed without
the consent of Lower Paxton Township and/or its authorized designee.
K. Properties subject to this section shall remain under the semiannual
registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance
standards of this section as long as they are registrable.
L. Until the mortgage or lien on the property in question is satisfied, or
legally discharged, the desire to no longer pursue foreclosure, the filing
of a dismissal of lis pendens and/or summary of final judgment and/or
certificate of title, voluntary or otherwise, does not exempt any
mortgagee holding the defaulted mortgage, from all the requirements
of this chapter as long as the borrower is in default.
M. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
§ 152-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5
1:147
Chapter 159
SEWERS
N. Failure of the mortgagee to properly register or to modify the
registration information within 10 days of the action requiring the
update to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this chapter
is a violation of the article and shall be subject to enforcement and any
resulting monetary penalties and/or property liens.
O. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination
that any property is in violation of this chapter, Lower Paxton Township
may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a
lien on the property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the
property and bring it into compliance.
P. Properties subject to this chapter shall be maintained in accordance
with the applicable code(s) of Lower Paxton Township.
§ 152-5 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 152-5
1:148
ARTICLE I
Septic Tanks; Drain Fields
[Adopted as Art. 1521 of the 1960 Code]
§ 159-1. Conformity required. [Amended 4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
94-08]
Septic tank installations will be approved in all areas not serviced by a
public sewer, but subject to inspection by the Health Officer, and must
conform to specifications set forth in this article.
§ 159-2. Facilities required.
Every property, residential or commercial, having sanitary facilities must
have its own septic system unless served by municipal sewers.
§ 159-3. Plan; inspection fee. [Amended 1-15-1968 by Ord. No. 3-68;
4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 94-08]
A plan in triplicate of all new private sewage disposal systems or
replacement of faulty private sewage disposal systems must be filed with
the Health Officer for approval before breaking ground. At this time an
inspection fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors must be paid. Plan forms will be furnished by the Township and
upon inspection will be certified by the Health Officer.
§ 159-4. Construction requirements.
Septic tanks shall be made of reinforced concrete with a reinforced
concrete lid having suitable inspection and cleanout ports. The tank must
have approved baffles.
§ 159-5. Minimum septic tank capacities.
A. Table I.
Table I
Capacities for Septic Tanks
Minimum Number of
Bedrooms
Minimum Liquid Capacity of
Tank in Gallons1
3 or fewer 500
4 750
5 900
Notes:
1 Increase minimum liquid capacity by 50% when household garbage
grinder discharges into system.
§ 159-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-5
1:149
§ 159-6. House sewer.
House sewer from building to septic tank must be constructed of fourinch
medium weight cast iron soil pipe with leaded and caulked joints,
be installed with an even grade of not less than 1/4 inch per foot and
be provided with an accessible heavy brass screw cap ferrule, caulked in.
Distribution line from septic tank to distribution box to be constructed of
four-inch medium weight cast iron soil pipe with cemented joints at septic
tank and distribution box.
§ 159-7. Sewer lines; tank distance from building.
Septic systems within the meaning of this article shall include the sewer
line from the house or building to the septic tank and such lines must
be left uncovered until the inspection required hereunder is completed.
Septic tanks may not be placed nearer than 10 feet to the foundation of any
building or structure.
§ 159-8. Distribution box.
All septic tanks must be equipped with a concrete distribution box having
one inlet and an outlet for each line in the drain field.
§ 159-9. Inspections. [Amended 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 94-08]
All septic tanks and installations must be inspected prior to being covered
over. Such inspections shall be made by the Township Health Officer and
at least 24 hours' notice, excluding Saturday, Sunday and holidays, must
be given to the Health Officer for inspection of all septic tanks and septic
systems installations. The contractor or installer of the septic system must
be represented in person, by his agent or his attorney at the time of the
inspection and shall assist in the inspection if the Health Officer requires
such assistance. If the Health Officer does not approve the installation, a
reinspection will be required, for which an additional charge as set forth
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors is hereby
imposed. Should an installer request separate inspections for each line of a
drain field, an additional charge as set forth from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors is hereby imposed for each inspection required
after the initial inspection of any project.
§ 159-10. Specifications of approved precast septic tanks.
All precast septic tanks must have a minimum wall and bottom thickness
of two inches for a round tank and a minimum wall and bottom thickness
of three inches for a rectangular tank. All precast septic tanks shall have
a minimum lid thickness of three inches, regardless of the shape of the
tank. Walls, bottom and lid of all tanks must be reinforced with welded
wire mesh 10-10 gauge, with six-inch-by-six-inch openings. Cleanout ports
B. Houses with six or more bedrooms and industrial and commercial
establishments must have special Board of Sanitation approval.
§ 159-5 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-10
1:150
must have minimum openings of 20 inches by 20 inches square in the case
of a rectangular opening or 24 inches in diameter in the case of a round
opening. Baffles must be securely fastened. Tanks must be free from cracks
or flaws and must be watertight. Tank lids and cleanout port lids must be
cemented on with mastic cement to keep out surface water. Sectional tanks
must be cemented with mastic.
§ 159-11. Specifications of approved cast-on-the-job septic tanks.
§ 159-12. Location of drain field. [Amended 4-13-1981 by Ord. No.
81-5]
The Township shall prohibit installation of sewage disposal facilities
requiring solid absorption systems where such systems shall not function
due to high ground water, flooding or unsuitable soil characteristics or
are proposed for location in designated Floodplain Conservation Districts.
The Township may require that the developer note on the face of the plat
and in any deed of conveyance that soil absorption fields are prohibited in
designated areas.
A. Plans and specifications must be submitted and approved before a
permit can be issued.
B. Mix.
MIX — High early-strength Portland Cement
1 part cement
2 parts concrete sand
3 parts gravel or stone, sized from pea gravel to 2B stone
C. Concrete must not have a slump of over three inches in a slump test.
Wall, base and top thickness must be not less than four inches. Wall,
base and top must be reinforced with welded wire mesh 10-10 gauge,
six-inch-by-six-inch opening, no joints to be made at corners. Wire shall
be located as near to center of wall as practical. Inlet and outlet holes in
tanks must be provided for in the course of manufacture by the
insertion of a suitable thimble in forms before casting. The bottom of
the inlet hole must be three inches higher than the bottom of the outlet
hole.
D. The complete tank must be poured in one operation and puddled to
make sure concrete is thoroughly packed in the forms. Cleanout ports
must have a minimum opening of 20 inches by 20 inches square. Tank
lids and cleanout port lids must be cemented on with mastic cement to
keep out surface water.
E. Forms. Wood or steel must be securely braced to prevent slipping or
moving in any way that may cause a tank failure. Forms must be oiled or
greased to allow easy releasing. Forms must be kept intact at least
three days.
§ 159-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-13
1:151
§ 159-13. Design of drain field.
§ 159-14. Dimensions of drain field. [Amended 4-4-1994 by Ord. No.
94-08]
Table II below should be used as a guide in the general design of a tile
disposal field.
Table II
Drain Fields
Minimum diameter of tile 4 inches
Minimum number of lines per field 3 inches
Maximum length of each line 75 feet
Minimum trench width 18 inches
Maximum trench width 36 inches
Preferred depth of lines 18 inches
Maximum depth of lines 24 inches
Maximum grade of lines 4 inches per 75 feet
Minimum space between trenches 6 feet
Minimum filter material beneath tile 8 inches
Minimum filter material over tile 3 inches
Minimum lengths of Drain Fields
500 gallon septic tank 200 linear feet
750 gallon septic tank 270 linear feet
A. The tile disposal field should be designed to provide proper distribution
of the sewage effluent throughout the entire field. Sufficient laterals
must be installed to provide the necessary absorption area and to
prevent overloading any single line. Each field lateral line should be
connected separately to the distribution box, should never be
subdivided and must be of equal length in order to maintain a wellbalanced
system.
B. The tile line must be laid one to a trench with one-fourth-inch open
joints and surrounded by clean gravel, crushed stone or slag, ranging in
size from 1/2 inch to 21/2 inches. Tar paper strips must be placed over
the joints to prevent fine materials from being carried into the lines.
However, if the filter material is graded and washed, the tar paper
strips are not necessary. A piece of untreated building paper, heavy
wrapping paper or a layer of straw must be placed over the filter
material before backfilling with earth.
C. Drain field ditches must be dug level. If steps are necessary because of
sloping terrain, steps must be made with crushed stone or clean gravel.
§ 159-13 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-14
1:152
Table II
Drain Fields
900 gallon septic tank 380 linear feet
1,000 gallon septic tank To be determined by Health
Officer
§ 159-15. Violations and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice
in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person, firm or
corporation who or which violates or permits the violation of this article
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.
Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense. Each section of this article that
is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 159-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-15
1:153

ARTICLE II
Sewage Facilities Program
[Adopted 10-18-1976 by Ord. No. 76-2 (Art. 912 of the 1960 Code)]
§ 159-16. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the administration
of the sewage facilities program, and it is hereby declared that this article is
necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of the Township.
§ 159-17. Definitions.
Unless specifically and clearly indicated otherwise, the meanings of all
terms used in this article shall be the same as those terms defined by
the applicable rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental
Protection, Chapters 71 and 73 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, as
amended.
§ 159-18. Rules and regulations.
The Township Manager, in conjunction with the certified Sewage
Enforcement Officer of the Township, is hereby authorized and empowered
to adopt such rules and regulations concerning administration of the
sewage facilities program which he may deem necessary from time to
time to effect the purposes herein. All such rules and regulations shall
be in conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the
Township and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 159-19. Permit required.
No person, partnership or corporation shall construct, install or repair any
individual sewage system or community sewage system before obtaining a
permit to do so from the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
§ 159-20. Application and fee.
Any applicant for a permit under this article shall first complete an
application for an individual sewage disposal system and submit such
application to the certified Sewage Enforcement Officer along with an
application fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 159-21. Duties of applicant.
The following responsibilities shall be those of the applicant:
A. The applicant shall have a test pit and test holes prepared at the site on
the day when the Sewage Enforcement Officer arrives to observe the
soils test.
§ 159-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-21
1:155
§ 159-22. Sewage disposal system construction.
Sewage disposal systems shall be constructed in accordance with the
following provisions:
§ 159-23. Applicability. [Amended 10-18-1976 by Ord. No. 76-13]
The provisions and definitions contained in this article shall apply only to
on-lot sewage disposal systems and shall not be construed to amend or
repeal any provisions of Chapter 142, Plumbing Standards.12
B. The applicant shall have a geologist or soils scientist approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection furnish to the Township a
written report regarding the soils test on forms provided by the
Township.
C. The applicant shall have percolation tests performed by a registered
professional engineer, geologist or soils scientist approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection who shall furnish a written
report regarding the percolation tests to the Township on forms
provided by the Township.
D. All notices to the Sewage Enforcement Officer required by this article
or rules and regulations promulgated in accordance with this article
shall be delivered to the Township municipal building in writing on
forms provided by the Township.
A. House sewers shall be constructed of four-inch service weight cast iron
with rubber gasket or leaded joints, or solid PVC plastic pipe schedule
40 with solvent joints.
B. All anaerobic septic tanks shall be constructed of concrete. Aerobic
tanks will be required to meet all National Sanitation Foundation (NSF)
specifications according to Chapter 73, Section 73.41, of the
Department of Environmental Protection regulations. No metal tanks
shall be permitted.
C. Sewerage lines between tank and distribution box shall be constructed
of four-inch service weight cast iron or solid PVC plastic pipe schedule
40.
D. All systems shall use a distribution box.
E. Clay tile or four-inch PVC sewer and drain pipe conforming to ASTM
D-2729-.075. Walls shall be permitted in subsurface absorption areas.
Stones used shall be 2-B limestone, not river gravel.
F. Sand used in any system shall meet state specifications and shall be
compacted mechanically and/or by water. No wheeled equipment shall
be permitted to be used for compaction. [Amended 10-18-1976 by
Ord. No. 76-13]
§ 159-21 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-24
1:156
§ 159-24. Violations and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice
in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person, firm or
corporation who or which violates or permits the violation of this article
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.
Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense. Each section of this article that
is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
12.Editor's Note: Chapter 142, Plumbing Standards, was superseded by the provisions of the
Uniform Construction Code. See now Ch. 90, Art. III, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 159-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-24
1:157

ARTICLE III
Lower Paxton Township Sewer Authority
[Adopted 5-7-1990 by Ord. No. 90-3 (Art. 913 of the 1960 Code)]
§ 159-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, certain words are defined as follows:
AUTHORITY — Lower Paxton Township Authority, a Pennsylvania Municipal
Authority organized and existing under the Municipality Authorities Act of
1945, as amended.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located with the Township upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which
structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any and all wastes discharged from an industrial
establishment other than sanitary sewage.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from the main sewer
as constructed by the Authority.
NONCONTAMINATED WASTEWATERS — Any waters which may be
disposed of through a storm sewer system or other such drainage system
upon approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Health.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — All improved property other than
residential property constructed or intended for occupancy or use by human
beings or animals.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any improved property occupied as living
quarters, intended to be occupied as living quarters or constructed for the
purpose of occupancy as living quarters.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from any improved property.
SEWAGE — Any waste, sanitary sewage or material discharged from any
premises into the sewage system, not including industrial waste.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
of usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sanitary sewage system, including mains, pumping
stations, lift stations and any and all other appurtenances thereto.
§ 159-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-25
1:159
TOWNSHIP — Lower Paxton Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, a
Township of the second class, acting by and through its Board of
Supervisors or, in appropriate cases, by and through its authorized
representatives.
§ 159-26. Use of public sewers required; private system
discontinuance; connection notice.
A. The owner of any improved property accessible to and whose principal
building is within 150 feet of the sewer system shall connect such
improved property therewith, in such manner as the Township and the
Authority may require, within 60 days after notice to such owner from
the Township Authority to make such connection, for the purposes of
discharge of all sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from such
improved property, subject, however, to such limitations and
restrictions as established herein or otherwise shall be established by
the Township or the Authority from time to time.
B. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property,
after connection of such improved property with a sewer as required
under Subsection A hereof, shall be conducted into a sewer, subject,
however, to such limitations and restrictions as established herein or
otherwise shall be established by the Authority from time to time. No
surface water, stormwater or groundwater will be allowed to be
discharged into the sewer system. [Amended 6-6-1994 by Ord. No.
94-12]
C. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited
upon public or private property with the Township any sanitary sewage
or industrial wastes in violation of Subsection A hereof. No person shall
discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural outlet within the
Township any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of
Subsection A hereof, except where a suitable treatment has been
provided which is satisfactory to the Township Authority.
D. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used and maintained at any time upon any improved property
which has been connected to a sewer or which is required under
Subsection A hereof to be connected to a sewer. Every such privy vault,
cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle in existence shall
be abandoned and, at the discretion of the Township, shall be cleaned
and filled under the direction and supervision of the Township. Any such
privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle not so
abandoned and, if required by the Township, cleansed and filled shall
constitute a nuisance, and such nuisance may be abated as provided by
law at the expense of the owner of such improved property.
E. No privy vaults, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall, at any time, be connected with a sewer.
§ 159-25 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-26
1:160
§ 159-27. Sewer connection by Township Authority, billing;
collection.
Upon the failure of any property owner to make a required sewer
connection following the procedure set forth in this article, the Township
Authority may enter upon the property and construct the sewer connection.
In such case the Township Authority shall forthwith, upon completion of
the work, send an itemized bill of the cost of construction of the sewer
connection to the owner of the property to which connection has been so
made, which bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or refusal
of the owner of such property to pay said bill the Township Authority may
file municipal liens or bring a civil action for such construction, the same
to be subject in all respects to the general law providing for the filing and
recovery of municipal liens and civil actions.
§ 159-28. Existing line continuation.
Where an improved property, at the time connection to a sewer is required,
is served by its own sewage disposal system or device, the existing sewer
line shall be broken on the structure side of such sewage disposal system or
device and attachment shall be made, with proper fittings, to continue such
sewer line, as a building sewer.
§ 159-29. Inspection, approval and maintenance.
F. The notice by the Township Authority to make a connection to a sewer,
referred to in Subsection A hereof, shall consist of a written or printed
document requiring such connection in accordance with the provisions
of this article and specifying that such connection shall be made within
60 days from the date such notice is given. Such notice may be given at
any time after a sewer is in place which can receive and convey sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes for treatment and disposal from the
particular improved property. Such notice shall be served upon the
owner either by personal service or by registered mail or by such other
method as, at the time, may be provided by law.
G. If the owner fails to make the required connection within said sixty-dayperiod,
such failure shall be a violation of this article. The violator shall
be subject to payment for connections to the sewer system by the
Township Authority under § 159-27 or upon conviction liable to penalty
under § 159-38.
A. No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by the Township Authority. If any part of a building sewer is
covered before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered
for inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved
property to be connected to a sewer.
B. Every building sewer or any improved property, including the lateral,
shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe operating condition and kept
in good repair by the owner of such improved property.
§ 159-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-30
1:161
§ 159-30. Failure to remedy unsatisfactory conditions.
If any person fails or refuses, upon receipt of a notice in writing from the
Township Authority, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with respect to
a building sewer within 60 days of receipt of such notice, the Township
Authority may refuse to permit such person to discharge sanitary sewage
and industrial wastes into the sewer system until such unsatisfactory
condition has been remedied to the satisfaction of the Township Authority.
§ 159-31. Infiltration and Inflow Inspector. [Amended 6-6-1994 by
Ord. No. 94-12]
§ 159-32. Waste exclusion or pretreatment; manhole and sampling;
industrial waste permit.
All owners of property connected to and from which sewage and/or suitable
industrial wastes, collectively "wastewaters," can be discharged to the
sewer system shall be subject to the following:
A. The Board of Supervisors hereby appoints the Manager of the Lower
Paxton Township Authority as the Infiltration and Inflow Inspector (the
"Infiltration and Inflow Inspector"). His duties shall be to conduct
inspections for inflow and infiltration from prohibited sources into the
Lower Paxton Township sanitary sewer system. "Prohibited sources"
shall include the following:
(1) Inflow into the sanitary sewer system from sump pumps, floor
drains, rain conductors and other sources of surface water,
stormwater or groundwater.
(2) Infiltration into the sanitary sewer system of surface water,
stormwater or groundwater caused by broken, cracked or
otherwise damaged pipes, pipe fittings or connections to the
sanitary sewer system.
B. The salary and expenses of the Infiltration and Inflow Inspector shall be
paid entirely by the Lower Paxton Township Authority, and the
Infiltration and Inflow Inspector may designate such assistants as may
be necessary for the fulfillment of his duties.
A. The Township Authority reserves the right to refuse permission to
connect to the sewer system, to compel discontinuance of use of the
sewer system or to compel pretreatment of wastewaters by any
industry in order to prevent discharges deemed harmful or to have a
deleterious effect upon any portion of the sewer system. No
wastewaters shall be discharged to the sewer system:
(1) Having a temperature higher than 100° F.
(2) Containing more than 100 parts per million, by weight, of fats, oils
and grease.
§ 159-30 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-32
1:162
(3) Containing any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other
inflammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases.
(4) Containing any garbage that has not been ground by householdtype
or other suitable garbage grinders.
(5) Containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any
other solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstructions
or other interferences with proper operation of the sewer system.
(6) Having a pH lower than 6.5 or higher than 9.0 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to
structures, equipment or personnel of the sewer system.
(7) Containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or to
constitute hazards to humans or animals or to create any hazard in
waters which receive treated effluent from either the City of
Harrisburg or Swatara Township Authority sewage treatment
plant. Toxic wastes shall include, but shall not be limited to, wastes
containing cyanide, chromium, copper and nickel ions.
(8) Containing noxious or malodorous gases or substances capable of
creating a public nuisance.
(9) Containing solids of such character and quantity that special and
unusual attention is required for their handling.
(10) Containing substances having characteristics which violate
provisions of the agreements for sewage transportation and
treatment services with the City of Harrisburg and Swatara
Township Authority. Industries shall install suitable pretreatment
facilities to meet the requirements stipulated therein.
B. Suitable pretreatment facilities shall be installed to meet these
requirements. The Township Authority reserves the right to require
nonresidential establishments having large variations in rates of
wastewater discharge to install suitable regulating devices for
equalizing wastewater flows to the sewer system.
C. When directed by the Township Authority, owners of nonresidential
establishments shall install, pay for and maintain a manhole and such
other devices as may be approved by the Township Authority to
facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of wastewaters
discharged to the sewer system. The Township Authority or its duly
authorized representatives shall, at all reasonable times, after advance
notice of at least 24 hours, be permitted to enter upon any and all
properties for the purpose of inspecting, observing, measuring and
sampling wastewaters discharged to the sewer system. The owner of
any nonresidential establishment that desires to connect to the sewer
system or any nonresidential establishment which is connected to the
§ 159-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-32
1:163
§ 159-33. Sewer rental rates.
The Board of Supervisors directs that all sewer rental rates shall be
established by the Township Authority by resolution.
§ 159-34. Sewer connection fee.
The Board of Supervisors directs that all sewer connection fees shall be
established by the Township Authority by resolution.
§ 159-35. Additional rules and regulations.
The Township Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to promulgate
additional rules and regulations as it deems necessary under this article,
which additional rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be
construed as part of this article.
§ 159-36. Enforcement.
The Township Authority is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions
of this article and its rules and regulations promulgated hereunder and in
conjunction herewith.
§ 159-37. Disconnection.
In addition to any monetary penalties for violation of this article, the
Township Authority may require all owners or persons in charge of
properties serviced by the Lower Paxton Township sanitary sewer system
who violate any provisions of this article, after giving notice of such
violation either personally or by means of the United States mail and, if no
action to correct said violation is taken within 30 days of the date of such
notice, to remove or close the sewer connection, if otherwise permitted by
law. Reconnection will not be made until after correction of the violation has
been accomplished and inspected by the Township Authority. The expense
of such shutoff or removal or closing and the expense of reconnection shall
be a debt due to the Lower Paxton Township Authority, and a lien upon
the property affected may be filed and collected as provided by law. With
respect to the enforcement of this article or any related provision of the
sewer system and plans to change operations so as to materially alter
the characteristics and volumes of wastewaters discharged to the
sewer system shall notify the Township Authority, in writing, at least 10
days before making such connection or changing its operations.
D. Owners of industrial establishments desiring to discharge industrial
wastes to the sewer system shall obtain a permit from the Authority to
do so upon notification by the Authority. Applications for a permit to
discharge industrial wastes shall be accompanied by all information
requested by the Authority for the determination of industrial waste
volumes, characteristics and constituents. The cost for obtaining such
information shall be borne by the industrial establishment.
§ 159-32 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-37
1:164
Township of Lower Paxton Code concerning the sanitary sewerage system,
the Township Authority shall be empowered to secure search warrants as
otherwise provided by law.
§ 159-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
article shall, for each and every such violation, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and cost of prosecution
and in default of payment of such fine and costs shall be imprisoned for not
more than 30 days. Each day's violation of any provision of this article shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 159-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-38
1:165

ARTICLE IV
Street and Storm Sewer Construction
[Adopted 10-21-1974 by Ord. No. 74-34]
§ 159-39. Building permit required; fees.
A. No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall construct any new
street or storm sewer in the Township unless and until a building permit
for new street or storm sewer construction has been obtained. No
permit shall be issued until the final plans for the subdivision or land
development within which such construction is to take place have been
submitted to the Township and the required plan and profiles for the
same have been reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer. The
approval granted for such construction shall be valid for a period of
three years, after which time the applicant shall be required to
resubmit plan and profiles for any portions of street or storm sewer not
constructed within the three-year period in accordance with ordinances
in effect at the time of resubmission.
B. The fee for such building permit shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:
(1) For the initial 500 linear feet of roadway or 1,000 linear feet of
storm sewer or fraction thereof: as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
(2) For each additional 100 linear feet of roadway or 200 linear feet of
storm sewer or fraction thereof: as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 159-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-39
1:167

ARTICLE V
Sewage Holding Tanks
[Adopted 3-1-1976 by Ord. No. 76-1 (Art. 920 of the 1960 Code)]
§ 159-40. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage
whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is hereby declared that
this article is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Township.
§ 159-41. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meanings of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Sewer Authority of Lower Paxton Township, Dauphin
County, Pennsylvania.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of
the sewage at another site. Holding tanks include but are not limited to the
following:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Township upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
MUNICIPALITY — Lower Paxton Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the Township.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet uing chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
A.
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by
a water-carrying system.
B.
VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where
water under pressure is not available.
C.
§ 159-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-42
1:169
§ 159-42. Rights and privileges granted.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
Township the control and methods of holding tank sewage disposal and the
collection and transportation thereof.
§ 159-43. Rules and regulations.
§ 159-44. Rates and charges.
The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by applicable law.
§ 159-45. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges. [Amended
9-12-1994 by Ord. No. 94-20]
§ 159-46. Duties of improved property owner. [Amended 9-12-1994
by Ord. No. 94-20]
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules
and regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from
time to time to effect the purpose herein.
B. All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the
Township and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations
of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved
property utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the
direction and control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof shall be
made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department
of Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The Authority shall receive, review and retain pumping receipts from
permitted holding tanks.
C. The Authority shall complete and retain annual inspection reports for
each permitted tank.
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this article or any other
ordinance of the municipality, the provisions of any applicable law and
the rules and regulations of the Authority and any administrative
agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Authority or its agent to inspect holding tanks on an
annual basis.
C. Permit only the Authority or its agent to collect, transport and dispose
of the contents therein.
§ 159-42 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-47
1:170
§ 159-47. Abatement of nuisances. [Amended 9-12-1994 by Ord. No.
94-20]
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation
of § 159-46 above shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the
Authority or the municipality by either seeking mitigation of the nuisance or
appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 159-48. Violations and penalties.
This article shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice
in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person, firm or
corporation who or which violates or permits the violation of this article
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding, be punishable by a fine of
not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days.
Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense. Each section of this article that
is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 159-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-48
1:171

ARTICLE VI
Sanitary Sewer Pretreatment Standards for the Paxton Creek,
Spring Creek and Asylum Run Drainage Basin
[Adopted 6-2-1998; amended in its entirety 11-2-2009 by Ord. No.
09-14]
§ 159-49. Purpose and policy.
This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct contributors to the
Paxton Creek, Spring Creek and Asylum Run Drainage Basins of the sewer
system within or from the Township of Lower Paxton, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, and to any municipality or person outside the Township who
is by contract or agreement or otherwise a user of the sewer system,
which has its discharge treated by the treatment plant of the City of
Harrisburg (city) and enables the city and the Lower Paxton Township
Authority (Authority) to comply with all applicable state and federal laws
required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403).
§ 159-50. Objectives.
The objectives of this article are:
§ 159-51. Applicability.
This article shall apply to direct contributors to the Paxton Creek, Spring
Creek and Asylum Run drainage basins of the sewer system within or from
the Township and to any municipality or person outside the Township who
is, by contract or agreement or otherwise, a user of the sewer system.
§ 159-52. Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Authority and the Director of the
Sewer Department of the Township shall administer, implement and enforce
the provisions of this article with respect to the Paxton Creek, Spring Creek
and Asylum Run Drainage Basins. The city may assist in the administration,
implementation and enforcement of this article as may be requested by the
Authority.
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewer system which
will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the
resulting sludge.
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewer system which
will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into the receiving
waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the
system.
C. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system.
§ 159-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-53
1:173
§ 159-53. Definitions.
These definitions shall apply throughout this article unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise; other definitions may be found in the glossary.
ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE — A discharge not caused by the fault of any
person, and one that could not have been prevented by any means
suggested by common prudence, which would interfere with the operation
of the Advanced Wastewater Treatment Facility (AWTF).
ADVANCED WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY OF THE CITY OF
HARRISBURG (AWTF) — The publicly owned wastewater collection
conveyance and treatment system (POTW), as defined by Section 212 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act of
1977, as amended."
APPLICANT — All persons holding title to facilities or improvements for
which a permit for the connection to or discharge into the sewer system is
required.
AUTHORITY CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — The interceptor sewers, pumping
stations and force mains and all related structures which are a part of the
wastewater facilities transporting and conveying wastewater from facilities
of the Authority to the AWTF which is part of the wastewater facilities.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF A SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER
— Either:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Schedules of activities,
prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, other management
practices including treatment requirements and operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage and shall be considered
local limits and pretreatment standards for the purposes of 307(d) of the
Act.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure, five days at 20° C. expressed in terms of weight and
concentration (milligrams per liter).
A principal executive officer of at least the level of Vice President, if the
user is a corporation; or
A.
A general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively; or
B.
A principal executive officer or ranking elected official, if the user is a
municipality, state, federal, or other public agency.
C.
Duly authorized representative of the individual designated in
Subsection A, B, or C above, if such representative is responsible for the
overall operation of the facility or facilities from which the discharge
originates.
D.
§ 159-53 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-53
1:174
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand.
CFR — The Code of Federal Regulations.
CLEAN STREAMS LAW — The Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987, as amended
and reenacted by Act of October 10, 1980, P.L. 894, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to
691.702.
CLEAN WATER ACT (aka FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT)
— A federal statute enacted by Public Law 92-500, October 18, 1972; 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.: as amended by Public Law 95-217, December 28,
1977; Public Law 97-117, December 29, 1981; Public Law 97-440, January
8, 1983; and Public Law, 100-04, February 4, 1987.
COLLECTION AND CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — The sanitary sewer
collection system of the Authority in which wastewater is collected,
conveyed and discharged, or will be discharged, into the advanced
wastewater treatment facility (AWTF).
COLLECTION SYSTEM — The sanitary sewer collection system of the
Authority in which wastewater is collected and discharged, or will be
discharged, into the AWTF.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any premises or improvements not a
dwelling unit or industrial establishment.
COMPLIANCE MONITORING — The act of checking specific conditions or
requirements of the industrial user permit.
CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANTS — Pollutants which are usually found in
domestic, commercial or industrial wastes, such as phosphorus, total
suspended solids, biochemical oxygen demand, fecal coliform, adverse pH
levels and oil and grease.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.
DEP — See "PA DEP."
DEPARTMENT — The Sewer Department of Lower Paxton Township.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Sewer Department of Lower Paxton
Township or his designee.
DISCHARGER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of treated or untreated wastewater into the sewer system.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — Ordinary water-carried household wastes
from sanitary conveniences from residential and nonresidential
establishments.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — An agency or
administrative department of the United States or any other agency or
administrative department of the United States hereafter exercising all or
any portion, as appropriate, of the powers or jurisdiction presently being
exercised thereby.
§ 159-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-53
1:175
EPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — A measure of the volume of
flow or expected flow of sanitary sewage or industrial waste from any
property that is equal to the volume of flow discharged from one dwelling
unit as determined by the Authority in accordance with sound engineering
practice.
FEDERAL ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the "Clean Water Act of 1977, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq."
FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks of vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b), (c)
or (d) of the Federal Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), (c) or (d)] into the AWTF.
For the purposes of this definition, holding tank wastes shall be considered
indirect discharge.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any nonresidential establishment
discharging sewage and wastes other than normal waste-carried domestic
sewage and wastes and cooling water, directly or indirectly to the AWTF.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued pursuant to
Section 402 of the Federal Act. (33 U.S.C. § 1342.)
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance, waterborne
wastes or form of every rejected or escaping from any industrial,
manufacturing, trade or business proceeds or from the development,
recovering or processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the AWTF treatment
processes or operation which contributes to a violation of any requirement
of the Harrisburg Authority's NPDES permit. The term includes pollution
which prevents the use or disposal of sewage sludge by the AWTF in
accordance with Section 405 of the Federal Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act or more
stringent state criteria applicable to the method of disposal or use employed
by the AWTF.
LEASE — The agreement of lease between the city as lessee and the
Harrisburg Authority as lessor, whereunder the wastewater facilities are
§ 159-53 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-53
1:176
leased to the city for operation and use, and any amendments and
supplements to such lease.
LOCAL LIMITS — A locally established limit deemed to be a pretreatment
standard for the purpose of Section 307(d) of the Clean Water Act. The
limit is specific to the advanced wastewater treatment facility (AWTF) and is
based on the potential for pass-through, interference, sludge contamination
or capacity to cause damage or hazards to structures, equipment or
personnel of the advanced wastewater treatment facility (AWTF) by the
discharge of any pollutant by an industrial user.
MILLIGRAM PER LITER (mg/l) — Concentration based on mass of pollutant
per unit volume.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with Section 307(b)
and (c) of the Federal Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317(6)(b) and (c), which applies to a
specific category of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Act, 33
U.S.C. § 1342.
NATIONAL PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation
developed under authority of Section 307(b) of the Federal Act, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317(b), and 40 C.F.R. Section 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any new building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants which commences after
the date of publication of a proposed pretreatment standard under Section
307(c) of the Clean Water Act.
NONRESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any building, structure, room,
group of rooms, establishment or facility other than a residence which
discharges sewage and wastes, including industrial wastes, directly or
indirectly to the AWTF.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure sanitary sewage, industrial waste, or
both, is or may be discharged.
PADEP — The Department of Environmental Protection, an agency or
administrative department of the commonwealth or any other agency or
administrative department of the commonwealth hereafter exercising all or
any portion, as appropriate, of the powers or jurisdiction presently being
exercised thereby.
PARTS PER MILLION (PPM) — Indicates a mass ratio meaning milligrams
per million milligrams, and generally will be considered equivalent to
milligrams per liter (mg/l).
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the AWTF into a waterway
of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
§ 159-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-53
1:177
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of
a violation of the Harrisburg Authority's NPDES permit.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand and cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste
discharged into water.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological or radiological integrity of water.
POLYCHLORINATED BIPHENYLS (PCBS) T — The sum of Arochlors 1016,
1221, 1232, 1242, 12248, 1254, or 1260.[Added 6-7-2011 by Ord. No.
11-04]
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the AWTF. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
process, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40
CFR Section 403.6(d) (dilution).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENT — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment other than a pretreatment standard
imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard, local limit or discharge prohibition regulation identified in this
article containing a list of pollutant discharge limitations.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product
or waste product. Sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewaters are excluded unless they become process makeup water.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARD — National Prohibited Discharge
Standard.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE COLLECTION SYSTEM — Real estate
which adjoins, abuts or is adjacent to or is within 200 feet of the collection
system.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works as
denned by Section 212 of the Clean Water Act, which is owned by a state
or municipality (as defined by Section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act). This
definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a
liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if
they convey wastewater to a treatment facility.
§ 159-53 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-53
1:178
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any room, group of rooms, house, housetrailer
or other enclosure occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living
quarters by a single family or by persons living alone, which property shall
be billed and considered a separate entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and commercial
and industrial establishments.
SELF-MONITORING — Sampling and analysis performed by the industrial
user to ensure compliance with permit provisions.
SERVICE AGREEMENT — The second supplemental agreement dated
September 15, 1976, among the City of Harrisburg, Harrisburg Sewage
Authority and the suburban municipalities, and any supplements and
amendments to such agreement.
SERVICE PERIOD — For sewer rental purposes, the length of time for which
sewer rentals are billed as may be determined by the Bureau of Water of the
city to correspond with water service periods.
SEWER SYSTEM — All the facilities for the collection and conveyance of
sewage and suitable industrial wastes into the AWTF and the treatment
plant.
SIC — Standard Industrial Classification.
SIGNATORY — A responsible corporate officer, general partner, proprietor
or duly authorized representative of that individual.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — All categorical industrial users or any
noncategorical industrial users that:
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — One or more violations of:
Have a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average workday
of process wastewater; or
A.
Have an average process flow which makes up 5% or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment
plant; or
B.
Have a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the Superintendent, to
adversely affect the treatment plant through inhibition, pass-through of
pollutants, sludge contamination or endangerment of AWTF workers or
to violate any pretreatment standard or requirement.
C.
Pretreatment standards or requirements, including chronic violations,
technical review criteria violations, any discharge which alone or in
combination causes interference or pass-through or endangers the
health or welfare of AWTF personnel, the public or environment or
results in the AWTF exercising its emergency authority to halt or
prevent such a discharge;
A.
B. Best management practices;
§ 159-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-53
1:179
SLUG DISCHARGE — Any pollutant released in a discharge at a flow or
concentration rate which will cause interference with the operation of the
AWTF.
SPILL PREVENTION AND CONTROL PLAN — A plan prepared by an
industrial user to minimize the likelihood of a spill and to expedite control
and cleanup activities should a spill occur.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION — A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office
of the President, Office of Management and Budget (1972).
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STEELTON CONVEYANCE SYSTEM — The facilities owned or leased by the
Borough of Steelton which transport and convey wastewater from facilities
of any of the suburban municipalities, and not through the Harrisburg
conveyance system, to the wastewater treatment facilities which are part of
the wastewater facilities.
SUBURBAN MUNICIPALITIES OR SUBURBAN MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES
— The Borough of Penbrook, Borough of Paxtang, Borough of Steelton,
Township of Swatara, Township of Lower Paxton and the Township of
Susquehanna and, as applicable, Swatara Township Authority, Lower Paxton
Authority, Steelton Borough Authority and Susquehanna Township
Authority, collectively or individually, as appropriate.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the city to supervise
the operation of the AWTF and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this article or any other applicable legislation or one or
more duly authorized representatives.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC MATERIAL OR POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of
pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under
Section 307(a) of the Federal Act or the Federal Laws.
TREATMENT — Pretreatment.
TREATMENT PLANT — The plant for the treatment of sewage conveyed
thereto by the collection system, and the equipment and facilities thereof;
the AWTF.
UPSET — An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with the pretreatment standards because of
C. Compliance schedule milestones;
D. Reporting requirements;
E. Accurately reporting noncompliance; or
Any other violation or group of violations the AWTF considers to be
significant.
F.
§ 159-53 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-53
1:180
factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset
does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities,
lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the AWTF.
VIOLATION — The act of not meeting specific conditions or requirements
(i.e., noncompliance).
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, together with any pollutants which may be present, whether
treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the
sewer system.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The wastewater conveyance, treatment,
disposal and related facilities owned by the Harrisburg Authority and leased
to the City of Harrisburg for operation and use, including existing facilities
and all future additions and improvements thereto.
WATERWORKS — All facilities for the collection and distribution of water to
persons in the city.
§ 159-54. Compliance required.
No connection or discharge shall be made to or into the sewer system
except in compliance with all federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations now in force and effect as well as such federal, state and
local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be
enacted, adopted, approved or promulgated by any federal, state or local
authority or may be otherwise provided by law.
§ 159-55. Power to prohibit connections and certain discharged.
A. The Township reserves the right to refuse permission to connect to the
sewer system, to compel discontinuance of use of the sewer system or
to compel pretreatment of wastewaters by any person in order to
prevent discharges deemed harmful or deemed to have a deleterious
effect upon the operation of or any portion of the sewer system.
B. No wastewaters shall be discharged to the sewer system:
(1) Having heat in such quantities that the discharge causes the
temperature at the AWTF to exceed 40° C. or 104° F.
(2) Containing fats, wax, grease or oils of petroleum origin, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil or petroleum products of mineral
origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through at
the AWTF.
§ 159-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-55
1:181
(3) Containing any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other
explosive liquids, solids or gases or any other pollutants which will
create a fire or explosion hazard, including but not limited to
waterstreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. or
60° C. using the test methods specified in 40 CFR Part 261.21.
(4) Containing any garbage that has not been ground by householdtype
or other suitable garbage grinders.
(5) Containing any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any
other solids or viscous substances capable of causing obstructions
or other interferences with proper operation of the sewer system.
(6) Having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 10.0 standard units, or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazards to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewer system.
(7) Containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity to
injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to
constitute hazards to humans or animals or to create any hazard in
waters which receive treated effluent from the sewer system
treatment plant. Toxic wastes shall include but not be limited to
wastes containing cyanide, chromium, cadmium, mercury, copper
or nickel or any characteristic or listed hazardous waste.
(8) Containing noxious or malodorous gases or substances capable of
creating a public nuisance.
(9) Containing solids of such character and quantity that special and
unusual attention is required for their handling.
(10) Containing any substance which may affect the AWTF's effluent
and cause violation of the NPDES permit requirements.
(11) Containing any substance which would cause the AWTF to be in
noncompliance with sludge use, recycling or disposal criteria
pursuant to guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405
of the Federal Act, the Clean Air Act or regulations criteria for
sludge management and disposal as required by the DEP.
(12) Containing color which is not removed in the treatment processes.
(13) Containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes.
(14) Containing any pollutant, including conventional pollutants,
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which would
cause interference with the AWTF.
(15) Containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 0° C. or 32° F. and 60° C. or 140° F.
§ 159-55 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-55
1:182
§ 159-56. Customer's pretreatment and sampling facilities.
(16) Containing chemical constituents which alone or in combination
result in the release of toxic gases, vapors or fumes in a quantity
that may cause acute worker health and safety problems.
C. When the Director determines that an industrial user is contributing
any of the above substances in such amounts as to exceed stated limits
or to interfere with the operation of the AWTF, he or she shall:
(1) Advise the user of the impact of such discharges on the operation of
the AWTF;
(2) Develop effluent limitations for those discharges to correct the
interference with the operations of the AWTF;
(3) Direct the user to comply with the effluent limitations as provided
in this article; and
(4) Utilize the enforcement provisions of this article.
A. Upon notification by the Authority, pretreatment facilities shall be
installed within 90 days of the date of such notice, at the sole cost of the
significant industrial user, to meet Township requirements. In no event
shall dilution be acceptable as a means of pretreatment to meet the
requirements of this article. Any order to install pretreatment facilities
may be appealed to the Director as provided in this article.
B. The Township reserves the right to require nonresidential dischargers
having large variations in rates of wastewater discharge to install
suitable regulating devices for equalizing wastewater flows to the
sewer system.
C. When directed by the Department, industrial users shall install, within
90 days of the directive, at their sole cost and expense, and thereafter
maintain a manhole and such other devices as may be approved by the
Department to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of
wastewaters discharged into the sewer system. The duly authorized
representatives of the Department shall, at all times, be permitted to:
(1) Enter upon any and all properties of industrial users for the
purpose of inspecting for compliance, observing, measuring and
sampling wastewaters discharged into the sewer system;
(2) Set up and use monitoring equipment;
(3) Inspect and copy industrial waste discharge, monitoring and
production records or any other records pertinent to compliance
with this article; and
(4) Have access to any meters used for establishing or determining
water consumption, water excluded from the sewer system and
wastewater discharged into the sewer system. If an individual user
§ 159-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-56
1:183
§ 159-57. Wastewater discharge permits.
has security measures in force which physically limit entry to the
premises of such user, the industrial user shall, within 30 days
of the effective date of this section, immediately provide the
Department with whatever is necessary to allow authorized
township or Authority representatives to enter the premises,
without delay, for the purpose of performing their duties and
responsibilities.
D. The Department may require any industrial establishment to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this article.
A. Any industrial establishment desiring to discharge or currently
discharging, directly or indirectly, wastes into the sewer system or
planning to change operations so as to materially alter the
characteristics and/or volumes of wastewaters discharged into the
sewer system shall notify the Department in writing at least 30 days
before making such connection or changing its operations and shall
obtain a permit from the Department to do so. Applications for such
permit shall be on the form supplied by the Director and shall be
accompanied by all information requested by the Department for the
determination of waste volumes, characteristics and constituents. The
cost for obtaining such information shall be borne by the applicant. Any
significant industrial user shall make application for a new permit
within 30 days of the effective date of this section.
B. This application shall include but shall not be limited to the following
information in units and terms appropriate for evaluation:
(1) Name, address and location of applicant.
(2) SIC number(s) according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of Budget, 1972, as amended.
(3) Volume of wastewaters to be discharged.
(4) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, as determined by a
reliable analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with the procedures established by the
United States EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Federal Act, 33
U.S.C. § 1314(g), and the regulations promulgated thereunder, 40
CFR Part 136, as amended.
(5) Time and duration of discharge.
(6) Average and maximum wastewater flow rates, including daily,
monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(7) A schematic flow representation which shall include floor plans,
mechanical and plumbing plans and details of all sewers, sewer
connections and appurtenances, sizes, locations and elevations.
§ 159-56 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-57
1:184
(8) Number of employees and hours worked.
(9) Description of activities, facilities and plan processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged;
each product produced, listed by type, amount and rate of
production.
(10) Type and amount of raw materials processed, average and
maximum per day.
(11) Each substance considered toxic, hazardous, noxious or
malodorous, including a description of the hazards associated with
each substance.
(12) A schematic flow representation which shall include all
pretreatment or treatment plans and details, including
appurtenances, sizes, locations, elevations.
(13) Pretreatment, treatment and flow meter standard operating
procedures manual.
(14) Certification of accuracy by the applicant.
(15) Any other information required by 40 CFR 403.12(b) or any other
information as may be deemed necessary by the Department to
evaluate that permit application.
C. The Department shall evaluate the data furnished by the applicant and
may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of
the data furnished, the Director shall issue a permit subject to terms
and conditions provided therein, as set forth in Subsection D hereof.
D. Wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this
article and all other applicable federal, state and local laws, rules,
regulations, charges and fees. The conditions of such permits shall be
uniformly enforced by the Township or authority in accordance with
this article and applicable federal, state and local laws, rules and
regulations. Permits may contain but shall not be limited to the
following conditions:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of special charges and fees or
wastewater surcharges to be paid for the wastewater to be
discharged into the sewer system pursuant to such permit.
(2) The average and maximum allowable wastewater constituent and
characteristics.
(3) Equalization, neutralization or other requirements to control high
pH or highly variable pH discharge.
(4) Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization.
§ 159-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-57
1:185
§ 159-58. Specific discharge limitations.
(5) Requirements for installation, maintenance and/or operation of
monitoring, inspection and sampling facilities.
(6) Pretreatment requirements.
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports.
(8) Signatory requirements for certification of technical reports or
discharge reports.
(9) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge for a minimum of three years or longer as
specified by the Department and affording the Department access
thereto.
(10) Compliance schedules.
(11) Specifications for monitoring programs, including self-monitoring,
sampling location, frequency and method of sampling, number,
types and standards for tests and reporting schedules.
(12) Requirements for notification of pretreatment standard
exceedance and repeat sampling and testing.
(13) Requirements for notification of slug or accidental discharge.
(14) Requirements for a spill or slug discharge prevention and control
plan in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8 (f) (2)(vi) (A)(B)(C) and (D).
(15) Requirements for best management practices.
(16) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Township to ensure
compliance with these regulations.
E. Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years, subject to compliance with all of the
provisions of this article and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
Any applicant who does not meet the standards of this article shall not
be entitled to a five-year permit. All holders of a wastewater discharge
permit must also comply with any National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards within 90 days of their promulgation or any revisions
thereto.
F. A wastewater discharge permit is not assignable or transferable to a
new user, owner or new use.
A. No industrial user shall discharge, directly or indirectly, into the
wastewater collection or conveyance system any wastewater containing
in excess of the following pollutant in milligrams per liter: [Amended
6-7-2011 by Ord. No. 11-04]
§ 159-57 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-58
1:186
§ 159-59. Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
Upon promulgation of federal categorical pretreatment standards or any
federal standard for a particular industry or subcategory, the standards
referenced in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, if more
stringent than the limitations contained in this article for such discharges,
shall immediately supersede the standards set forth in this article. The
Superintendent shall notify all affected industrial users of the applicable
reporting requirements under 40 CFR Section 403.12.
§ 159-60. State standards.
Any state requirements and limitations on discharge which have been or
may be adopted which are more stringent than the federal limitations or
those contained in this article shall supersede both federal and Township
standards. The Director shall notify all affected users of any such change.
§ 159-61. Upset, slug or accidental discharge; notice requirements.
Pollutant
Daily
Maximum
Instantaneous
Maximum Ordinance
Arsenic (T) 2.81 5.62 98-11
Cadmium (T) 0.75 1.50 98-11
Chromium (T) 1.31 2.62 90-03
Copper (T) 2.99 5.98 90-03
Cyanide (T) 2.15 2.15 90-03
Lead (T) 0.55 1.10 98-11
Mercury (T) 0.04 0.08 98-11
Molybdenum (T) 6.78 13.56 11-04
Nickel (T) 1.00 2.00 90-03
PCBs (T) 1.28 2.56 11-04
Selenium (T) 2.14 4.28 11-04
Silver (T) 15.46 30.92 11-04
Zinc (T) 2.20 4.40 98-11
B. The limits may be changed by regulation of the Director or by the EPA
to whichever limitation is more stringent.
A. Each significant industrial user shall provide protection from an upset
of pretreatment facilities, slug or accidental discharge of prohibited
materials and any other substances requested by this article. Facilities
to prevent and plans to mitigate an upset, slug or accidental discharge
shall be provided and maintained at such user's expense. Facilities to
prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided
and maintained at such user's expense. No significant industrial user
§ 159-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-61
1:187
§ 159-62. Compliance reports.
which commences discharge into the sewer system shall be permitted
to introduce pollutants into the sewer system until a spill, prevention
and control plan has been approved by the Department. Approval of
such plans and procedures shall not relieve such user of the
responsibility to modify such user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this article.
B. In the event of an upset, slug or accidental discharge, it shall be the
responsibility of the significant industrial user to:
(1) Make immediate notification to the AWTF of a location of
discharge, date and time thereof and type of waste, including
concentration and volume and corrective action taken; and
(2) Within five days following an upset, slug or accidental discharge,
submit to the Superintendent a written report which shall specify:
(a) Description of the upset, slug or accidental discharge, the
cause thereof and the impact on the industrial user's
compliance status, including location of discharge, type of
concentration and volume of waste.
(b) Duration of noncompliance, including exact date and times of
noncompliance, and, if the noncompliance continues, the time
by which compliance is reasonably expected to occur.
(c) All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of such an upset, slug or accidental discharge or
other conditions of noncompliance.
(3) The notification required by this section shall not relieve the
significant industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other
liability incurred to the AWTF, the Township Authority or any state
or federal department or authority or any damage to person,
property or environment; nor will this notification relieve the
significant industrial user of any fines, penalties or any other
liability which may be imposed by this article or any other
applicable law.
A. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance or, if a new
source, the commencement of discharge, any user subject to the
treatment provisions of this article shall submit to the Director a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants and the average
and maximum flows of the discharges which are limited by such
pretreatment standards and requirements. The report shall state
whether the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are
being met and, if not, what additional pretreatment facilities or
additional operations and maintenance tasks are necessary to bring
such user in compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards
§ 159-61 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-62
1:188
§ 159-63. Prior notice of discharge or hazardous waste.
No industrial user shall introduce any untreated process waste or process
wastewater into the sewer system containing any hazardous waste
constituent identified in 40 CFR Part 261 without prior written notification
to the Director. Any notification shall provide the identity of the waste,
the hazardous waste constituent and number and an estimation of the
mass and concentration of hazardous waste to be discharged and shall be
accompanied by a statement certifying that a waste reduction program is
in place. In no case shall the introduction of any hazardous process waste
or nonprocess waste constituent be permitted as a substitute for the proper
treatment and disposal of any such waste.
§ 159-64. Limitations on point of discharge.
and requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and certified by a qualified individual.
B. Any significant industrial user subject to the provisions of this article
shall submit to the Director, at least on a semiannual basis, a report
containing the information required by its permit. The reports required
by this subsection shall be certified by an authorized signatory of the
user and submitted within 30 days following the end of the reporting
period unless the Director authorizes, in writing, another submission
date or schedule.
C. If any sampling and testing required by Subsections A and B hereof
indicate a violation of a pretreatment standard, the industrial user shall
notify the Department within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation, repeat sampling and testing within 72 hours or the first day
representative of normal operation and submit, in writing, the results of
the repeat analysis within 30 days.
D. In addition to the requirements of Subsections A, B and C hereof, if the
Director has reason to believe that a significant industrial user is not
meeting the pretreatment standards on a consistent basis, such user
may be required to submit interim compliance reports on a regular or
irregular schedule.
E. Any reports required by this section shall be maintained and retained
for a minimum of three years or longer, as specified by the Department,
and access by the Department afforded thereto.
A. No user shall discharge any waste or wastewater directly into a
manhole or other opening in the sewer system, other than an approved
building sewer, unless such user has been issued a special permit to do
so by the Director. Such permit shall be of limited duration and the
permittee shall comply with all applicable provisions of this article.
B. The discharge of any trucked or hauled pollutants is prohibited except
at discharge points designated in a special permit approved by the
§ 159-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-64
1:189
§ 159-65. Charges and fees.
The Director shall adopt a schedule of charges and fees to cover the costs
of implementation of the pretreatment provisions of this article. These fees
are in addition to and separate from all other fees charged by the Authority
and will be assessed by the Authority on all permit holders. Such charges
and fees may include but are not limited to the following:
§ 159-66. Applicability of provisions.
The pretreatment provisions and all other requirements of this article shall
apply to any person currently discharging into, directly or indirectly, or
otherwise using the sewer system or any person who shall in the future
discharge into, directly or indirectly, or otherwise use the sewer system.
§ 159-67. Present and future rules and regulations.
The Director is authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations as are
necessary for the proper administration, implementation and enforcement
of this article. This authority is in addition to that granted in any section of
this article. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect
as the provisions of this article, and any violation thereof shall be deemed a
violation of the applicable sections for enforcement purposes. The Director
shall publish notice of the promulgation of any such rules and regulations
prior to adoption of the same.
§ 159-68. Failure to comply.
Should any user refuse, neglect or fail to comply with any provision of this
article or any of the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder or any
notice or directive given in conformity with or pursuant to the provisions of
this article, the Township or Authority may pursue any or all of the remedies
set forth in this article.
Director. Such permit shall be of limited duration and the permittee
shall comply with all applicable provisions of this article.
A. Costs of monitoring inspection and surveillance procedures.
B. Costs of reviewing permit applications.
C. Administrative costs and appeals.
D. Costs of reviewing accident discharge reports.
E. Costs of reviewing pretreatment facility construction plans.
F. Costs of consistent removal by the AWTF of pollutants subject to
pretreatment standards.
G. Any other costs incurred by the Township in implementing the
requirements of this article.
§ 159-64 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-69
1:190
§ 159-69. Confidentiality of proprietary information.
Any information submitted to the Township or Authority pursuant to this
article or any rules and regulations promulgated thereunder may be
claimed as confidential by the submitter. Any such claim shall be asserted at
the time of submission by the stamping or placing of the words "Confidential
Business Information" on each page containing such information. If no
claim is made at the time of submission, the Township or Authority may
make the information available to the public without further notice. If a
claim is asserted, the information shall be treated in accordance with the
procedures in 40 CFR Part 2 (Public Information); provided, however, that
any information regarding effluent data shall be available to the public
without restriction.
§ 159-70. Compliance monitoring and inspection performed by the
Township or authority.
Compliance monitoring and inspection will be performed by the Township
or Authority and may be performed by the city as authorized by the
Township or Authority. This duty will be based on a schedule determined by
the type of facility, type and concentration of pollutants in the discharge and
the past performances of compliance by the industrial user.
§ 159-71. Enforcement and penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the
penalty and enforcement provisions of this article, including the right of the
Township or Authority to disconnect service.
§ 159-72. Termination or suspension of service or permit.
Pursuant to the applicable notice requirements of this article, the Township
or Authority may suspend wastewater treatment and/or a discharge permit
when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Township or
Authority, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which:
§ 159-73. Cessation of harmful activity.
After informal notice to halt or prevent a discharge which reasonably
appears to present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, the AWTF, the sewarage system or the environment, the person
responsible for the discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. In the event of failure of the person to cease or cause to
cease such contribution, the Director shall authorize any actions as deemed
A. Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to
the health or welfare of persons or to the environment;
B. Causes or may cause interference with the operations of or damage to
the AWTF; or
C. Causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
§ 159-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-73
1:191
necessary to halt or prevent such contribution, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the
sewerage system and/or the AWTF, the environment or to any individuals.
§ 159-74. Suspension or revocation of permit.
The existence of any one of the following conditions may cause the
Township or Authority to revoke the permit of the significant industrial user:
§ 159-75. Reinstatement of permit and restoration of service.
The Township or Authority shall reinstate a permit and/or restore service
under the following conditions, as applicable:
A. Failure to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of a discharge.
B. Failure to report significant changes in operations or in wastewater
constituents and characteristics.
C. Refusal of access to the discharger's premises for the purpose of
inspecting or monitoring or determining the amount of sewer rental
payable.
D. Failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of a permit.
E. Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this article.
A. Demonstration to the satisfaction of the Township or Authority that
such significant industrial user is now utilizing good management
practices to prevent or reduce the contribution of pollutants to the
sewer system. Good management principles include but are not limited
to preventive operating and maintenance practices to reduce the
quantity and improve the quality of effluent discharged and the control
of plant spillage, leaks and drainage from storage area.
B. Submission to the Township or Authority of proof of elimination of any
noncomplying discharge.
C. Submission within 15 days of the occurrence a detailed report
describing the causes of the noncomplying discharge and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence.
D. Access to the premises in question for enforcement purposes is
assured.
E. Submission of a detailed report describing the measures taken to
ensure present and future compliance with the terms and conditions of
a permit.
F. Evidence of compliance with federal, state and local laws, rules and
regulations is submitted.
§ 159-73 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-76
1:192
§ 159-76. Notice of violation.
Whenever the Director finds that any person has violated or is violating
any provisions of this article to which these enforcement provisions apply,
any permit issued thereunder or any applicable federal, state or local
regulation, the Director or a designee shall serve or cause to be served
upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation and
requiring the submission within 30 days of the date of the notice a plan for
the satisfactory correction of such violation.
§ 159-77. Right to hearing.
Any person affected by a notice, directive or other decision of the Director
may request a hearing before the Township and present evidence of
circumstances justifying reconsideration of the decision of the Director.
Such request must be in writing and served on the Township within 10 days
of the date of the notification or decision. The Township shall hold a hearing
and render a decision within 15 days of the request.
§ 159-78. Injunctive relief.
Subject to the applicable notice provisions of this article, in circumstances
where the nature of the violation constitutes a violation of the Clean
Streams Law, the Township or Authority may apply for a mandatory
preliminary injunction or special injunction in the Court of Common Pleas of
Dauphin County or the Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure relating to actions in equity.
§ 159-79. Civil liability.
A. Any person who permits or allows a discharge which causes an
obstruction or damage to the AWTF shall be assessed a charge equal to
the amount necessary to repair or replace the damaged facilities.
B. Should any person refuse, neglect or fail to comply with pretreatment
provisions and discharge limitations of this article, with any of the rules
and regulations promulgated hereunder or with any directive or notice
given pursuant to this article to which these enforcement provisions
apply, then the Director is hereby empowered to authorize and may
authorize the supply of all labor and materials necessary to effect
compliance. Such person shall be assessed a charge equal to the
amount necessary to effect compliance.
C. Should the city suffer the termination or suspension of its NPDES
permit or be assessed penalties or fines for violations thereof, which
violations were caused by the failure of a discharger to comply with the
provision of this article and any applicable rules and regulations, such
discharger shall be assessed a charge equal to the amount expended by
the city to cause its NPDES permit to be reinstated, plus the amount of
any penalties or fines imposed against it.
§ 159-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-80
1:193
§ 159-80. Remedy by Authority.
§ 159-81. Public notification.
Pursuant to the public participation requirements of 40 CFR Part 25, the
Department shall cause to have published at least annually in the largest
daily newspaper of general circulation in Lower Paxton Township a list of
all industrial users who, during the previous twelve-month period, were in
significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards or other
pretreatment requirements. For the purpose of this provision, a significant
noncompliance violation is:
A. All charges assessed in accordance with this article or any other fees or
charges authorized by any provision to which this article applies shall
be a lien on the properties served from the date the charge therefor
first becomes due and payable.
B. All charges imposed pursuant to this article, together with a 10%
penalty thereon, shall be certified by the Director to the Authority
Solicitor who shall enter the same as a lien in the Court of Common
Pleas of Dauphin County and proceed to collect the same in like manner
as other municipal claims are by law collectible.
C. In addition to the above method, the Authority may proceed to collect
such assessments by action in assumpsit in the name of the Authority
against the owner of the property charged and/or the person
discharging into the sewer system.
D. In addition to the above, the Authority may recover reasonable
attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporter fees and all other expenses
of litigation to enforce the claim or claims of the Authority.
A. One or more violations of a pretreatment standard or requirement,
including chronic violations and technical review criteria violations;
B. Any discharge which alone or in combination causes interference or
pass-through or endangers the health or welfare of AWTF personnel,
the public or the environment or results in the AWTF exercising its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
C. Failure to implement best management practices;
D. Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone;
E. Failure to provide a required report;
F. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
G. Any other violation or group of violations the AWTF considers to be
significant.
§ 159-80 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-82
1:194
§ 159-82. Public nuisance.
Any person who violates any of the terms, provisions or requirements of this
article or any of the applicable rules and regulations regarding discharges
shall be deemed to be maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the Authority
is authorized and directed to abate in the manner provided by law.
§ 159-83. Service of notice.
Whenever notice is necessary under this article, such notice shall be
properly served upon an owner if a copy thereof is delivered to the owner
personally; or by leaving a notice at the usual place of abode with someone
of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof;
or by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known
address with return receipt showing it has been delivered. If the return
receipt shows that it has not been delivered, then service may be made
by posting a copy thereof ill a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice. Such notice shall set forth a reasonable time for
such compliance to be accomplished.
§ 159-84. Issuing authorities.
The Director and his designee shall act in the capacity of police officers
for the limited purpose of issuing nontraffic summary citations to owners of
premises or persons who are found in violation of this article.
§ 159-85. Violations and penalties.
A. Civil penalty. In addition to proceedings under this article or any other
remedy available at law or equity for violation of pretreatment
standards requirements, any person, firm or corporation who or which
fails to comply with any provision of this article or any applicable rules
or regulations or whoever fails to comply with a notice given pursuant
to those chapters and/or this article may be assessed a civil penalty,
whether or not the violation was willful or negligent, in accordance with
Subsection 4(a)(1) of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works Penalty Law,
Act of March 26, 1992, P.L. 23, 53 P.S. § 752.4(a)(1), of not more than
$25,000 per day of violation. Each twenty-four-hour period during
which a violation continues shall be considered a separate and distinct
offense under this provision and punishable as such.
B. Criminal penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who or which
knowingly or negligently violates any of the terms, provisions or
requirements of this article or any of the applicable rules and
regulations or whoever refuses or neglects to comply with any notice
given pursuant to this article to such person or whoever obstructs or
interferes with any person in the enforcement of these chapters shall,
upon conviction thereof, severally for each and every violation or
noncompliance, respectively, be fined not more than $1,000 or
imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. Each twenty-four-hour
§ 159-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-85
1:195
period during which a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense and punishable as such.
C. Any person, firm or corporation who or which knowingly or negligently
makes a false oral or written statement in any report, record, plan,
application or other document filed with the Authority or who falsifies,
tampers with or renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this article shall be liable to prosecution under
appropriate criminal statutes, including but not limited to false
swearing, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4903; unsworn falsification to authorities, 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 4904; tampering with or fabricating physical evidence, 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 4910; and tampering with public records or information, 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 4911.
§ 159-85 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-85
1:196
ARTICLE VII
On-Lot Sewage Disposal Facilities
[Adopted 2-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-01]
§ 159-86. Short title; introduction; purpose.
§ 159-87. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A sewage enforcement officer, employee of the
Township, professional engineer, plumbing inspector, or any other qualified
or licensed person who is authorized to function within specified limits as
an agent to administer or enforce the provisions of this article.
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors, Lower Paxton Township, Dauphin
County, Pennsylvania.
CESSPOOL — A below ground cavity built of loose rock or blocks that
provides for the temporary storage of sanitary sewage until the sewage
drains into the surrounding area.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the collection of sewage from two or more lots, and the
treatment and/or disposal of the sewage on one or more lots or at any other
site.
A. This article shall be known and may be cited as "An ordinance providing
for an On-Lot Sewage Management Program for Lower Paxton
Township."
B. In accordance with municipal codes, the Clean Streams Law (Act of
June 27, 1937, P.L. 1987, No. 394 as amended, 35 P.S. §§ 691.1 to
691.1001), and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act of January
24, 1966, P.L. 1535 as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., known as Act
537), it is the power and the duty of Lower Paxton Township to provide
for adequate sewage treatment facilities and for the protection of the
public health by preventing the discharge of untreated or inadequately
treated sewage. The Official Sewage Facilities Plan for Lower Paxton
Township indicates that it is necessary to formulate and implement a
sewage management program to effectively prevent and abate water
pollution and hazards to the public health caused by improper
treatment and disposal of sewage.
C. The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation, inspection,
maintenance and rehabilitation of on-lot sewage disposal systems; to
further permit intervention in situations which may constitute a public
nuisance or hazard to the public health; and to establish penalties and
appeal procedures necessary for the proper administration of a sewage
management program.
§ 159-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-87
1:197
DEP or DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks, or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in
whole or in part into the soil or into any waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
MALFUNCTION — The condition occurring when an on-lot sewage disposal
system discharges sewage onto the surface of the ground, into ground
waters of the commonwealth, into surface waters of the commonwealth,
backs up into a building connected to the on-lot system or in any manner
causes a nuisance or hazard to the public health or pollution of ground or
surface water or contamination of public or private drinking water wells.
Systems shall be considered to be malfunctioning if any of the conditions
noted above occur for any length of time during any period of the year.
MUNICIPALITY — Lower Paxton Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL ACT 537 SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — A comprehensive plan
for the provision of adequate sewage disposal systems, adopted by the
Township and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, as described in and required by the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act.
ON-LOT MANAGEMENT PROGRAM — A comprehensive set of legal and
administrative requirements including this article, the Act, the Clean
Streams Law, and all regulations and requirements adopted by the Board to
enforce and administer this article.
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system for disposal of sewage
involving pretreatment and subsequent disposal of the clarified sewage into
the soil for final treatment and disposal; including both individual sewage
systems and community sewage systems.
OWNER — Any person having an equitable or legal interest in real estate in
Lower Paxton Township.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, public or private
corporation whether for profit or not-for-profit, partnership, firm, trust,
estate, department, board, bureau or agency of the Commonwealth,
political subdivision, municipality, district, authority or other legally
recognized entity which is recognized by the law as the subject of rights
and duties. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty
or imposing a fine or imprisonment, the term person shall include the
members of an association, partnership or firm and the offices of any local
agency or municipal, public or private corporation for profit or not for profit.
REHABILITATION — Work done to modify, alter, repair, enlarge, or replace
an existing on-lot disposal system.
§ 159-87 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-87
1:198
SEPTAGE — Any human excrement, other domestic or restaurant waste,
or other material or substance removed from a portable toilet, septic tank,
seepage pit, treatment tank, cesspool, or other enclosure used for the
storage or decomposition of sewage, but does not include liquid industrial
waste.
SEPTIC SYSTEM REPORT — Township form to be completed by the
pumper/hauler for each individual tank and forwarded to the Township after
each inspection and/or pumping.
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight tank that provides for the treatment of
sanitary sewage prior to its discharge to an absorption area.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substances being harmful or inimical to
public health, or to animal or aquatic life, or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation or which constitutes pollution under the Act
of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 94), known as "the Clean Streams Law," as
amended.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER (SEO) — An agent of the Township,
certified by DEP to issue and review permit applications and conduct such
investigations and inspections as are necessary to implement Act 537 and
the rules and regulations promulgated there under.
SEWAGE FACILITIES — Any method of sewage collection, conveyance,
treatment, and disposal, which will prevent the discharge of, untreated
or inadequately treated sewage into the waters of this Commonwealth
or otherwise provide for the safe and sanitary treatment and disposal of
sewage.
SEWAGE MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Any area or areas of the Township
designated in the 537 Plan adopted by the Board as an area where sewage
management is to be implemented.
TOWNSHIP — Lower Paxton Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
§ 159-88. Applicability.
From the effective date of this article, its provisions shall apply to every
owner of a lot served by an on-lot sewage system within Lower Paxton
Township and all persons or businesses servicing on-lot sewage systems
(constructing, pumping, inspecting, or repairing on-lot sewage systems)
within the Township.
§ 159-89. Permit requirements.
A. No person shall install, construct or request bid proposals for
construction, or alter an individual sewage system or community
sewage system or construct or request bid proposals for construction or
install or occupy any building or structure for which an individual
sewage system or community sewage system is to be installed without
first obtaining a permit from the sewage enforcement officer which
§ 159-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-89
1:199
§ 159-90. Inspections.
permit shall indicate that the site and the plans and specifications of
such system are in compliance with the provisions of the Clean Streams
Law (35 P.S. §§ 691.1-691.1001) and the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (35 P.S. 750.1 et seq.) and the regulations adopted pursuant to
those Acts.
B. No system or structure designed to provide individual or community
sewage disposal shall be covered from view until approval to cover the
same has been given by a sewage enforcement officer. If 72 hours have
elapsed, excepting Sundays and Holidays, since the sewage
enforcement office issuing the permit received notification of
completion of construction, the applicant may cover said system or
structure unless permission has been specifically refused by the sewage
enforcement officer.
C. Applicants for sewage permits shall be required to notify the sewage
enforcement officer of the schedule for construction of the permitted
on-lot sewage disposal system so that inspection(s) in addition to the
final inspection required by the Sewage Facilities Act may be scheduled
and performed by a sewage enforcement officer.
D. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for a new building
which will contain sewage generating facilities until a valid sewage
permit has been obtained from a sewage enforcement officer.
E. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued and no work shall
begin on any alteration or conversion of any existing structure, if said
alteration or conversion will result in the increase or potential increase
in sewage flows from the structure, until either the structure's owner
receives a permit for alteration or replacement of the existing sewage
disposal system or until the structure's owner and the appropriate
officials of Lower Paxton Township receive written notification from a
sewage enforcement officer that such a permit will not be required. The
sewage enforcement officer shall determine whether the proposed
alteration or conversion of the structure will result in increased sewage
flows.
F. Sewage permits may be issued only by a sewage enforcement officer
employed by Lower Paxton Township. DEP shall be notified as to the
identity of each sewage enforcement officer employed by the Township.
A. An inspection shall be conducted whenever an on-lot sewage system is
pumped in accordance with this article. It shall be the property owner's
responsibility to schedule the inspection with a licensed pumper/hauler
who is registered with the Township for the same time as the system is
pumped.
B. The person completing the inspection shall prepare a written report on
the inspection findings using the Lower Paxton Township septic system
§ 159-89 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-90
1:200
§ 159-91. Operation.
§ 159-92. Maintenance.
report form and immediately provide the completed form to the
property owner who shall be responsible for submitting the completed
form to the Township.
C. Any on-lot sewage disposal system may be inspected by an authorized
agent at any reasonable time as of the effective date of this article.
D. An authorized agent shall have the right to enter upon land for the
purposes of inspections described in this section.
E. The inspection by the Township's SEO may include a physical tour of
the property, the taking of samples from surface water, wells, other
groundwater sources, the sampling of the contents of the sewage
system itself and/or the introduction of a traceable substance into the
interior plumbing of the structure served to ascertain the path and
ultimate destination of wastewater generated in the structure. The
owner will bear the cost of the inspection and the analysis of any
sample(s).
F. An authorized agent shall inspect systems known to be, or alleged to be,
malfunctioning. Should said inspections confirm that the system is
malfunctioning, the authorized agent shall order action to be taken to
correct the malfunction. If total correction cannot be done in
accordance with the regulations of DEP including, but not limited to,
those outlined in Chapter 73 of Title 25 of Pennsylvania Code or, is not
technically or financially feasible in the opinion of the authorized agent
and a representative of DEP; then action by the property owner to
mitigate the malfunction shall be required.
A. Only normal domestic wastes shall be discharged into any on-lot
sewage disposal system. The following shall not be discharged into the
system.
(1) Industrial waste.
(2) Automobile oil and other nondomestic oil.
(3) Toxic or hazardous substances or chemicals, including but not
limited to, pesticides, disinfectants (excluding household cleaners),
acids, paints, paint thinners, herbicides, gasoline and other
solvents.
(4) Clean surface or groundwater, including water from roof or cellar
drains, springs, basement sump pumps and trench drains.
A. The Township shall notify all owners of property served by an on-lot
sewage disposal system that their system must be pumped and
inspected within 12 months from the date the notification letter is
§ 159-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-92
1:201
postmarked. The Township shall follow a schedule whereby
approximately 1/3 of all owners of properties within the Township
served by on-lot sewage disposal systems are notified annually of the
pumping and inspection requirement, such that all owners are notified
at least once every three years. Any person owning a building served
by an on-lot sewage system within the boundaries of Lower Paxton
Township, which contains a treatment tank, shall have the tank pumped
by a licensed pumper/hauler who is registered with the Township. The
property owner must have his system pumped within the time period
specified in the Township's notification letter, unless he can provide
the Township with a receipt, or other written evidence showing that
his tank has been pumped within the past one year. Property owners
providing such written documentation satisfactory to the Township can
request a postponement of their initial required pumping until the end
of a three-year period following enactment of this article.
B. Property owners within the Sewage Management District must provide
a fully completed septic system report to the Township within 30 days of
the date of pumping. The property owner shall mail or hand-deliver the
septic system report to the Township Municipal Center at 425 Prince
Street, Harrisburg PA 17109.
C. Commencing from the date of pumping as prescribed in Subsection A
above, removal of septage or other solids from treatment tanks shall be
performed every three years or whenever an inspection program
reveals the treatment tanks are filled with solids in excess of 1/3 of
liquid depth of the tank or filled with scum in excess of 1/3 the liquid
depth of the tank.
D. The required pumping frequency may be increased at the discretion of
the SEO if the septic tank is undersized, if solids buildup in the tank is
above average, if the hydraulic load on the system increases
significantly above average, if a garbage grinder is used in the building,
if the system malfunctions or for other good cause shown (as
determined by the SEO).
E. Treatment tanks to be pumped more frequently than the required three
years must have a septic system report prepared and provided to the
Township within 30 days of each pumping occurrence.
F. The Township may allow a treatment tank to be pumped less than once
every three years if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
Township that the system will operate to its maximum efficiency with
less frequent pumping. In no case shall the period extend beyond six
years. Such a request may be made after the initial pumping and
inspection. Requests must be in writing with all supporting documents
attached. The Township, in making its determination, shall take into
account the information submitted by the applicant, the sewage permit
issued by the Township SEO upon installation or rehabilitation of the
system and supporting documentation, reports of inspection and
maintenance of the system including documentation that the sludge
§ 159-92 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-92
1:202
§ 159-93. System rehabilitation.
depth and/or scum layer is less than 1/3 of the tank capacity as
determined by a pumper/hauler, and other relevant information, and
may conduct an on-site inspection. The applicant shall bear the cost
of any inspection, surface or subsurface, and soil or wastes sampling
conducted for the purposes of evaluating the request. The applicant
shall receive a decision within 30 days of receipt of all necessary
information by the Township.
G. The owner of a property upon which an on-lot sewage system is
constructed shall maintain the area around such system so as to
provide convenient access for inspection, maintenance, and pumping;
and divert surface water and downspouts away from the absorption
area and other on-lot sewage system components.
H. Tanks shall only be pumped from/through the manhole/access port, i.e.
the largest tank opening. Tanks shall not be pumped from/through the
observation port.
I. Any person owning a building served by an on-lot sewage disposal
system which utilizes alternate technology or an aerobic treatment tank
shall follow the operation and maintenance recommendations of the
equipment manufacturer. A copy of the manufacturer's
recommendations and a copy of the service agreement shall be
submitted to the Township within six months of the effective date of this
article. Thereafter, service receipts shall be submitted to the Township
at the intervals specified by the manufacturer's recommendations. In no
case may the service or pumping intervals for aerobic treatment tanks
exceed those required for septic tanks.
J. Additional maintenance activity may be required as needed including,
but not necessarily limited to, cleaning and unclogging of piping,
servicing and the repair of mechanical equipment, leveling of
distribution boxes, tanks and lines, removal of obstructing roots or
trees, the diversion of surface water away from the disposal area, or
other acceptable means as determined by the SEO and/or DEP.
A. No person shall operate or maintain an on-lot sewage disposal system
in such a manner that it malfunctions. All liquid wastes, including
kitchen and laundry wastes and water softener backwash, shall be
discharged to a treatment tank. No sewage system shall discharge
untreated or partially treated sewage to the surface of the ground or
into the waters of the commonwealth unless a permit for such
discharge has been obtained from DEP.
B. A written notice of violation shall be issued to any person who is the
owner of any property which is found to be served by a malfunctioning
on-lot sewage disposal system or which is discharging sewage without a
permit.
§ 159-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-93
1:203
§ 159-94. Liens.
The Township, upon written notice from the SEO that an imminent health
hazard exists due to failure of property owner to maintain, repair or replace
an on-lot sewage disposal system as provided under the terms of this article,
shall have the authority to perform, or contract to have performed, the work
required by the SEO. The owner shall be charged for the work performed
and, if necessary, a lien shall be entered therefor in accordance with law.
§ 159-95. Disposal of septage.
C. Within seven days of notification by the Township that a malfunction
has been identified, the property owner shall make application to the
sewage enforcement officer for a permit to repair or replace the
malfunctioning system. Within 30 days of initial notification by the
Township, construction of the permitted repair or replacement shall
commence. Within 60 days of the original notification by the Township,
the construction shall be completed unless seasonal or unique
conditions mandate a longer period, in which case the Township shall
set an extended completion date.
D. A sewage enforcement officer shall have the authority to require the
repair of any malfunction by the following methods: cleaning, repair or
replacement of components of the existing system, adding capacity or
otherwise altering or replacing the system's treatment tank, expanding
the existing disposal areas, replacing the existing disposal area,
replacing a gravity distribution system with a pressurized system,
replacing the system with a holding tank, or any other alternative
appropriate for the specific site.
E. In lieu of, or in combination with, the remedies described in Subsection
D above, a sewage enforcement officer may require the installation of
water conservation equipment and the institution of water conservation
practices in structures served. Water using devices and appliances in
the structure may be required to be retrofitted with water saving
appurtenances or they may be required to be replaced by water
conserving devices.
A. All septage originating within the sewage management district shall be
disposed of in accordance with the requirements of the Solid Waste
Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. §§ 6018.101 et seq.) and all
other applicable laws and at sites or facilities approved by DEP.
B. Pumper/haulers of septage operating within the sewage management
district shall operate in a manner consistent with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act (Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S.
§§ 6018.101 — 6018.1003) and all other applicable laws.
C. All pumper/haulers of septage operating in the Township shall maintain
registration with the Township and shall pay all registration fees as set
forth by the Township.
§ 159-93 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 159-96
1:204
§ 159-96. Administration.
§ 159-97. Appeals.
§ 159-98. Violations and penalties.
Any person failing to comply with any provision of this article shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $500 and costs, and not more than $5,000
and costs, or in default thereof shall be confined in the county jail for a
period of not more than 90 days. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute
a separate offense.
A. The Township shall employ or contract with qualified individuals to
carry out the provisions of this article.
B. All permits, records, reports, files and other written materials relating
to the installation, operation and maintenance and malfunction of on-lot
sewage disposal systems in the sewage management district shall
become the property of, and be maintained by, the Township. Existing
and future records shall be available for public inspection during
regular business hours at the official office of the Township. All records
pertaining to sewage permits, building permits, occupancy permits and
all other aspects of the sewage management program shall be made
available, upon request, for inspection by representatives of DEP.
C. The Township Board of Supervisors shall establish all administrative
procedures necessary to properly carry out the provisions of this
article.
D. The Township Board of Supervisors may establish a fee schedule, and
authorize the collection of fees, to cover the cost to the Township of
administering this program.
A. Appeals from final decisions of the Township or any of its authorized
agents under this article shall be made to the Board of Supervisors in
writing within 30 days from the date of written notification of the
decision in question.
B. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Board of
Supervisors at its next regularly scheduled meeting, if a written appeal
is received at least 14 days prior to that meeting. If the appeal is
received within 14 days of the next regularly scheduled meeting. If the
appeal is received within 14 days of the next regularly scheduled
meeting, the appeal shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled
meeting. The municipality shall thereafter affirm, modify, or reverse the
aforesaid decision. The hearing may be postponed for a good cause
shown by the appellant or the Township. Additional evidence may be
introduced at the hearing provided that it is submitted with the written
notice of appeal.
C. A decision shall be rendered in writing within 30 days of the date of the
hearing.
§ 159-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-98
1:205
Chapter 162
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
§ 162-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a desirable amount of tree
cover on public lands within the Township; maintain Township trees in a
healthy and nonhazardous condition through good arboricultural practices;
establish and maintain appropriate diversity in tree species and age classes
to provide a stable and sustainable suburban forest; promote conservation
of tree resources; and select, situate and maintain street trees appropriately
to minimize hazard, nuisance, hardscape damage and maintenance costs.
§ 162-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree, measured at a point six inches above
the ground line if the resulting measurement is no more than four inches.
If the resulting measurement is more than four inches, the measurement is
made at a point 12 inches above the ground line.
CARTWAY — That portion of a street or alley which is improved, designated
or intended for vehicular use.
CROWN — The sum total of all the living branches of a tree.
DBH — Diameter breast height. Measurement made at 4 1/2 feet above the
ground line.
HARDSCAPE — The sidewalks, gutters and street surfacing materials that
cover the soil surface, including but not limited to concrete, brick, stone
pavers, asphalt, or other impervious pavements.
HAZARDOUS TREES/BRANCHES — Any dead, diseased, broken or
mutilated trees, branches or parts of trees which are in a state of
decomposition and pose a threat to public safety.
LARGE TREES — Designated as those attaining a height of 45 feet or more
at maturity.
LINE OF SIGHT — An area of clear visibility within and defined by forming
an imaginary triangle shaped by seventy-five-foot-long lines measured from
the midpoint of the intersection of the streets and along the centerline of
each crossing street.
MEDIUM TREES — Designated as those attaining a height of 30 feet to 45
feet at maturity.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY OWNER — The owner of record of a parcel of property.
§ 159-98 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 162-2
1:206
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area that has been secured or reserved by the
Township for streets, roads, or other roadway related purposes.
SHADE TREE — Any planted tree located within the right-of-way of the
public streets and highways of the Township. "Shade tree" does not include
vegetation growing naturally within the Township right-of-way.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — The body that has jurisdiction over all shade
trees.
SMALL TREES — Designated as those attaining a height of 15 feet to 30
feet at maturity.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width of every municipal way or rightof-
way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Paxton.
TREE — A large perennial plant with one main trunk, one or many stems,
and many branches.
TREE LAWN — That part of the street or highway right-of-way adjacent to
developed property, not covered by sidewalk or other paving, lying between
the sidewalk and that portion of the street or highway used for vehicular
traffic.
§ 162-3. Shade Tree Commission.
§ 162-4. Powers and duties of Commission.
A. There is hereby created a commission to be known and designated as
the "Shade Tree Commission." The Commission shall consist of five
members, all of whom shall be residents of the Township. All will serve
without compensation.
B. Members shall serve for a term of five years, one term to expire each
year. On expiration of any term of a Commissioner, a successor shall be
appointed by the Board of Supervisors to serve for a term of five years.
Vacancies in the office of Commissioner shall be filled by the Board of
Supervisors for the unexpired term.
A. The Shade Tree Commission shall have sole custody and control of the
shade trees in the Township and may authorize the abutting property
owner to plant, remove, maintain and protect shade trees on the public
streets within the municipality.
B. The duties of the Commission shall be as follows:
(1) To study the problems and determine the needs of the Township
regarding shade trees on the public streets, including the
notification to property owners of any removals or maintenance
needs as a result of an inspection of a shade tree.
§ 162-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:207
§ 162-5. Approval required.
No person shall plant, cut, trim or remove any shade tree or parts thereof
under the jurisdiction of the Township or fasten any sign, wire, rope or other
material to, around or through any shade tree without written approval
from the Shade Tree Commission. No electrical installations shall be
attached to any shade tree nor shall excavating of trenches or tunnels
be dug within 20 feet of any shade tree without first obtaining written
permission from the Township.
§ 162-6. Duties and responsibilities of property owners.
(2) To recommend to the Board of Supervisors the type and size of
trees to be planted upon the Township streets or parts thereof as
designated.
(3) To assist the Board of Supervisors and Township officials in the
dissemination of news and information regarding the selection,
planting and maintenance of trees upon the streets and to make
such recommendations from time to time to the Board of
Supervisors as to desirable legislation concerning the shade tree
program and activities for the Township.
(4) To conduct regular and special meetings at which the subject of
shade trees may be discussed by the members of the Commission,
officers and personnel of the Township and all others interested in
the shade tree program.
(5) To annually report in full to the Board of Supervisors the
transactions and expenses of the Commission for the previous fiscal
year.
(6) To authorize entities other than the abutting property owner to
plant, remove, maintain and protect shade trees in the public
streets within the municipality.
(7) To perform a periodic inspection of the condition of shade trees
within the Township right-of-way.
(8) To perform timber sale inspections for the Township zoning office.
C. The Commission shall provide for the adoption of rules and procedures
and for the holding of regular and special meetings as said Commission
shall deem advisable and necessary in order to perform the duties set
forth. The first meeting of each calendar year the Commission shall
conduct a reorganization meeting where the Commissioners will elect a
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.
A. It is the duty and responsibility of the property owner or occupier of
property abutting streets and highways in the Township to properly
maintain any tree or trees in the tree lawn adjoining the property. This
includes maintenance of trees and other vegetation in a manner so as
§ 162-4 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 162-6
1:208
§ 162-7. Cutting and removal of trees.
The Shade Tree Commission may, upon 30 days' written notice, require an
abutting property owner to have cut and remove tree(s) within the rightof-
way afflicted with any disease or infested with any insect that threatens
to injure or destroy shade trees in the Township. Upon failure of any such
owner to comply with such notice, the Township may undertake the work
to be done and collect the costs thereof from the owner of the abutting
property. Removal by the property owner of nondiseased trees or those not
infested by insects shall not be permitted within the right-of-way unless, in
the judgment of the Shade Tree Commission, one or more of the following
criteria exist:
not to create a safety or liability problem for motorists, pedestrian
traffic or other activities within the right-of-way. The Township may
require that the cost of tree planting, transplanting, trimming and
removal of street trees in the tree lawns be paid by the owner of the
real estate abutting the street where the work is to be done. In areas
where tree lawns exist, the setback for tree planting shall be at a point
halfway between the curb and sidewalk. However, no tree(s) shall be
planted in a tree lawn within the line of sight.
B. In rural or undeveloped areas where sidewalks and curb are not
present, the right-of-way may vary in width but does exist. The abutting
property owner shall be responsible for trees and other vegetation
growing in the area between the edge of the cartway and the right-ofway
line in such rural or undeveloped areas. Trees in these areas shall
be pruned to conform with §§ 162-8 and 162-9. Where no curbing exists,
the setback for tree planting shall be eight feet from the edge of the
cartway. However, no tree(s) shall be planted within the line of sight.
C. All trees and other vegetation within the Township right-of-way must be
pruned or trimmed in a manner to allow for full visibility of street
signage and the minimum required line of sight.
A. A tree will sustain substantial damage due to the installation or repair
of underground utilities where no other alternative, such as tunneling,
sleeving or relocation, exists.
B. A tree is causing traffic safety problems and pruning or other less
invasive techniques would not eliminate the problems.
C. A tree has caused substantial sidewalk and/or curb damage and repair
or replacement of the sidewalk and/or curb would inflict serious root
damage to the tree.
D. The maintenance of overhead utilities would require that a tree be
severely pruned resulting in the removal of 2/3 or more of the crown
thereby causing irreparable damage to the tree.
§ 162-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-8
1:209
§ 162-8. Manner of trimming or pruning.
All trimming and pruning of shade trees shall be done in a manner to ensure
natural growth of such tree and a natural appearance, in accordance with
national pruning standards. Pollarding or topping of trees (removal of 2/3
or more of the crown) is specifically prohibited.
§ 162-9. Clearance of trees over sidewalks and streets.
All branches of shade trees shall be kept trimmed in a manner to maintain
a minimum height of 12 feet where they overhang a street and eight
feet where they overhang a sidewalk. All shade trees standing on private
property and having branches overhanging sidewalks or streets shall also
be kept pruned by the owner so the lowest branches are in compliance with
this section. In the event that the property owner neglects or refuses to
maintain trees at the prescribed level within the time specified as notified
in writing, the Township may perform such work at owner's expense, in the
same manner as otherwise specified in this chapter.
§ 162-10. Removal of fallen trees and parts of trees.
In the event that a shade tree or its parts are felled by storm or other
accident, the fallen tree and/or its felled parts shall be removed from the
cartway of the street by the Township without charge. Property owners shall
be responsible for any other removal or cleanup outside of the cartway of
the fallen tree and/or its felled parts.
§ 162-11. Repair or replacement of damaged trees.
In the event that a shade tree is damaged, the Township may charge for
repairs or replacement or make a charge for the appraised value of the tree
against the person responsible for the damage of said tree.
§ 162-12. Removal of tree stumps.
After removal of a tree, the remaining stump shall be removed by the
abutting property owner to a point not less than six inches below the grade
of the surrounding area. If a replacement tree is to be planted at the same
location, the stump will be removed to accommodate the replacement tree.
§ 162-13. Branches not to obstruct streetlights.
The property owner shall trim or cause to be trimmed any tree branches
so that they do not obstruct light from streetlights. In the event that said
work is performed by the Township, the abutting property owner may be
responsible for the expense as otherwise specified in this chapter.
§ 162-14. Hazardous shade trees and branches.
Where hazardous shade trees or dead branches overhang the right-ofway
of a street or otherwise exist within the right-of-way, the Shade Tree
§ 162-8 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 162-14
1:210
Commission may require the abutting property owner to cause them to be
removed at their expense so as to maintain public safety within the rightof-
way. In the event of an emergency or imminent hazardous situation, the
Shade Tree Commission may require that the tree(s) be removed within 24
hours or less.
§ 162-15. Replacement trees.
As a condition to any request to remove any shade tree, the Shade Tree
Commission may require that the property owner, at their own expense,
plant another tree in place of the one removed and, in such case, direct
the type, size and location of the tree to be planted and the season within
which the work shall be done. A replacement tree shall be planted within
six months of removal of the previous tree and the Shade Tree Commission
should be notified when the work is completed so the file may be closed.
§ 162-16. Spacing and location of trees.
Spacing between newly planted shade trees shall not be less than 25 feet
nor more than 40 feet and may vary with species of tree(s) being planted.
In addition to the restrictions established under § 162-6 of this chapter, no
shade tree shall be planted less than 15 feet from a fire hydrant, or light
standard.
§ 162-17. Size specifications for tree replacement.
Tree replacement size shall be measured at a point six inches above
planting level. All trees shall be of 1/2 inch to two inches in caliper at this
point and shall have no branches below a height of five feet measured from
ground level.
§ 162-18. Planting under existing utility lines.
All trees planted under overhead utilities shall be a species which will not
obstruct or have the potential to grow into or come into contact with the
wires. They shall be small trees or medium trees according to utility height
and shall be specified by the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 162-19. Root zone controls.
The Commission may in some cases require root control devises or material
to minimize the effect of root growth on sidewalks, curbs or underground
utilities. The need and type of control shall be prescribed by the
Commission where necessary.
§ 162-20. Unnecessary harm to trees prohibited.
No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any shade tree or set
fire to or permit fire to burn any shade tree. No person shall allow any toxic
chemical, liquid or solid, to empty, drain, or seep onto shade trees or their
§ 162-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-20
1:211
root systems. No person shall permit any gas pipe or main to leak into the
root zone of said tree.
§ 162-21. Tree maintenance contractors.
All tree maintenance contractors who trim, remove or otherwise maintain
trees located within the Township right-of-way shall possess general liability
insurance coverage with a policy limit of not less than $500,000 for each
occurrence.
§ 162-22. Exceptions permitted.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have the power in appropriate cases
to permit deviations from strict compliance with this chapter whenever,
due to special circumstances, literal enforcement of this chapter would be
impossible, impractical, or not in the best interest of the Township or the
trees.
§ 162-23. Collection of costs for work done by Township.
Payment of costs for work done by the Township shall be due and payable
30 days after proper invoice by the Township to the property owner. If the
property owner does not make payment within 30 days, said costs shall be
considered as an assessment to the property and the Township Solicitor
shall file a lien against the property to ensure payment as may be provided
by law.
§ 162-24. Authorized species of trees.
The planting of any species of tree within Township right-of-way other
than those approved by the Shade Tree Commission is prohibited. A list of
approved trees shall be maintained by the Commission and made available
to the public through the Township Office. Any person desiring to plant a
tree(s) species that does not appear on the list, within the Township rightof-
way, shall make application to the Shade Tree Commission for approval
of the desired species.
§ 162-25. Township maintenance.
The Township, at its sole discretion, shall have the authority to plant, trim,
remove or otherwise maintain any shade trees at its expense or the expense
of the affected property owner.
§ 162-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who or which violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $50 nor more than $600, plus the costs of prosecution. Each
day during which the violation occurs or persists shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 162-20 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 162-26
1:212
Chapter 165
SOLID WASTE
§ 162-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-26
1:213

ARTICLE I
Hazardous Waste Disposal
§ 165-1. Short title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Lower Paxton
Township Hazardous Waste Disposal Ordinance."
§ 165-2. Adoption of commonwealth and federal legislation, rules
and regulations by reference.
The various acts, rules and regulations regulating the collection and
disposal of hazardous waste adopted and/or promulgated from time to time
by the United States of America and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
whether now or in force or hereafter adopted or promulgated, are
incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference thereto.
§ 165-3. Conflicting legislation, rules and regulations.
In the event that the real or apparent conflict exists between the language
of this article or regulations adopted hereunder, the federal or state
legislation, rules or regulations, it is herby declared that any such conflict
shall be resolved by enforcing the most restrictive legislation, rule or
regulation, it being the intent of the Board of Supervisors to limit the
dumping of hazardous waste in the most restrictive manner possible, to
minimize the expense of operating the Township landfill and assure
compliance with both state and federal regulations.
§ 165-4. Prohibition of disposal of hazardous waste.
No collector of refuse or hazardous waste contracted under Lower Paxton
Township shall dispose thereat any waste determined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection to be a hazardous waste requiring special
notification, recordkeeping or reporting requirements pursuant to the
regulations adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
as set forth in 40 CFR, Part 261, adopted under the authority of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, or any
amendments or supplements thereto.
§ 165-5. Notification of customers likely to generate hazardous
waste; method of identifying, isolation and disposing of such waste.
All collectors of refuse and/or hazardous waste in Lower Paxton Township
shall supply the Lower Paxton Township Manager with a list of all
commercial, industrial, hospital or school customers and their addresses for
whom they collect and dispose of refuse. Such list shall be supplied within
30 effective days of the effective date of this article. Furthermore, at the
same time, they shall advise the Lower Paxton Township Manager of their
method of identifying and isolating hazardous waste from nonhazardous
waste disposed of that has been collected within the limits of Lower Paxton
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-5
1:215
Township and their location and method of disposal of any hazardous waste
collected by them.
§ 165-6. Notification of generation of hazardous waste.
Any commercial and/or industrial enterprise, hospital or school generating
waste within Lower Paxton Township, which waste has been determined
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection to be a hazardous waste requiring
special notification, recordkeeping or reporting requirements pursuant to
the regulations adopted by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency under the authority of the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976, as amended, shall supply Lower Paxton Township such waste
from nonhazardous waste, and the method and location of disposal. Such
notification shall be made within 60 days after the effective date of this
article, or within five days of the date they first begin generating such
waste, whichever last occurs.
§ 165-7. Joint notification.
Any generator or transporter of hazardous waste, or anyone who owns or
operates a facility for treating, sorting or disposing of hazardous waste,
who is required to notify the Environmental Protection Agency of their
activity pursuant to the regulations adopted under § 3001 of the Resource
and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, shall also file a duplicate copy of
any such notification with the Lower Paxton Township Manager.
§ 165-8. Definitions.
All definitions relating to the enforcement of this article shall be as set forth
in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency regulations or the Resource
Recovery Conservation Act of 1976, and any subsequent amendments
thereof. References herein to specific parts or sections shall include the
successor parts or sections if renumbered or amended.
§ 165-9. Exemption of municipality or municipal authority sludge.
In the event the United States Environmental Protection Agency regulations
shall be deemed to include the disposal of sewage sludge from sewage
treatment plants operated by a municipality or municipal authority, such
municipality or municipal authority may be exempted form the provisions
of this article upon submitted evidence satisfactory to a majority of the
members of the Board of Supervisors of Lower Paxton Township that such
disposal is in the best interest of the Township residents, after taking into
consideration the cost of alternate methods of disposal, the additional cost
related to such disposal, and such other factors as the Board of Supervisors
deem to be relevant and appropriate in making such a determination.
§ 165-5 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 165-10
1:216
§ 165-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial
District Justice in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine or not more than $1,000, plus costs, and in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
90 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section
of this article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 165-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-10
1:217

ARTICLE II
Solid Waste and Recycling
§ 165-11. Title; purpose; definitions.
A. Short title. This article shall be known as the "Lower Paxton Township
Municipal Solid Waste and Recycling Ordinance."
B. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the Township of Lower Paxton by
regulating the collection, storage, transportation, removal, dumping,
deposit, disposal and recycling of solid waste by:
(1) Instituting a comprehensive solid waste management program.
(2) Establishing a mandatory recycling program pursuant to the
requirements of the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act, the Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 556, Act No. 101,
as amended, 50 P.S. § 4000.1501 es seq.
(3) Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this
article shall have, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise,
the meanings given to them in this subsection:
ALUMINUM CANS — Clean, nonaerosol and empty all-aluminum
beverage and food containers.
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — Person, firm or corporation
licensed, registered or contracted by Lower Paxton Township to
handle municipal waste and/or recyclables in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
BULKY WASTE — Items of solid waste which, due to their size,
shape or weight, cannot be collected as part of the normal weekly
municipal waste collection and, therefore, require special handling.
For example, large household appliances such as stoves and
refrigerators, plumbing fixtures, furniture, large crates, tires, tools,
machinery or parts thereof, and similar items shall be considered
bulky waste.
COMMERICAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment engaged
in a nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business including, but
not limited to, stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants,
shopping centers and theaters.
COMMUNITY EVENTS — Events which include, but are not limited
to fairs, bazaars, socials, picnics, and organized sporting events,
that will be attended by 200 or more individuals per day, regardless
of the length of time of the event.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Lumber, roofing
material, sheathing, rubble, broken concrete macadam, plaster and
brick, conduit, pipe, insulation and other material which results
from a construction, demolition or remodeling process.
§ 165-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-11
1:219
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Paper boxes constructed in a
corrugated manner and used as containers for business and
consumer applications.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
building and forming a single, habitable unit with facilities which
are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and
eating by one family.
EXCLUSIVE CONTRACT — An agreement entered into by Lower
Paxton Township with a private person or corporation for the
collection and disposal of al municipal waste and/or recyclables
within the Township of Lower Paxton to the extent provided by this
article and the agreement.
GLASS — Plain, uncolored or colored glass bottles and jars.
Expressly excluded from the definition of glass are blue glass, lead
crystal, porcelain, ceramic products and tempered or plate glass.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment engaged in
service to persons, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing
homes, orphanages, schools and universities.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Rental housing apartment
buildings or apartment complexes which have two or more dwelling
units, and condominium associations and homeowners'
associations of two or more dwelling units which are established
and organized in such a manner that the association provides
common services for the residents of the housing development.
This definition shall also include apartment buildings and
apartment complexes owned and operated by institutional
establishments if the institutional establishment charges a rental
fee for the dwelling unit.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom
or office waste and any other material, including solid waste, liquid,
semisolid or contained gaseous materials resulting from the
operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
establishments and from community activities and any sludge not
meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid
Waste Management Act, the Act of July 1, 1980, P.L. 380, Act
No. 97, as amended, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., from a municipal,
commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facilities. The
term does not include source-separated materials. (Municipal
Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act.)
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as
newsprint and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon
news and opinion and containing advertisements and matters of
public interest, excluding magazines.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal
§ 165-11 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 165-11
1:220
§ 165-12. Storage, handling and disposal of municipal waste and
recycling.
government or agency, state institution or agency, or any other
legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject
of rights and duties.
PLASTIC BOTTLES — Empty and clean consumer product
containers made of polyethylene terephthalate (PET),
polypropylene (PP), High-density polyethylene (HDPE) and lowdensity
polyethylene (LDPE) most commonly, but not limited to,
plastic bottles used as containers for soda, milk and other
consumer food products or for household cleaning products or for
personal care products.
RECYCLABLES/RECYCLABLE MATERALS — Those materials
specified by Lower Paxton Township for separation, collection,
processing, recovery or reuse as part of a recycling program.
RECYCLING — The program or system of separation, collection,
processing, recovery or reuse of recyclables.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — See "dwelling unit."
RESIDENTIAL MUNICIPAL WASTE — Municipal solid waste, as
herein defined, that is generated at a dwelling unit.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded
material or other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous materials resulting from industrial, mining and
agricultural operations and any sludge from an industrial, mining
or agricultural water supply treatment facility, wastewater
treatment facility or air pollution control facility, provided that it
is not hazardous. The term shall not include coal refuse as defined
in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act, the Act of September 24,
1968, P.L. 1040 § 318, as amended, 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq. The
term shall not include treatment sludge from coal mine drainage
treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on pursuant
to and in compliance with a valid permit issued pursuant to the
Clean Streams Law, the Act of June 22, 1987, P.L. 1987, No. 394,
as amended, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq. (Municipal Waste Planning,
Recycling and Waste Reduction Act.)
SOLID WASTE — Any waste including, but not limited to, municipal
residual or hazardous waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous materials. (Solid Waste Management Act,
§ 103.)
STEEL CANS — Clean, nonaerosol and empty all-steel (ferrous
metal) or bimetal beverage and food containers.
TOWNSHIP — The governmental jurisdiction and legal entity of
Lower Paxton Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
§ 165-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-12
1:221
A. General. It shall be the duty of every owner of property and every
person occupying a dwelling unit, premises or place of business within
the Township where municipal waste is generated and accumulated, by
his/her own expense and cost, except as otherwise specified in this
article, to provide and keep at all times a sufficient number of
containers to hold all municipal waste accumulated between intervals
of collection of such waste by an authorized collector; and to insure the
sanitary and legal disposal of such waste in accordance with this article
and all other Township, state and federal applicable laws and
regulations.
B. Storage on residential property.
(1) Containers. All municipal waste and recyclables accumulated by
owners of residential and/or the occupants of residential properties
shall be placed in containers for collection by an authorized
collector. The containers shall be durable, watertight and made of
rust-resistant metal or plastic and have tight fitting lids. The size of
each container shall not exceed a thirty-six-gallon capacity unless
bulk (dumpster-type) containers are used. Containers for curbside
recyclables will be as specified by the Township or as provided by
the Township directly or through exclusive contract for collection
of recyclables. Use of bulk containers at multifamily establishments
shall comply with the provisions of Subsection C(1) below.
(2) Location of containers. Each municipal waste container and
curbside recyclable container shall be placed for collection so as to
be accessible to the collector at ground level and at a point
immediately behind the curbside of the street, within no more than
10 feet of the cartway of the street or alley from which the
collection with a vehicle is made if there is no curbing, or at a
location mutually agreeable between the resident, the Township
and the collector. Failure to place containers at such location may
result in waste not being picked up. Location for collection of
uncontainerized recyclable material shall be as specified by the
Township. Location of bulk containers at multifamily
establishments shall be in accordance with Subsection C(2) below.
(3) Time limitation. Waste and recyclable containers are not permitted
to be stored in the location provided in Subsection B(2) outside of
the scheduled pick-up days. This time limitation applies to the
keeping/storing of compost bags/cans. Waste and recycling shall
not be placed at the curb more than eight hours before the
scheduled pick-up day and must be removed from the right-of-way
within eight hours after pick-up. This time may be extended at the
Townships discretion.
C. Storage on commercial, institutional and industrial properties.
(1) Containers. Storage of municipal waste on commercial,
institutional and industrial properties shall be done in the same
§ 165-12 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 165-12
1:222
type of containers as required for residential properties except
where the accumulation of solid waste for such commercial,
institutional or industrial property precludes their use, in which
case such owner or occupant shall make special arrangements
with the authorized collector for the storing of such additional
quantities. Special arrangement shall include the number and type
of special bulk container(s) to be furnished by the collector as may
be approved by the Township.
(2) Location of containers. Containers for collection at commercial,
institutional or industrial properties shall be located on the owner's
or occupant's premises at a place agreed upon by the owner or
occupant of the commercial, institutional or industrial property and
the authorized collector, and shall be satisfactory to the Township.
Such locations shall not interfere with public or private sidewalks,
walkways, driveways, roads, streets, highways, alleys or entrances
and exits of public or private buildings.
D. Authorization of municipal waste collectors and reporting
requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation, other
than persons or corporations authorized by license or contract by the
Township, to collect and/or transport municipal waste of any nature as a
regular hauling business within or from the Township. If the Township
decides to enter into an exclusive contract for the collection of
residential municipal waste in the Township, said contractor shall be
required to collect municipal waste in the Township exclusive of other
private haulers and collectors subject to exceptions to the exclusive
Township contract. The Township shall not issue a license to any private
hauler or collector for collection of residential municipal waste other
than the hauler or collector having the exclusive contract with the
Township. Authorization to collect, transport and dispose of municipal
waste for persons other than oneself may be given only by the Township
through the issuance of a contract or license. All applicants for
licensing shall be reviewed by the Township and shall be approved in
accordance with the following. (Municipal waste collection licenses or
contacts may be issued to only those persons or corporations who can
provide satisfactory evidence that they are capable of providing the
necessary services and can comply with the provisions and intent of the
article. The Township reserves the right to disapprove any application
for license.)
(1) Applicants for municipal waste collection license must furnish the
following information:
(a) The number of collection vehicles, the make, model, license
plate number and size of each vehicle to be used for the
collection and transportation.
(b) The location, address and telephone number of the business
office of the applicant.
§ 165-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-12
1:223
(c) A certificate of the applicant's workman's compensation
insurance as required by law.
(d) A certificate of insurance coverage providing complete thirdparty
comprehensive bodily injury and property damage
liability insurance, limits of which will not be less than
$5,000,000/$1,000,000 for bodily injury and $100,000 for
property damage.
(e) Intended disposal facility proposed to be used by the applicant.
(f) Any other information which the Township may request and
deem necessary prior to the issuance of a license.
(2) Licenses shall be issued on a calendar-year basis, but may be
revoked at any time by the Township for just cause, including by
not limited to, violation of any of the provisions of this article,
applicable state or federal law or regulations or other policies
established by the Township or contractual arrangements entered
into between the applicant and the Township.
(3) Fees for licenses shall be set by the Township, and the amount shall
be provided to an applicant or any person upon request.
(4) Any person or corporation who is licensed to provide municipal
waste collection services for commercial, industrial and
institutional establishments within the Township shall be required
to submit an annual report stating the amount of municipal waste
collected and the type and weight of each recyclable material
collected within the Township. The reporting form shall be supplied
by the Township to the collector and shall be returned to the
Township within 30 days of the end of each calendar year.
E. Transportation of solid waste. Any person transporting solid waste
within the Township shall prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles
or containers used in transport of such solid waste. The vehicles used to
transport or convey solid waste shall be leak-proof.
F. Disposal of municipal waste. All municipal waste produced, collected
and transported from within the jurisdictional limits of the Township
shall be disposed of at a landfill or other disposal facility licensed or
permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or other state government. However, the
Township reserves the right to designate a state-permitted facility of its
choice and require that all municipal waste generated in the Township
be disposed of at this designated facility. If the Township designates a
disposal facility as provided for above, all authorized (licensed)
collectors, or collectors operating under contract with the Township for
collection of municipal waste, shall be informed by the Township of the
location, regulations and other information pertaining to the designated
disposal facility. The Township reserves the right to make inspections of
authorized collectors to insure that waste generated within the
§ 165-12 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 165-12
1:224
Township is being disposed of in an authorized or designated facility
and to limit the use of a designated facility only to waste generated
within the Township. Any authorized collector found to be in violation
of this section shall have his license to collect or haul municipal waste
in the Township revoked.
G. Unlawful deposition of municipal waste. It shall be unlawful for any
person to deposit for collection any solid waste including bulky items
not generated at the address from which collection is made or to bring
any solid waste into the Township or from one address to another in the
Township for the purpose of taking advantage of the collection service
or to avoid the cost of collection.
H. Bulky waste. Bulky waste which is not collected by the normal or
weekly residential collection shall not be stored outside of a building or
accessory building on any land in the Township, except for a period not
exceeding 14 days pending the special handling for disposal of the
bulky waste. However, bush, tree trimmings, yard clipping, leaves,
grass or other waste from live plantings may be stored for longer
periods of time if necessary until the next scheduled collection for such
items or for the purpose of composting or burning such materials in
accordance with Township ordinances, unless such storage violates
other ordinances or regulations of the Township. It shall be unlawful for
any person to place bulky waste on any property other than on the
property at which it was generated or directly associated with. Bulky
waste shall be disposed of at a state-permitted or -licensed disposal
facility, a facility especially designated by the Township to take such
bulky Items or a legitimate salvage dealer that is in the business of
disposing or recycling such items.
I. Construction and demolition waste. All waste materials resulting from
the building structural alteration, repair, construction or demolition of
buildings or structures shall be disposed of as permitted by the
regulations of the State Department of Environmental Protection or
pertinent ordinances or regulations of the Township. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to ensure the disposal of such
waste in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.
J. Exclusions.
(1) Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person
not regularly engaged in the business of collection municipal waste
from hauling his own municipal waste on an irregular or
unscheduled basis to a state-permitted disposal facility or to the
disposal facility as designated by the Township in accordance with
the regulations of the disposal facility.
(2) Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out
normal farming operations, including composting or spreading of
manure or other farm-produced agricultural waste, not otherwise
prohibited or regulated for land application.
§ 165-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-12
1:225
§ 165-13. Service fees and billing.
(3) The provisions of this article do not apply to anything but the
storage, collections, transportation and disposal of municipal waste
and do not apply therefore, to hazardous or residual waste as
defined by the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act and its
amendments. All hazardous or residual waste must be disposed of
in compliance with applicable state and federal laws and
regulations.
K. Reporting requirements for commercial, institutional and industrial
establishments. Any commercial, institutional or industrial
establishment located within the Township that collects and transports
their own municipal waste, in other words, does not contract with a
licensed municipal waste hauler or come under the Township's
municipal waste contractor, shall submit an annual report to the
Township stating the amount of municipal waste generated by their
establishment. The reporting form shall be supplied by the Township to
the establishment and shall be returned to the Township within 30 days
of the end of each calendar year.
A. General. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner of
property and every person occupying a dwelling unit, premises or a
place of business within the Township where municipal waste is
produced and is accumulated to pay a service fee for the collection and
disposal of this waste, except as otherwise provided by this article, to a
licensed hauler, exclusive contractor or to the Township. A licensed
hauler, exclusive contractor or the Township may discontinue service
for nonpayment of service fees by a resident, commercial, institutional
or industrial establishment. Discontinuance of service due to
nonpayment of service fees shall not relieve the resident or
establishment from abiding by all of the requirements of this article.
B. Service charges to be based on volume of waste collected. To encourage
and maximize recycling, all municipal waste service charges for the
collection and disposal of municipal waste paid either to a licensed
hauler, an exclusive contractor or the Township shall be based upon the
volume of waste collected at the commercial, institutional or industrial
establishment. At residential units, service charges shall be based on
volume to the extent that any amount over four, thirty-six-gallon cans
per week be charged on a volume basis. To effectuate this provision, the
following guidelines are hereby established:
(1) The Township may require licensed haulers to disclose and allow
review by the Township of the solid waste rates being used by the
hauler if the Township has reason to believe the hauler is not
charging for solid waste services on a volume basis.
(2) An exclusive contract for the collection of residential municipal
waste as may be established by the Township shall include
provisions for billing residential units on a volume basis. This
§ 165-12 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 165-13
1:226
§ 165-14. Recyclables.
provision shall not preclude the Township or its contractors from
establishing a minimum charge for solid waste collection as an
assessment against the property for the benefit to the health and
welfare of the community for having a comprehensive solid waste
collection and recycling program available to the owners of
property in the Township. Such minimum charges will be set at
a level that is appropriate to cover the basic cost of solid waste
collection but shall not be set so high as to discourage recycling
solid waste.
C. Charges to be established by resolution. All service fees established
under an exclusive contract for the collection of waste by the Township
shall be established by a resolution to the Township Board of
Supervisors. Service charges so established shall be reviewed at least
annually and adjusted as necessary to ensure that all costs involved in
the collection and disposal of municipal waste under the exclusive
contract, including the administrative cost of the Township, are covered
by the service charges.
A. Introduction. The Township, recognizing that reclaiming of recyclable
materials is an important method for addressing the growing solid
waste disposal problem through conserving landfill space, and that
recycling conserves natural resources, reduces energy consumption
and promotes the general interest, and to be in compliance with the
Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act,13 does
hereby authorize and encourage collection, processing, storage,
transportation and recycling materials in accordance with the
provisions of this subpart.
B. General. Recyclables separated for the purpose of materials recovery
rather than disposal and collection by the Township or its designated
agent or contractor shall not be considered solid waste as defined
under this article and shall not be subject to the provisions of this
article which require the disposal of waste at designated facilities
unless such recyclables become unmarketable.
C. Establishment of program. The Township hereby establishes a program
for the mandatory separation of recyclables from municipal waste by
persons residing in single-family dwellings and multifamily
establishments, by commercial, institutional, and industrial
establishments, and by community events providers/sponsors/
promoters.
D. Items to be separated and recycled (this list may change from time to
time based on the recycling market):
(1) At residential units (including multifamily establishments):
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 165-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-14
1:227
(a) Newspapers.
(b) Glass (clear, brown, blue and green).
(c) Aluminum and steel cans.
(d) Plastic bottles and jugs.
(e) Leaf waste.
(2) At commercial, institutional, and industrial establishments and
community events.
(a) Newspapers.
(b) High-grade office paper and corrugated paper.
(c) Aluminum and steel cans.
(d) Glass (clear, brown, blue and glass).
(e) Plastic bottles.
(f) Leaf waste.
E. Exclusions. Newspapers that are used for secondary purposes, such as
wrapping other waste or for cleaning which renders then unusable for
recycling, shall not be required to be recycled.
F. Plan to be filed and approved by the Township. Commercial, industrial
and institutional establishments and family establishments conducting
their own recycling program, not in conjunction with an agent of the
Township or under an exclusive contract as may be established by the
Township for the collection of municipal waste and recyclables, shall
file with the Township and have approved by the Township individual
recycling programs which provide for, at minimum, the recycling of
items listed in Subsection D(2) above, as provided in § 1501(c) of the
Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, 53 P.S.
§ 4000.1501(c).
G. Establishment of regulations. The Township or its authorized agent
shall establish and promulgate regulations on the manner, days and
time of collection of recyclable materials, and for the building,
handling, location and time of placement of such materials for
collection. Regulations shall be promulgated for each of the programs
undertaken including, but not limited to, the residential, multifamily
and commercial sources of recyclable materials.
H. Separation of recyclables and placement for disposition. Recyclable
materials shall be placed at the curb or other designated area
separated from solid waste, for collection or taken to drop-off sites at
such times, dates, manner and places as may be established or
authorized by the Township.
§ 165-14 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 165-14
1:228
I. Collection by unauthorized person(s). From the time of placement of
recyclable items at the curb or designated location, or at a drop-off
center as designated or authorized by the Township, the recyclable
items shall become the property of the Township or its authorized agent
or contractor. It shall be violation of this subsection for any person
unauthorized by the Township to collect, pick up or cause to be
collected or picked up by any such items. Any and each collection in
violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereafter provided.
J. Unlawful disposing of recyclables. Upon and after the effective date of
this article it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dispose of
any recyclable item as established in Subsection D above, commingled
with other solid waste not required to be recycled or to dispose of such
items in other places that will not insure that items are recycled, unless
the material is so contaminated that it is unacceptable for recycling.
K. Registration of recyclable collectors.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation other than person
or corporations registered within the Township to collect and/or
transport recyclable materials of any nature extracted from
municipal waste as a regular hauling business within or from the
Township. All persons or corporations who register with the
Township for recyclable collection shall be reviewed by the
Township and shall be approved in accordance with the following:
(a) Ability to provide necessary services and comply with
provisions and intent of this article.
(b) Registrants for recyclable collection must furnish the following
information of the applicant.
[1] The location, address and telephone number of the
business office of the applicant.
[2] Any other information which the Township may request
and deem necessary prior to the registering the applicant.
(2) Municipal waste collections who have applied for and received a
license to operate within the Township shall be exempt from
registration of recyclable collection and transportation. There shall
be no charge for the registration of recyclable collectors.
L. Reporting requirements for registered recyclable collectors.
(1) Any commercial, institutional or industrial establishment located
within the Township that handles their own recyclable items which
are extracted from municipal waste, in other words, does not
contract for recycling services through a licensed or registered
contractor or come under the Township's municipal waste and
recycling contract, shall submit an annual report stating the
§ 165-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-14
1:229
§ 165-15. Violations and penalties; remedies.
amount, type and weight of each recyclable material generated
by the establishment and handled by the establishment itself.
Reporting forms shall be supplied by the Township to the
establishment and shall be returned to the Township within 30 days
of the end of each calendar year.
A. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who shall
violate any provision of this article, upon conviction thereof in an action
brought before a Magisterial District Justice in the manner provided for
the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation
of this article continues or each section of this article which shall be
found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Other remedies. In addition to the foregoing penalty, the Township may
require the owner or occupant of a property to remove any
accumulation of solid waste and should said person fail to remove such
solid waste after five days following written notice, the Township may
cause the solid waste to be collected and disposed of with the cost for
such action to be charged to the owner or occupant of the property in a
manner provided by law.
§ 165-14 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 165-15
1:230
Chapter 170
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, DRAINAGE AND EROSION
CONTROL
§ 165-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-15
1:231

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 170-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Lower Paxton Township
Stormwater Management Ordinance.
§ 170-102. Statement of findings.
The Board of Supervisors of Lower Paxton Township finds that:
§ 170-103. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote public health, safety, and welfare
within the Township and its watersheds by minimizing the harms and
maximizing the benefits through stormwater management provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood-reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases non-pointsource
pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of land development and redevelopment (that
may cause loss of natural infiltration or accelerated erosion) is
fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of
the people of the Township and all the people of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, their resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater program.
F. Implement an "illegal discharge detection and elimination program"
within MS4 permitted urbanized areas to address nonstormwater
discharges into the Township's separate storm sewer system.
§ 170-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-103
1:233
§ 170-104. Statutory authority.
A. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
B. Provide review procedures, performance standards, and design criteria
for watershed-wide stormwater planning and management.
C. Promote the utilization and preservation of existing natural drainage
systems.
D. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires
a minimum of structures and a maximum use of natural processes.
E. Focus design and planning on infiltration of stormwater, to maintain
groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality, and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the
Township and the commonwealth.
G. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at Pennsylvania Code, Title 25. Environmental Protection,
Chapter 93.4a, to protect and maintain "existing uses" and maintain the
level of water quality to support those uses in all streams, and to
protect and maintain water quality in special-protection streams.
H. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
I. Provide for proper operations and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management best management practices (BMPs) that are
implemented in the Township.
J. Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES
permit requirements.
K. Implement an "illicit discharge detection and elimination program" to
address nonstormwater discharges that may enter into the Township's
separate storm sewer system.
L. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and permit
the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
M. Ensure the drainage of all low points along the streets and other
applicable areas and provide positive drainage away from all
structures.
A. The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167),
32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management
Act."
B. The Township also is empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, (Act
§ 170-103 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-104
1:234
§ 170-105. Applicability.
247), the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended by
Act 170 of December 21, 1988, and Act 131 of December 14, 1992.14
C. Chapter 102 of the Rules and Regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection imposes requirements on earthmoving
activities which create accelerated erosion or a danger of accelerated
erosion and which require planning and implementation of effective soil
conservation measures.
A. This chapter shall apply to any "regulated activities" within the
Township and all stormwater runoff entering into the Township's
separate storm sewer system from lands within the boundaries of the
Township.
B. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
C. All earth disturbance activity and all subdivision and land development
applications duly filed under this chapter are defined as "regulated
activities" and shall be regulated by this chapter.
(1) "Regulated activities" are any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a
manner that may affect stormwater runoff. "Regulated activities"
include, but are not limited to, the following listed items:
(a) Earth disturbance activities.
(b) Land development.
(c) Subdivision.
(d) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces.
(e) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing
buildings.
(f) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream
channel.
(g) Installation of stormwater management facilities or
appurtenances thereto.
(h) Installation of stormwater BMPs.
(2) See § 170-302 of this chapter for exemption/modification criteria.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 170-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-106
1:235
§ 170-106. Repealer.
Any ordinance, ordinance provision(s), or regulation of the Township
inconsistent with any of the provision(s) of this chapter is hereby repealed
to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 170-107. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section(s) or
provision(s) of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity
of any of the remaining section(s) or provision(s) of this chapter.
§ 170-108. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable codes,
laws, rules, statutes, or ordinances. To the extent that this chapter imposes
more rigorous or stringent requirements for stormwater management, the
specific requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
§ 170-109. Duty of persons engaged in the development of land.
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety,
or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required
to manage the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property,
and water quality.
§ 170-110. Township liability.
The degree of stormwater management sought by the provisions of this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the Township, any appointed or
elected official of the Township, the Dauphin County Conservation District,
or any officer, engineer, or employee thereof for any erosion, sedimentation,
or flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 170-106 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-110
1:236
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 170-201. Definitions and word usage.
A. All terms not defined in this chapter but which are defined in the Lower
Paxton Township Zoning Ordinance shall have the meanings therein
defined. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall,
for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
C. Definitions.
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activity and the natural
processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
ACCELERATED RUNOFF — Runoff occurring at rates in excess of rates
occurring under natural, undisturbed conditions.
ACT 167 PLAN — Plans prepared in accordance with Pennsylvania's
Stormwater Management Act (Act 167 of 1978). The Act requires
counties to prepare and adopt watershed based stormwater
management plans, and it requires municipalities to adopt and
implement ordinances to regulate development consistent with these
plans.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS — An enterprise that is actively
engaged in the commercial production and preparation for market of
crops, livestock and livestock products in the production, harvesting
and preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic,
horticultural, silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities. The
term includes an enterprise that implements changes in production
practices and procedures or types of crops, livestock, livestock
products or commodities produced consistent with practices and
procedures that are normally engaged by farmers or are consistent
with technological development within the agricultural industry.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:237
Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an
agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who
has filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors
and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat
or plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AS-BUILT PLANS — Plans prepared and certified by a professional land
surveyor depicting the exact location, orientation, and elevation of all
site improvements, which exist as a result of construction activities. Asbuilt
plans are also referred to as record drawings or record plans.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The 100-year flood elevation as indicated
in a Flood Insurance Study (FIS), as revised, for Lower Paxton
Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration,
that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that
has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.
BMP MANUAL — The Pennsylvania Stormwater best management
practices Manual as published by the Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Watershed Management, Document Number:
363-0300-002, effective date: December 30, 2006, and as revised.
BMPs (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from earth disturbance activities; to meet state water quality
requirements; to promote groundwater recharge; and to otherwise
meet the purposes of this chapter. BMPs include, but are not limited to:
infiltration facilities, filter strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet
ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, forested buffers, sand filters,
and detention basins.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Lower
Paxton Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established
by plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or
built upon as a unit.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
required minimum distance between any principal or accessory
structure and adjacent right-of-way and the line defining side and rear
yards, where required.
§ 170-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-201
1:238
CHANNEL — A passage for water (or other fluids) to flow through.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by
moderate to large floods.
CHANNEL, MAIN — The downstream later receiving channel
designated in the Act 167 Plans that accepts the discharge of
undetained post-development peak runoff without causing any harm for
the given design storm.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Land amenities, parts of building, central
services and utilities, and any other elements and facilities owned and
used by all unit owners and are designated as common elements. These
elements may include, but are not limited to:
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel, or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water within a development site
and designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including streets, off street parking areas and areas
set aside for public facilities.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for
common ownership solely by the owners for those portions. Real estate
is not a condominium unless the undivided interest in the common
elements are vested in the unit owners.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION — The community association which
administers and maintains the common property and common elements
of a condominium.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Dauphin County Conservation
District.
The land on which the building is located and portions of the
building which are not included in a unit.
(1)
The foundation, structural parts, supports, main walls, roofs,
basements, halls, corridors, lobbies, stairways and entrances and
exits of the building.
(2)
(3) The yards, parking area and driveways.
Portions of the land and building used exclusively for the
management, operation or maintenance of the common elements.
(4)
(5) Installations of all central services and utilities.
All other elements of the building necessary or convenient to its
existence, management, operation, maintenance and safety or
normally in common use.
(6)
(7) Such other facilities as are designated as common elements.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:239
COUNTY — County of Dauphin, Pennsylvania.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended to
furnish access to pedestrians.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street open at one end for vehicular and
pedestrian access with the opposite end terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure, including appurtenant
works, which carries surface water under a roadway or other structure.
CURB — A cut stone, asphalt or concrete boundary usually marking the
edge of the roadway, driveway or other paved areas.
CURB CUT — The opening along the curb line at which point vehicles
may enter or leave the roadway or other paved area.
CURVE NUMBER — A numerical designation which reflects amounts of
runoff based on land use and hydrological soil group.
CUT — An excavation. The difference between a point on the original
ground and designated point of lower elevation on the final grade; also,
the material removed from an excavation.
DAM — Any artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or any
other fluid or semi-fluid or any refuse bank, fill or structure for highway,
railroad or other purposes which does or may impound water or any
other fluid or semi-fluid.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of occurrence and duration and used in
computing stormwater management control systems.
DESIGNEE — An agent of the governing body involved with the
administration, review or enforcement of any provisions of this chapter
by employment, contract, or memorandum of understanding.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DETENTION FACILITIES, REGIONAL — A detention facility that
detains and treats stormwater runoff for two or more development
sites, where the development sites are generally considered to be
independent and typically would contain their own separate detention
facilities.
DETENTION POND — A vegetated pond designed to collect water
runoff for a given storm event and release it at a predetermined rate;
also known as a "dry pond."
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released during or after a storm event into waters of the commonwealth
at a controlled rate.
§ 170-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-201
1:240
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, earth disturbance activity, mining,
dredging or drilling operations, the placement of manufactured homes,
streets and other paving, utilities and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase
"provisions of development plan" when used in this chapter, shall mean
the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific parcel or tract of land for which a
development activity is proposed.
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of
the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all
overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed toward it.
DRAINAGE —
DRAINAGE AREA — That area in which all of the surface runoff
resulting from precipitation is concentrated into a particular point of
interest.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, swale,
culvert, storm sewer or other structure designed, intended or
constructed for the purpose of diverting surface waters from or
carrying surface waters off streets, public rights-of-way, parks,
recreational areas or any parts of any subdivision or land development.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — An easement required for the installation
and maintenance of storm sewers, drainage ditches, other drainage
facilities, and/or required for the preservation or maintenance of a
natural watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, swale, culvert, storm sewer,
or other system designed, intended, or constructed for the purpose of
(1) Surface water runoff.
The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development, the means for preserving the water supply and the
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
(2)
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:241
diverting surface waters from or carrying surface waters off streets,
public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas or any part of any
subdivision or land development.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the design and analysis of
a stormwater management or drainage system, if any, to be used for a
given development site.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Pipes, swales, natural features and man-made
improvements designated to carry drainage.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch,
pipe, swale, channel, or similar depression into which surface water
flows.
DRIVEWAY — A private access drive providing access for vehicles to
a parking area, space, garage, dwelling or other structure, including
nonresidential structures.
DWELLING or DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or
more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again
being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road
maintenance, building construction and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted for the limited use of land for
public, quasi-public or private purposes.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL — An individual licensed and registered
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to engage in the
practice of engineering. A professional engineer may not practice land
surveying unless licensed as set forth in P.L. 534, No. 230; however, a
professional engineer may perform engineering land surveys.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP/MUNICIPAL — A registered professional
engineer in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania designated by the
Township to perform the duties of engineer as herein specified.
ENGINEERING LAND SURVEYS — Surveys for:
The development of any tract of land including the incidental
design of related improvements, such as line and grade extension
of roads, sewers and grading but not requiring independent
(1)
§ 170-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-201
1:242
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The engineering specifications of
the Township regulating the installation of any required improvements
or for any facility installed by any owner, subject to public use.
EROSION — The process involving the detachment and movement of
soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface or
channels by water, ice, wind, chemical action and gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions
resulting thereof.
EXCEPTIONAL-VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality,
which satisfies Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Environmental Protection,
Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, 93.4b(b) (relating to
antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed subdivision, land development or construction.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the ground surface prior
to excavation or filling.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FILL —
engineering judgment; providing, however, that tract perimeter
surveys shall be the function of the professional land surveyor.
The determination of the configuration or contour of the earth's
surface, or the position of fixed objects thereon or related thereto
by means of measuring lines and angles and applying the principles
of mathematics, photogrammetry or other measurement methods.
Geodetic or cadastral survey, underground survey and
hydrographic survey.
(2)
(3) Erosion and sedimentation control surveys.
(4) The determination of the quantities of materials.
(5) Tests for water percolation in soils.
The preparation of plans and specifications and estimates of
proposed work as described herein.
(6)
Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a
new location above the natural surface of the ground or on top
of the stripped surface and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
(1)
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:243
FINISHED GRADE — The proposed elevation of the land surface of a
site after completion of all site preparation work.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration.
FLOOD HAZARD, AREAS OF SPECIAL — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
FLOOD, BASE (100-YEAR FLOOD) — A flood that on the average, is
likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a 1% chance of
occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year.)
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or as delineated by applicable Department
of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration
Flood Hazard Boundary - mapped as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to proposed and existing structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the 100-year-frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA). In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the 100-year frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent
evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to
50 feet from the top of each of the banks of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
FUTURE — Post-development (as with future condition or runoff).
The difference in elevation between a point on the original ground
and designated point of higher elevation on the final grade.
(2)
(3) The material used to make a fill.
§ 170-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-201
1:244
FUTURE CONDITIONS — Proposed land use.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY —
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of Lower Paxton
Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground
specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
GRADE, EXISTING — See definition of "existing grade."
GRADE, FINISHED — See definition of "finished grade."
GRADE, TO — To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment or
bottom of excavation.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually
broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to
convey surface water.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS MODEL CALIBRATED — (Hydrologic Engineering Center
Hydrologic Modeling System) A computer-based hydrologic model
technique adapted to the Paxton Creek, Spring Creek and Multi-Creek
Watersheds for the Act 167 Plans. The model has been calibrated by
adjusting key model input parameters.
HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface water having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania
Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93 Water Quality
Standards, 93.4b(a).
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A community association which
administers and maintains common property in a development,
including a unit owners' association as defined in the Uniform
Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., and the Uniform Planned
Community Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSG's (A, B, C, and D)
according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for
bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resource Conservation
Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture defines
the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United
States and their group classification. The soils in the area of interest
A right-of-way required for the expansion of existing streets to
accommodate anticipated future traffic.
(1)
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
(2)
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:245
may be identified from a soil survey report, which can be obtained from
the local NRCS office or Dauphin County Conservation District office.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN OR DISTRICT — Those floodplain areas
specifically designated in the Lower Paxton Township Zoning Ordinance
(§ 203-504D) as being inundated by the 100-year flood. Included would
be areas identified as the Floodway (FW) and the Flood Fringe (FF).
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any discharge to a municipal separate storm
sewer or stormwater conveyance that is not entirely composed of
stormwater.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the percolation of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
include, but are not limited to: any roof, parking or driveway areas,
and any new streets and sidewalks. For purposes of stormwater runoff
analysis, any surface areas existing or proposed to be gravel or crushed
stone shall also be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
IMPROVEMENTS — Any man-made, not readily movable item which
becomes part of, placed upon or is affixed to, real estate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A constructed device, such as a
seepage pit, trench drain or infiltration pond, designed to facilitate the
infiltration of runoff into the soil.
INLET —
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by
depressions, sinkholes, limestone towers and steep-sided hills,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks,
such as limestone or dolomites and sometimes gypsum.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Any of the following
activities:
(1) A surface connection to a closed drain.
(2) A structure at the diversion end of a conduit.
(3) The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number or occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
(b)
(1)
§ 170-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-201
1:246
LAND/EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading,
excavating, digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or
any other activity that causes an alteration to the natural condition of
the land.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(2) A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(a)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building,
on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(b)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an
amusement park. For purposes of this subsection, an
"amusement park" is defined as tract or area used principally
as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have
been approved by the proper authorities.
(c)
Where an addition of no more than 15% of the square footage
is being added to an existing building, but in no case of an
addition of more than 2,000 square feet, a building permit
and site plan approval is required to be obtained from the
appropriate officer of the Township but, submission of a land
development plan and review by the Planning Commission and
approval by the Board of Supervisors may be waived, only
when:
The building is added to the existing structure and is not
separated; and
[1]
[2] There is no change to any street or public way; and
There is no interference or substantial change to drainage
or the flow of water; and
[3]
The appropriate building officer of the Township
determines that the same is otherwise in compliance with
all zoning and land development requirements.
[4]
(d)
(3)
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:247
is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or
other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LIMIT OF DISTURBANCE — A line provided on the SWM site plan
that indicates the total area to be disturbed during a proposed earth
disturbance activity.
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY — A street, roadway, or highway which
carries a large volume of traffic at relatively high speeds with access
controlled at designated points and not specifically from adjacent
properties.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot as
shown on a subdivision plan excluding space within any street rightsof-
way but including the area of any easement or utility right-of-way.
LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE — An interior lot having frontage on two
streets.
LOT, REVERSE-FRONTAGE — A lot extending between and having
frontage on an arterial street and a minor street, and with vehicular
access solely from the latter.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Paxton Creek, Spring Creek
or Multi-Creek Watershed hydrologic models.
MAINTENANCE — Provisions to ensure proper functioning, safety,
structural integrity, weed and pest control, aesthetic appeal or any
other measures required to maintain facilities to a standard as
approved under the requirements of this chapter.
MANNING'S EQUATION (MANNING'S FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include
closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MASTER DEED — A legal instrument under which title to real estate is
conveyed and by which a condominium is created and established.
MINIMUM SEPARATION DISTANCE — The minimum distance between
the discharge of runoff from impervious surfaces and the receiving
stream, storm sewer, or property line, whichever is smaller, whether
the discharge is from a point or non-point source. It is intended to
provide ample, natural, undisturbed vegetated pervious areas to allow
for infiltration of increased volumes of runoff caused by development.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erections thereon of a single mobile
home.
§ 170-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-201
1:248
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME, DWELLING — See definition of "dwelling mobile
home."
MODIFIED RATIONAL METHOD — Variation of rational methodology;
used to generate hydrographs and required detention volume.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created
pursuant to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the
"Municipalities Authority Act of 1945."
MUNICIPALITY — Any city of the second class A or third class,
borough, incorporated town, Township of the first or second class,
county of the second class through eighth class, home rule municipality,
or any similar general purpose unit of government which shall hereafter
be created by the General Assembly.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the
federal government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean
Water Act, which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NATURAL DRAINAGE FLOW — The pattern of surface and stormwater
drainage from a particular site before the construction or installation of
improvements or prior to any grading operations.
NEW IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (NEW IMPERVIOUS AREA) —
Impervious surface or area constructed after the effective date of
Ordinance 10-06, as amended by Ordinance 11-06, excluding
impervious surface or area that was constructed to replace an
impervious surface or area that preexisted the effective date of
Ordinance 10-06, as amended by Ordinance 11-06, provided that the
location, size and dimensions of the replacement of the preexisting
impervious surface or area are the same as the preexisting impervious
surface or area.
NOAA ATLAS 14 — Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Atlas 14, Volume 2, United States Department of Commerce, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland
(2004). NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at Internet address:
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
NON-POINT-SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service [previously Soil
Conservation Service (SCS)].
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, fence,
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:249
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting
into any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area, which may impede,
retard or change the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or is placed where
the flow of the water might carry the same downstream to the damage
of life and property.
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes not under pressure.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — See definition of "common open space."
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Open space owned by a public agency and
maintained by it for the use and enjoyment of the general public.
OUTFALL —
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake,
tidewater, or artificial drain.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — The use of impervious parking areas as
temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during
rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of storm runoff at a
given point and time resulting from a specified storm event.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, partnership or
corporation.
PERVIOUS SURFACE (AREA) — Surface such as soil or other areas not
defined as impervious which allows for the infiltration of water to the
ground.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater or other fluids.
PLAN, COMPREHENSIVE — The development policy plan (master plan)
and/or future land use plan and/or official map or other such plans, or
portions thereof, as may be adopted, pursuant to statute, for the area of
the Township in which the subdivision or land development is located.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision or land development
plan, prepared for official recording as required by statute, to define
property rights and proposed streets and other improvements. In all
cases where only one plan is required, it shall be a final plan.
(1) The point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain.
Point source, as defined herein; the point where the Township's
storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of the
commonwealth.
(2)
§ 170-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-201
1:250
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision or land development
plan, in lesser detail than a final plan, showing approximate proposed
street and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of
a final plan.
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan indicating the salient existing
features of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of a
proposed subdivision or land development.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The committee duly appointed by the
Board of Supervisors of Lower Paxton Township to carry out the duties
as described herein and to make recommendations to the governing
body relative to subdivision, land development and other related
matters.
PMF (PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD) — The flood that may be
expected from the most-severe combination of critical meteorological
and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area.
The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP)
as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, or discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to: any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
POLLUTANT — Any introduced gas, liquid or solid that makes a
resource unfit for a specific purpose.
POLLUTION — The presence of matter or energy whose nature,
location or quantity produces undesired environmental effects.
PRESENT — Pre proposed development (as with present conditions or
runoff).
PRESENT CONDITIONS — Refer to "existing conditions."
PRINCIPAL BUILDING or PRINCIPAL USE — The basic or predominant
purpose for which a building or land area is occupied or intended to be
occupied as opposed to accessory or incidental uses; usually classifiable
as residential, commercial, industrial or public in nature.
PRIVATE ROAD — A legally established right-of-way, other than a public
street, which provides the primary pedestrian and vehicular access to
one or more lots and constructed to the design standards contained in
this chapter.
PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD (PMF) — The flood that may be
expected from the most-severe combination of critical meteorological
and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area.
The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP)
as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:251
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS — Persons who provide expert or
professional advice, including, but not limited to, architects, attorneys,
certified public accountants, engineers, geologists, land surveyors,
landscape architects or planners.
PROFILE LINE — The profile of the centerline of the finished surface of
the street, which shall be midway between the sidelines of the street.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activity
in the Township is planned, conducted or maintained.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Board of Supervisors intended to inform and/or obtain public
comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of
July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once not more than 60 days
nor less than seven days before passage in one newspaper circulating
generally in the Township.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A professional engineer licensed by
the Pennsylvania Department of State, and other persons licensed or
otherwise qualified by law to perform the work required by the
Ordinance.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate
peak flow.
REAL ESTATE — Any fee, leasehold or other estate or interest in, over
and under land, including structures, fixtures and other improvements
and interests by which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance
of land though not described in the contract of sale or instrument of
conveyance. Real estate includes parcels with or without upper or lower
boundaries and spaces that may be filled with air or water.
REDEVELOPMENT — Development activities on land which has
previously been developed.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions, which impact
upon proper management of stormwater runoff and which are governed
by this chapter as specified in § 170-105C.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — An activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas.
(1)
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities.
(2)
(3) Publicly owned and operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 170-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-201
1:252
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The 100-year base flood
elevation as either indicated in a Flood Insurance Study (FIS), as
revised, for Lower Paxton Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania,
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal
Insurance Administration, or, in the absence of a Flood Insurance Study,
the 100-year flood elevation computed using acceptable hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering principles without respect to a computed
floodway.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of the existing conditions peak
rate of stormwater runoff for a development site to which the future
conditions peak rate of runoff must be controlled to protect
downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — Those subwatershed areas in which postdevelopment
flows must be reduced to a certain percentage of
predevelopment flows as required to meet the plan requirements and
the goals of Act 167.
RESERVE STRIP — A strip of land adjacent to a street intended to
control access to the street from an adjacent property.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored
and not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released
from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event
of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the twentyfive-
year return period rainfall or runoff event would be expected to
recur on the average once every 25 years, or have one out of 25 (4%)
chance of occurring in any given year.
REVERSE-FRONTAGE LOT — See definition of "lot, reverse-frontage."
RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREET — A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic
and/or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or however
designated.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A vegetated area bordering perennial and
intermittent streams and wetlands, that serves as a protective filter to
help protect streams and wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land
uses.
RISER — A vertical pipe or structure extending from the bottom of a
pond that is used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a
specified design storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:253
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches, and other similar activities.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
RUNOFF CAPTURE VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured
(retained) and not released into surface waters of the commonwealth
during or after a storm event.
SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM (COMMUNITY) — A sanitary sewage
collection method serving more than one lot within a subdivision or land
development owned and operated by a private entity in which sewage
is carried from the site by a system of pipes to a privately owned and
operated centralized treatment and disposal facility.
SANITARY SEWER (PUBLIC) — A sanitary sewage collection method
owned and operated by a public utility, municipal authority, or other
public entity, in which sewage is carried from the site by a system of
pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant.
SCS — Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin
located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material
transported by water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to properly design, construct, implement or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by wind, water or gravity. Once this matter is
deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred to as
"sediment."
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar material and into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEMIPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface such as stone, rock or other
materials which allows some infiltration of water to the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
§ 170-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-201
1:254
SEPTIC SYSTEM — An underground sewage disposal system with a
septic tank and drain field used for the decomposition and disposal of
domestic wastes; also referred to as an "on-lot system."
SERVICE DRIVE (PRIVATE) — A service way providing a secondary
means of private access to abutting property and not intended for
general traffic circulation.
SETBACK LINE — See definition of "building setback line."
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin,
even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SIDEWALK — A paved, surfaced or leveled area, paralleling and usually
separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic or other objects.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizontal. Slopes are
usually expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet
per 100 feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called Curve Number (CN).
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment of a mass
of soil to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise to improve its
engineering properties.
SPEED, DESIGN — The selected speed for which the horizontal and
vertical alignment, sight distances and other engineering elements of a
roadway are planned and designed.
SPEED, OPERATING — The speed at which vehicles routinely travel
over a portion of a roadway in a free-flow condition. For purposes of
this chapter, the operating speed shall be considered to be the 85th
percentile of the distribution of observed speeds of vehicles traveling
over the portion of a roadway in question.
SPEED, POSTED — The speed limit that is specifically stated for a
segment of a roadway by way of regulatory signs placed along said
segment of roadway.
SPILLWAY (EMERGENCY) — A depression in the embankment of a
pond or basin, or other overflow structure, that is used to pass peak
discharges greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
pond or basin.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations — protection of "designated" and "existing" uses (see 25 Pa.
Code, Chapters 93 AND 96) — including:
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:255
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD (MODIFIED PULS) — A reservoir
routing procedure based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow
minus outflow equals the change in storage for a give time interval) and
based on outflow being a unique function of storage volume.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm
"event" occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years.
See "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits and related
appurtenances which collects and carries intercepted surface runoff,
street water or drainage, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial
wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
STORMWATER CONTROL FACILITIES — Any structure, device, dam,
channel, swale, pit, trench or any other measure taken or method
employed to control stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER CONTROL PLAN (DRAINAGE PLAN) — The
documentation of the design and analysis of proposed stormwater
management controls, if any, to be used for a given development site,
the contents of which are established in Article VI of this chapter.
STORMWATER DETENTION — Any storm drainage technique that
retards or detains runoff, such as detention or retention basin, parking
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such
as "cold water fishery" or "potable water supply," which is listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained, under
state regulations.
(1)
Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water
quality in special-protection streams.
(2)
Water quality involves the chemical, biological, and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After earth disturbance
activities are complete, these characteristics can be impacted by
addition of pollutants such as sediment, and changes in habitat
through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result of changes
in land surface area from those activities. Therefore, permanent
discharges to surface waters must be managed to protect the
stream bank, streambed, and structural integrity of the waterway,
to prevent these impacts.
(3)
Protection and maintenance of water quality in special protection
streams pursuant to 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 93.
(4)
§ 170-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-201
1:256
lot storage, rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells or any
combination thereof.
STORMWATER DETENTION BASIN — A vegetated pond designed to
drain completely after storing runoff only for a given storm event and
releasing it at a predetermined rate; also known as a "dry pond."
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates
higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals, or toxicants than
are found in typical stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Any structure, natural
or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction,
conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to,
detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes and
infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The planned control of runoff
to allow water falling on a given site to be absorbed or retained on site
to the extent that after development the peak rate of discharge leaving
the site is not greater than if the site had remained undeveloped; a plan
showing all present and proposed grades and facilities for stormwater
management and best management practices (BMPs).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM SITE PLAN) — The
plan prepared by the applicant or his representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the project site in accordance
with this chapter.
STREAM — A watercourse with definite bed and banks, which confines
and conveys perennially or intermittently flowing water.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a
regulated water of this commonwealth.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be
used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon
which a lot fronts or in its absence the established grade of the other
streets upon which the lot abuts, at the midpoint of the frontage of the
lot thereon. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade
of the street at such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET WIDTH — The shortest distance between the lines delineating
the cartway for a street.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:257
SUBDIVIDER — The owner or authorized agent of the owner of a lot,
tract or parcel of land to be subdivided for transfer, sale or development
under the terms of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the
Township Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required
improvements for which financial security was posted pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter) of those improvements required as a
condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with
the approval plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied
or operated for its intended use.
SUBWATERSHED AREA (SUBAREA) — The smallest drainage unit of
a watershed for which stormwater management criteria has been
established in the stormwater management plan.
SURFACE DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan showing all present and
proposed grades and facilities for stormwater drainage.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all
perennial and intermittent rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, reservoirs,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, natural seeps and estuaries,
and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface water, or
parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries
of the commonwealth.
SURVEYOR, PROFESSIONAL LAND — An individual licensed and
registered under the laws of this commonwealth to engage in the
practice of land surveying. A professional land surveyor may perform
engineering land surveys but may not practice any other branch of
engineering.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most-distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total
of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOPOGRAPHICAL MAP — A map showing the elevations of the ground
by contours or elevations.
§ 170-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-201
1:258
TOPOGRAPHY — The configuration of a surface area showing relative
elevations.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are
fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus
debris. Top soil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the
"A" horizon.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Paxton, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, Board of Supervisors, its agents or authorized
representatives.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has
not been graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction
of a building or other improvements and on which no development or
building has occurred.
UNIT — A part of the property, structure or building designed or
intended for any type of independent use, which has direct exit to a
public street or way or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a
public street or way, and includes a proportionate undivided interest
in common elements, which are assigned to the property, structure or
building.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
UTILITY, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE —
VEGETATIVE COVER — Such cover shall consist of trees, shrubs,
flowers, grass or similar natural cover.
VERGE — An area adjacent to a roadway and located between the curb
and sidewalk which is intended to be maintained in grass cover and
used as a planting space for street trees.
WATER POLLUTION — The addition of pollutants to water in
concentrations or in sufficient quantities to result in measurable
degradation of water quality.
WATER TABLE — The upper surface of groundwater or that level below
which the soil is seasonally saturated with water.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel of conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
Any agency which under public franchise or ownership, or under
certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with
electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation,
water, sewage collection or other similar service; or
(1)
A closely regulated private enterprise with a franchise for
providing a public service.
(2)
§ 170-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-201
1:259
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and undergroundwater, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WATERSHED — A region or area that contributes surface water to a
defined point.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes but is not limited
to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest
Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal
Zone Management Plan and a wetland area designated by a river basin
commission. This definition is used by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the United States Army Corps of Engineers.)
§ 170-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-201
1:260
ARTICLE III
General Requirements
§ 170-301. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless specifically exempted in § 170-302:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the Township issues
written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(3) The SWM site plan shall demonstrate that adequate capacity will
be provided to meet the volume and rate control requirements, as
described under § 170-303 and § 170-304 of this chapter.
(4) The SWM site plan approved by the Township shall be on-site
throughout the duration of the regulated activities.
B. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code (including, but not limited to, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment
Control) and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated.
C. For all regulated activities, stormwater BMPs shall be designed,
installed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law, conform
to the state water quality requirements, meet all requirements under
the Storm Water Management Act and any more-stringent
requirements as determined by the Township.
D. The Township may, after consultation with PADEP and/or DCCD,
approve measures for meeting the state water quality requirements
other than those in this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law including, but not
limited to, the Clean Streams Law.
E. All regulated activities shall include, to the maximum extent
practicable, measures to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
§ 170-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-301
1:261
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes,
existing native vegetation and woodlands.
(b) Create, maintain, or extend riparian buffers and protect
existing forested buffers.
(c) Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(d) Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth and promote
groundwater recharge.
(e) Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways,
vegetation, soils, and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as
possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
(f) Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors,
mature forests) as design elements.
(g) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(h) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(i) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
(j) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas wherever possible, and decentralize and manage
stormwater at its source.
(3) Applicants are encouraged to incorporate the techniques for lowimpact
development practices described in the Pennsylvania
Stormwater best management practices Manual (BMP Manual) to
reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter
and the state water quality requirements.
F. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a developed parcel, the
new impervious area is subject to the requirements of this chapter;
and any existing impervious area that is within the new proposed
limit of disturbance is also subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
G. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
§ 170-301 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-301
1:262
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will result from the
concentrated discharge.
(1) Applicant must provide an executed easement for newly
concentrated flow across adjacent properties.
H. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
I. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements
(with a minimum width of 20 feet) shall be provided conforming to the
line of such watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may
adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Also, maintenance, including mowing of vegetation, within
the easement may be required, except as approved by the appropriate
governing authority.
J. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainage ways
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code,
Chapter 105, through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, through the general permit process.
K. Any stormwater management facilities or any facilities that constitute
water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges, outfalls, or stream
enclosures, etc.) that are regulated by this chapter, that will be located
in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth (including wetlands),
shall be subject to approval by PADEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code,
Chapter 105, through the joint permit application process, or, where
deemed appropriate by PADEP, the general permit process. When there
is a question whether wetlands may be involved, it is the responsibility
of the applicant or his agent to show that the land in question cannot be
classified as wetlands; otherwise, approval to work in the area must be
obtained from PADEP.
L. Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105
concerning dam safety which may be required to pass storms larger
than 100-year event.
M. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
will be located on or discharged onto state highway rights-of-way shall
be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT).
§ 170-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-301
1:263
§ 170-302. Exemptions/modifications.
N. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream Township, the stormwater analysis shall be submitted
to the downstream municipality's engineer for review and comment.
O. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil
conditions and geology permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need
for detention facilities.
P. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the site, made as
shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site
infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this
chapter.
Q. The design of facilities over karst shall include an evaluation and
implementation of measures to minimize adverse effects.
R. Roof drains, foundation drains, sump pumps and other similar
discharges shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers,
or roadside ditches in order to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where it is advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
the Township may permit it on a case-by-case basis.
A. Under no circumstance shall the applicant be exempt from
implementing such measures as necessary to:
(1) Meet state water quality standards and requirements.
(2) Protect health, safety, and property.
(3) Meet special requirements for high-quality (HQ) and exceptionalvalue
(EV) watersheds.
B. The applicant must demonstrate that the following BMPs are being
utilized to the maximum extent practicable to receive consideration for
the exemptions:
(1) Design around and limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands,
natural slopes over 15%, existing native vegetation, and other
sensitive and special value features.
(2) Maintain riparian and forested buffers.
(3) Limit grading and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural
flow paths.
(4) Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas.
(5) Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation.
§ 170-301 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-302
1:264
(6) Direct runoff to pervious areas.
C. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed development/
additional impervious area will not adversely impact the following:
(1) Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems.
(2) Velocities and erosion.
(3) Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed.
(4) Existing known problem areas.
(5) Safe conveyance of the additional runoff.
(6) Downstream property owners.
D. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with § 170-302A, B and C, may be exempted from various
requirements of this chapter according to the following table:
New Impervious Area*
[Since the Date of Adoption
of this chapter]
(square footage)
Applicant Must Submit to the
Township
0 to 1,000
1,000 to 5,000 Volume controls and SWM site plan
and report
> 5,000 Rate controls, volume controls, SWM
site plan and report and record
drawings
Notes:
* Gravel in the existing condition shall be considered pervious and
proposed gravel shall be considered impervious.
E. The purpose of this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater
management planning between local ordinances and NPDES permitting
(when required) and to ensure that the applicant has a single and clear
set of stormwater management standards to which the applicant is
subject. The Township may accept alternative stormwater management
controls, provided that:
(1) The applicant, in consultation with the Township, PADEP and/or
DCCD, states that meeting the requirements of the volume controls
or rate controls of this chapter is not possible or creates an undue
hardship.
(2) The alternative stormwater management controls, proposed by the
applicant, are documented to be acceptable to the Township,
§ 170-302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-302
1:265
§ 170-303. Volume controls.
PADEP and/or DCCD for NPDES requirements pertaining to post
construction stormwater management requirements.
(3) The alternative stormwater management controls are in
compliance with all other sections of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, §§ 170-301D and 170-302A, B and C.
F. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from rate and
volume control requirements and SWM site plan preparation
requirement of this chapter, provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102. It should be
noted that temporary roadways are not exempt.
G. Agricultural activities are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter, provided the activities are performed according to the
requirements of 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102.
H. Linear roadway improvement projects that create additional
impervious area are not exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
However, alternative stormwater management strategies may be
applied at the joint approval of the Township and the Dauphin County
Conservation District (if an NPDES permit is required) when site
limitations (such as limited right-of-way) and constraints (as shown and
provided by the applicant), preclude the ability of the applicant to meet
the enforcement of the stormwater management standards in this
chapter. All strategies must be consistent with PADEP's regulations,
including NPDES requirements.
I. The Township may, after an applicant has demonstrated compliance
with § 170-302A, B and C, grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of the Ordinance is
observed.
(1) All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall state in
full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on
which the request is based, the provision or provisions of the
Ordinance involved, and the minimum modification necessary.
A. The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual
and in Appendix B of this chapter shall be utilized for all regulated
activities to the maximum extent practicable.15
B. Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the
Design Storm Method or the Simplified Method. For regulated activities
equal to or less than one acre, this chapter establishes no preference
15.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 170-302 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-303
1:266
for either method; therefore, the applicant may select either method
on the basis of economic considerations, the intrinsic limitations on
applicability of the analytical procedures associated with each
methodology, and other factors.
(1) The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable
to any sized regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions.
(a) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume
when compared to the predevelopment total runoff volume for
the two-year/twenty-four-hour storm event.
(b) For hydrologic modeling purposes:
[1] Existing nonforested pervious areas must be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations.
[2] 20% of existing impervious area, when present on the
proposed project site, and contained within the new
proposed limit of disturbance, shall be considered meadow
(good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations for redevelopment.
(2) The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) is independent of
site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is
not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities
greater than one acre. For new impervious surfaces:
(a) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(b) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e., it shall not be released into surface waters of the
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(c) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities shall be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff shall be infiltrated.
C. All applicable worksheets from Chapter 8 of the BMP Manual must be
used when establishing volume controls.
D. Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed elevation of
the stormwater BMPs are required when 5,000 square feet or greater of
new impervious surface is added. Infiltration test shall be conducted in
accordance with BMP Manual. The Township shall be notified 24 hours
prior to infiltration tests being conducted as to provide an opportunity
for the Township to witness the tests.
§ 170-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-303
1:267

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 170-401. Stormwater Management District Rate controls (release
rates).
A. Watersheds. Lower Paxton Township is divided into three watersheds,
including Paxton Creek, Spring Creek, and Beaver Creek (all contained
within the Dauphin County Act 167 Plan). The map indicating the
watershed boundaries is available for inspection at the Township office.
All areas within the districts are subject to the specified release rates.
The one-year, two-year, ten-year, twenty-five-year and 100-year design
storms are all subject to the specified release rates.
B. Stormwater management districts.
(1) If the applicant can show that the post-development hydrograph
matches the predevelopment hydrograph for peak flows and
volume, for all design storms, then meeting the requirements of the
release rates are not required.
(2) Specific watershed requirements:
(a) Paxton Creek Watershed: Specified release rate districts. For
all districts in this category, the future runoff must be
controlled to the specified release rate; that is, the postdevelopment
runoff rate must be less than or equal to the
predevelopment rate multiplied by the specified release rate
for that district.
(b) Paxton Creek Watershed: provisional no-detention districts.
These watershed areas may discharge post-development peak
runoff without detention facilities. However, the applicant must
prove that the "local" runoff conveyance facilities which
transport runoff from the site to the main channel have
adequate capacity to safely transport unattenuated increased
peak flows for a twenty-five-year storm in accordance with
§ 170-114C. If there is inadequate capacity, the applicant shall
either use 100% release rate control or provide increased
capacity within the downstream drainage facilities to convey
increased peak flows consistent with § 170-114C. When
determining if adequate capacity exists in the local watershed
drainage network, the applicant must assume that the entire
local watershed is developed per current zoning and that all
new development will use the least restrictive runoff controls
specified by this article.
(c) Spring Creek Watershed: Specified release rate districts. For
all districts in this category, the future runoff must be
controlled to the specified release rate; that is, the postdevelopment
runoff rate must be less than or equal to the
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:269
predevelopment rate multiplied by the specified release rate
for that district.
(d) Beaver Creek Watershed: Specified release rate districts. For
all districts in this category, the future runoff must be
controlled to the specified release rate; that is, the postdevelopment
runoff rate must be less than or equal to the
predevelopment rate multiplied by the specified release rate
for that district.
(e) Areas not within the Paxton, Spring, or Beaver Creek
Watersheds: Standard release rate district. For all areas within
the Township but outside of the Paxton, Spring, or Beaver
Creek Watersheds, the future peak rate of runoff for one-year,
two-year, ten-year, twenty-five-year and 100-year design
storms must be controlled equal to or less than the
predevelopment runoff rate for the respective storm
frequencies.
(3) The exact location of any given development site, or activity
regulated by this article relative to the release rate district
boundaries shall be determined by mapping the release rate
district boundaries using two-foot topographic contour mapping
provided as part of the drainage plan.
(4) For a proposed development site located entirely within one
release rate district, the total runoff from the site shall meet the
required release rate criteria.
(5) For sites within one release rate district and having multiple
discharge points, any individual point may be designed to a 100%
release rate, provided that the total runoff from the site is
controlled to the applicable release rate for that district and
adequate downstream capacity exists for the unattenuated flow as
prescribed herein.
(6) For a proposed development site which is located within two or
more release rate districts, the maximum runoff discharged at any
point shall be equal to the release rate for the district in which the
discharge point is located. In the event that a portion of the site is
located in a provisional no detention area, no runoff from portions
of the site located in areas subject to release rate controls may be
drained to or through the provisional no detention area.
(7) Each development site shall be considered separately and shall
conform to the criteria of the district in which it is located. In no
case may the release rate for an area be exceeded as "credit" for a
reduction below the criteria or any other restrictions on a separate
site.
(8) Regional detention facilities may be permitted provided that
adequate conveyance is available or provided from the site to the
§ 170-401 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-401
1:270
facility. The acceptability and discharge characteristics of the
facility will be determined on a case by case basis, by the Township
Engineer, using the calibrated model developed for the Dauphin
County Act 167 Plan.
(9) In no case may a waiver be granted to exempt a proposed
development from meeting the requirements of the release rate
area in which the site is located, except as provided for in
§ 170-302.
§ 170-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-401
1:271

ARTICLE V
Erosion and Sedimentation (E&S) Standards
§ 170-501. Erosion and sedimentation requirements during earth
disturbance activities.
A. The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa. Code,
Chapters 92 and 102, as required and applicable as follows:
(1) The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control BMPs.
(2) Development of written plans.
(3) Submission of plans for approval.
(4) Obtaining erosion and sediment control and NPDES permits.
(5) Maintaining plans and permits on site.
B. Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for earth
disturbance activities from PADEP or the Dauphin County Conservation
District must be provided to the Township.
C. A copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any other
permit, as required by PADEP or the Dauphin County Conservation
District, shall be available at the project site at all times if required
under Chapter 102.
D. Construction of temporary roadways (e.g., for utility construction,
timber harvesting, etc.) shall comply with all applicable standards for
erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing regulations
under 25 Pa. Code, Chapters 102 and 105. The erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the Dauphin County
Conservation District for approval and shall address the following, as
applicable:
(1) Design of the roadway system, including haul roads, skid roads,
landing areas, trails, and storage and staging areas.
(2) Runoff control structures (e.g., diversions, culverts, detention
ponds, etc.).
(3) Stream crossings for both perennial and intermittent streams.
(4) Access to public roadways, including design of rock construction
entrance for mud and debris control.
(5) A remediation plan for restoring the disturbed area through
regrading, topsoil placement, reseeding, and other stabilization
techniques, as required.
§ 170-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-501
1:273
§ 170-502. Design criteria statement for stormwater management
and drainage facilities; stormwater management district
implementation provisions.
E. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, as to
maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall be protected from receiving sediment-laden
runoff.
(3) The source of protection for infiltration BMPs shall be identified
(i.e., orange construction fence surrounding the perimeter of the
BMP).
A. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed
to safely convey off-site flows through the development site.
B. "No harm" option. For any proposed development site, the applicant has
the option of using a less-restrictive runoff control (including no
detention), if the applicant can prove that "no harm" would be caused
by discharging at a higher runoff rate than existing conditions. The "no
harm" option is used when an applicant can prove that the postdevelopment
hydrographs can match predevelopment hydrographs, or
if it can be proven that the post-development conditions will not cause
increases in peak flows at all points downstream. Proof of "no harm"
would have to be shown based upon a downstream impact evaluation,
which shall include a downstream hydraulic capacity analysis
consistent with § 170-502C to determine if adequate hydraulic capacity
exists. The applicant shall submit this evaluation of the impacts due to
increased downstream stormwater flows in the watershed to the
Township.
(1) The downstream impact evaluation shall include hydrologic and
hydraulic calculations necessary to determine the impact of
hydrograph timing modifications due to the proposed development
upon a dam, highway, structure, natural point of restricted stream
flow, or any stream channel section established with the
concurrence of the Township.
(2) Proof of "no harm" must be shown from the point of discharge
through entire downstream network to the mouth of Paxton Creek
or Spring Creek, as applicable, at the Susquehanna River, or from
the mouth of Beaver Creek, as applicable, at the Swatara Creek.
For those areas outside of the Paxton, Spring, or Beaver Creek
§ 170-501 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-502
1:274
Watersheds, proof of "no harm" must be shown through the entire
downstream network to the ultimate discharge point at the
Susquehanna River or Swatara Creek as applicable.
(3) The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the
design return period storms (two-year, ten-year, and twenty-fiveyear)
shall be the values from the calibrated model for the Dauphin
County Act 167 Plan. These flow values can be obtained from their
respective watershed plans.
(4) Applicant-proposed runoff controls which would generate
increased peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas would,
by definition, be precluded from successful attempts to prove "no
harm," except in conjunction with proposed capacity improvements
for the problem areas.
(5) A financial hardship shall not constitute grounds for granting a "no
harm" exemption.
(6) Capacity improvements may be provided as necessary to
implement the "no harm" option, which proposes specific capacity
improvements to demonstrate that a less stringent discharge
control would not create any harm downstream.
(7) Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance system as
documented by an applicant may be used by the applicant only in
proportion to his/her development site acreage relative to the total
upstream undeveloped acreage from the identified capacity (i.e., if
the applicant's site is 10% of the upstream undeveloped acreage,
he may use up to 10% of the documented downstream available
capacity).
(8) The Township in approving a "no harm" option shall notify all
downstream municipalities of such approval. The Township shall
make all relevant information used to prove a "no harm" option
available upon request to any Township within the Paxton, Spring,
or Beaver Creek Watershed.
(9) Any "no harm" justifications shall be submitted by the applicant as
part of the drainage plan submission. The burden of proof shall rest
on the applicant.
C. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any downstream capacity
hydraulic analysis conducted in accordance with this article shall use
the following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased
peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a twenty-five-year return
period event within their banks at velocities consistent with
protection of the channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall
§ 170-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-502
1:275
be based upon criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual.
D. Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas within the
watershed, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility
for more than one development site than to provide an individual
control facility for each development site. The initiative and funding for
any regional runoff control alternatives is the responsibility of
prospective applicants. The design of any regional control basins must
incorporate reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed.
The peak outflow of a regional basin would be determined on a case-bycase
basis using the hydrologic model of the watershed consistent with
protection of the downstream watershed areas. "Hydrologic model"
refers to the calibrated model as developed for the Dauphin County Act
167 Stormwater Management Plan.
E. Capacity improvements may be provided as necessary to permit direct
discharge in a provisional no-detention district, to implement any
regional or subregional detention alternatives, or to implement a "no
harm" option which proposes specific capacity improvements to
document the validity of less stringent discharge control which would
not create any harm downstream.
F. General design guidelines:
(1) Stormwater shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another, unless:
(a) The watersheds are subwatersheds of a commonwatershed
which join together within the perimeter of the property;
(b) The effect of the transfer does not alter the peak rate discharge
onto adjacent lands; or
(c) Easements from the affected landowner(s) are provided.
(2) Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the drainage pattern of the watershed. A concentrated
discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an
existing watercourse or confined in an easement or returned to a
predevelopment flow type condition.
(3) Stormwater BMPs and recharge facilities are encouraged (e.g.,
rooftop storage, drywells, cisterns, recreation area ponding,
diversion structures, porous pavements, holding tanks, infiltration
systems, stream channel storage, in-line storage in storm sewers,
and grading patterns). They shall be located, designed, and
constructed in accordance with the latest technical guidance
published by PADEP, provided they are accompanied by detailed
engineering plans and performance capabilities and supporting
site-specific soils, geology, runoff and groundwater and infiltration
rate data to verify proposed designs. Additional guidance from
§ 170-502 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-502
1:276
other sources may be accepted at the discretion of the Township
Engineer (a preapplication meeting is suggested).
(4) All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems
and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in
their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the
appropriate regulatory agency.
(5) No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility, or
swale, shall discharge directly onto a municipal or state roadway.
(6) The invert of all stormwater management facilities and
underground infiltration/storage facilities shall be located a
minimum of two feet above the seasonal high groundwater table or
other soil limiting zone. The invert of stormwater facilities may be
lowered if adequate subsurface drainage, which does not alter the
existing water table level, is provided.
(7) Any stormwater management facility may be required to be fenced
with a minimum four-foot-high fence of material acceptable to the
Township. Gates with a minimum opening of 10 feet shall be
provided for access.
(8) Stormwater management facilities excavated to carbonate rock
must either be fitted with an impervious clay liner, or overexcavated
four feet and refilled with a suitable material mix.
Suitable backfill material is subject to the approval of the Municipal
Engineer.
(9) The type, location, and number of landscaping and planting
specification shall be provided for all stormwater management
facilities and be specific for each type of facility.
G. Topsoil and seeding.
(1) All pond areas, including bottoms, side slopes, and top of berms,
shall be provided with a minimum four inches of topsoil and shall
be seeded and mulched with Formula B seed mixture in accordance
with PENNDOT Publication 408, Section 804.
H. Where uniform flow is anticipated, Manning's Equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
coefficient "n" shall be consistent with values as presented in Table C-3,
Appendix C of this chapter.16 Manning's Equation should not be used for
analysis of pipes under pressure flow or for analysis of culverts.
I. The Township has the authority to require that computed existing
runoff rates be reconciled with field observations and conditions and
site history. If the designer can substantiate, through actual physical
16.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 170-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-502
1:277
calibration, that more appropriate runoff and time of concentration
values should be utilized at a particular site, then appropriate
variations may be made upon review and recommendation of the
Township Engineer.
J. Principal outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall
be designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using
any generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
K. At all points of concentrated flow discharge from a site, an adequate
channel must be provided downstream of the point of discharge to
accommodate the flows from the facility so as to prevent damage to
adjacent properties. If an adequate channel does not exist, an adequate
channel shall be constructed or the point of discharge shall be piped to
a point where an adequate channel exists. The approval and written
consent of all affected downstream property owners must also be
provided in the form of an executed drainage easement.
L. Stormwater management facilities (with a depth of water equal to or
greater then three feet measured from the lowest point inside a facility
to the crest of the emergency spillway):
(1) Any stormwater management facility designed to store runoff and
requiring a berm or earthen embankment, shall be designed to
provide an emergency spillway to handle peak rate of stormwater
runoff up to and including the 100-year post-development flow, with
a blocked primary outlet structure. The height of embankment
must be set as to provide a minimum one foot of freeboard through
the spillway, above the maximum water surface elevation,
computed when the spillway functions for the 100-year postdevelopment
inflow, with a blocked outlet structure. The primary
outflow structure must be designed to pass all design storms (up to
and including the 100-year event) without discharging through the
emergency spillway. The maximum water depth within any
stormwater management facility shall be no greater than eight feet
when functioning through the primary outlet structure.
(2) Emergency spillways shall be armored to prevent erosion during
the 100-year post-development flow, with blocked primary outlet
structure. Synthetic liners or rip-rap may be used, and calculations
sufficient to support proposed armor must be provided. An earthen
plug must be used to accurately control the spillway invert if riprap
is the proposed armoring material. Emergency spillway armor
must extend up the sides of the spillway, and continue at full width
to a minimum of 10 feet past the toe of slope.
(3) A stormwater management facility berm cross sections must be at
least five feet wide at the top, and eight feet wide through the
emergency spillway. For fill embankments, the side slopes shall be
no steeper then 3:1 on the inside of the facility and 3:1 on the
§ 170-502 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-502
1:278
outside of the facility. For cut slopes, the side slopes shall be no
steeper then 2:1.
(4) A cutoff and key trench of impervious material shall be provided
under all embankments four feet or greater in height.
(5) Soils used for the construction of stormwater management
facilities shall have low-erodibility factors ("K" factors) (refer to
E&S Manual) and be identified on the SWM site plan.
(6) Trash racks must be provided to prevent clogging of primary
outflow structure stages for all orifices equivalent to 12 inches or
smaller in diameter.
(7) Anti-seep collars must be provided on all outflow culverts in
accordance with the methodology contained in the latest edition of
the E&S Manual. An increase in seepage length of 15% must be
used in accordance with the requirements for permanent anti-seep
collars.
(8) Conventional, non-BMP stormwater management facilities (i.e., dry
detention basins) must empty over a period of time not less than 24
hours and not more than 72 hours from the end of the facility's
inflow hydrograph. Infiltration tests performed at the facility
locations and proposed basin bottom depths, in accordance with
the BMP Manual, must support time-to-empty calculations if
infiltration is a factor is the sizing of the stormwater management
facility.
(9) Impervious low-flow channels are not permitted within stormwater
management facilities to promote water quality and groundwater
recharge for frequent storm events. Facilities designed as water
quality/infiltration BMPs may have a bottom slope of zero. Minimal
maintenance, saturation tolerant vegetation must be provided in
basins designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs. Conventional,
non-BMP stormwater management facilities must have a minimum
slope of 1% extending radially out from the primary outlet
structure. Water storage below the lowest outlet structure stage
(i.e., dead storage) is permitted in stormwater management
facilities designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs.
(10) Stormwater management facilities bottom elevations must be
greater than adjacent floodplain elevations (FEMA or HEC-RAS
analysis). If no floodplain is defined, bottom elevations must be
higher than existing ground elevations 50 feet from top of stream
bank in the facilities vicinity.
(11) Basin outflow culverts discharging into floodplains must account
for tailwater. Tailwater corresponding to the 100-year floodplain
elevation may be used for all design storms, or the applicant may
elect to determine flood elevations of the adjacent watercourse for
each design storm. The floodplain is assumed to be 50 feet from top
§ 170-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-502
1:279
of stream bank in areas where a floodplain is not designated, or
where no other evidence is provided.
(12) Exceptions to these requirements may be made at the discretion of
the Township for BMPs that retain or detain water, but are of a
much smaller scale than traditional stormwater management
facilities.
M. Storm sewer facilities:
(1) Storm sewers must be able to convey post-development runoff from
a ten-year design storm without surcharging inlets where
appropriate. When connecting to an existing storm sewer system,
the applicant must demonstrate that the proposed system will not
exacerbate any existing stormwater problems and that adequate
downstream capacity exists.
(2) A minimum pipe size of 15 inches in diameter shall be used in all
roadway systems (public or private) proposed for construction.
Pipes shall be designed to provide a minimum velocity of 2 1/2 feet
per second when flowing full, but in all cases, the slope shall be no
less then 0.5%. Arch pipe of equivalent cross-sectional area may be
substituted in lieu of circular pipe where cover or utility conflict
conditions exist.
(3) In proposed curbed roadway sections, the maximum encroachment
of water on the roadway pavement shall not exceed half of a
through travel lane or one inch less than the depth of curb during
the ten-year design storm of five-minute duration. Gutter depth
shall be verified by inlet capture/capacity calculations that account
for road slope and opening area. The maximum distance between
inlets in curbed roadway sections shall be no more then 600 feet,
however access to underground pipes shall be provided every 300
feet.
(4) Standard Type "C" inlets with eight-inch hoods shall be used along
vertical concrete curbs roadway networks. Type "C" inlets with teninch
hoods that provide a two-inch sump condition may be used
with approval of the Municipal Engineer when roadway
longitudinal slopes are 1.0% or less.
(5) For inlets containing a change in pipe size, the elevation for the
crown of the pipes shall be the same or the smaller pipe's crown
shall be at a higher elevation.
(6) All inlets shall provide a minimum two-inch drop between the
lowest inlet pipe invert elevation and the outlet pipe invert
elevation.
(7) On curbed sections, a double inlet shall be placed at the low point
of sag vertical curves, or an inlet shall be placed at the low point
§ 170-502 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-502
1:280
and on each side of the low point at a distance not to exceed 100
feet, or at an elevation not to exceed 0.2 foot above the low point.
(8) At all roadway low points, swales and easements shall be provided
behind the curb or swale and through adjacent properties to
channelize and direct any overflow of stormwater runoff away from
dwellings and structures.
(9) Inlets shall be placed so drainage cannot cross intersections or
street center lines.
(10) All inlets in paved areas shall have heavy-duty bicycle-safe grating
consistent with PennDOT Publication 72M. A note to this effect
shall be added to the SWM site plan or inlet details therein.
(11) Inlets must be sized to accept the specified pipe sizes without
corner penetrations. All pipes entering or exiting inlets shall be cut
flush with the inlet wall. A note to this effect shall be added to the
SWM site plan or inlet details therein.
(12) Inlets shall have weep holes covered with geotextile fabric placed
at appropriate elevations to completely drain the subgrade prior to
placing the base and surface course on roadways.
(13) Inlets, junction boxes, or manholes greater then five feet in depth
shall be equipped with ladder rungs and shall be detailed on the
SWM site plan.
(14) Inlets shall not have a sump condition in the bottom (unless
designed as a water quality BMP). Pipes shall be flush with the
bottom of the box or concrete channels shall be poured.
(15) Inlets, manholes, pipes, and culverts shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications set forth in PennDOT's
Publication 408, latest edition, and as detailed in the PennDOT's
Publication 72M, Standards for Roadway Construction (RC), latest
edition, or as approved by the Municipal Engineer. All material and
construction details (inlets, manholes, pipe trenches, etc.), must be
shown on the SWM site plan, and a note added that all construction
must be in accordance with PennDOT's Publication 408 and
PennDOT's Publication 72M, latest edition. A note shall be added to
the plan stating that all frames, concrete top units, and grade
adjustment rings shall be set in a bed of full mortar according to
Publication 408.
(16) Accessible drainage structures shall be located on continuous
storm sewer system at all vertical dislocations, at all locations
where a transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is required, at all
vertical and horizontal angle points exceeding 5° and at all points
of convergence of two or more storm sewer pipes.
§ 170-502 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-502
1:281
§ 170-503. Calculation methodology.
(17) All storm drainage piping (equal to or greater than 12 inches)
discharging to the ground surface shall be provided with either
reinforced concrete headwalls and end sections or plastic and
metal pipe end sections compatible with the pipe size involved in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 408 and Publication 72M.
(18) Outlet protection shall be provided at all surface discharge points
with storm drainage piping (equal to or greater than 12 inches) in
order to minimize erosion consistent with the E&S Manual.
(19) Pavement base drain shall be provided at all low point in cut areas,
toe of slope areas, and other areas as dictated by proven
engineering principles and design judgment. All base drain shall be
in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408.
N. Swale conveyance facilities:
(1) Swales must be able to convey post-development runoff from a tenyear
design storm with six inches of freeboard to top of the swale.
(2) Swales shall have side slopes no steeper than 3:1.
(3) All swales shall be designed, labeled on the SWM site plan, and
details provided to adequately construct and maintain the design
dimension of the swales.
(4) Swales shall be designed for stability using velocity or shear
criteria. Velocity criteria may be used for channels with less than
10% slope. Shear criteria may be used for all swales.
Documentation must be provided to support velocity and/or shear
limitations used in calculations.
(5) Where swale bends occur, the computed velocities or shear
stresses shall be multiplied by the following factor for the purpose
of designing swale erosion protection:
(a) When swale bend is 30° to 60°: 1.75.
(b) When swale bend is 60° to 90°: 2.00.
(c) When swale bend is 90° or greater: 2.50.
(6) Swales must be designed for both temporary and permanent
conditions in accordance with the latest E&S Manual.
A. All calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the
BMP Manual.
B. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or a Soil Cover Complex methodology.
Methods shall be selected by the qualified professional based on the
§ 170-502 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-503
1:282
individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site.
C. Rainfall values:
(1) Rational Method. The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Drainage Manual, Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves,
Publication 584, Chapter 7A, latest edition, shall be used in
conjunction with the appropriate time-of-concentration and return
period.
(2) Soil Cover Complex Method. The Soil Conservation Service Type II,
twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution shall be used in conjunction
with rainfall depths from NOAA Atlas 14 or consistent with the
following table:
Return Interval
(year)
24-hour Rainfall Total
(inches)
1 2.40
2 2.90
10 4.36
25 5.43
50 6.38
100 7.48
D. Peak flow rates:
(1) Rational Method: may be used for drainage areas up to 20 acres.
Extreme caution should be used by the qualified professional if the
watershed has more then one main drainage channel, if the
watershed is divided so that hydrologic properties are significantly
different in one verses the other, if the time of concentration
exceeds 60 minutes, or if stormwater runoff volume is an important
factor. The combination of Rational Method hydrographs based on
timing shall be prohibited.
(a) The use of the Modified Rational Method to design stormwater
management facilities must be approved by the Municipal
Engineer.
(2) Soil Cover Complex Method: may be used for drainage areas
greater then 20 acres. This method is recommended for design of
stormwater management facilities and where stormwater runoff
volume must be taken into consideration.
(3) For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth
of a cubic foot per second (cfs).
E. Runoff coefficients:
§ 170-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-503
1:283
(1) Rational Method: Use Table C-1 (Appendix C).17
(2) Soil Cover Complex Method: Use Table C-2 (Appendix C).
(3) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing nonforested pervious areas conditions shall
be considered as meadow (good condition).
(4) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, 20% of existing impervious area, when present on
the project site, and contained within the new proposed limit of
disturbance, shall be considered meadow (good condition) for
predevelopment hydrologic calculations for redevelopment.
F. Design storm:
(1) All drainage facilities (inlets, pipes, and swales) shall be designed
to safely convey the ten-year storm.
(2) All stormwater management facilities shall be verified by routing
the proposed one-year, two-year, ten-year, twenty-five-year, fiftyyear,
and 100-year hydrographs through the facility using the
Storage Indication (Modified Puls) Method. The design storm
hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation method that
produces a full hydrograph.
(3) The stormwater management and drainage system shall be
designed to safely convey the post-development 100-year storm
event to stormwater detention facilities, for the purpose of meeting
peak rate control.
(4) All structures (culvert or bridges) proposed to convey runoff under
a municipal road shall be designed to pass the fifty-year design
storm with a minimum one foot of freeboard measured below the
lowest point along the top of the roadway.
(5) All design within state or federal rights-of-way or that falls under
the design criteria of any higher authority must meet the
requirements of that agency in addition to meeting the minimum
requirements of this chapter.
G. Time of concentration:
(1) Time of concentration shall be computed using the NRCS
Segmental Method as described in TR-55 (SCS 1986, or most
current update). The length of sheet flow shall be limited to 100
feet. The Manning's "n" Roughness Coefficient for TR-55 sheet flow
can be found in Table C-4 (Appendix C).18 Time of concentration for
channel and pipe flow shall be computed using Manning's
Equation.
17.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
18.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 170-503 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-503
1:284
(2) For sites with insignificant channelized flow and less than 20%
imperviousness coverage, the time of concentration may be
computed using the NRCS equation for lag time:
Time of Concentration = Tc = [(Tlag/.6)*60](minutes)
(S + 1)0.7
Tlag = L0.8 1900 Y
Where:
Tlag = Lag time (hours).
L = Hydraulic length of watershed (feet).
Y = Average overland slope of watershed (percent).
S = Maximum retention in watershed as defined by: S =
[(1,000/CN) - 10].
CN = NRCS Curve Number for watershed as defined by the
NRCS Loss Method.
(3) Additionally, the following provisions shall apply to calculations for
time of concentration:
(a) The post-development time of concentration shall never be
greater that the predevelopment time of concentration for any
watershed or subwatershed.
(b) The minimum time of concentration for any watershed shall be
five minutes.
(c) The designer may choose to assume a five-minute time of
concentration for any post-development watershed or
subwatershed without providing any computations.
(d) The designer must provide computations for all
predevelopment time-of-concentration paths. A five-minute
time of concentration can not be assumed for predevelopment.
(e) Undetained fringe areas (areas that are not tributary to a
stormwater facility but where a reasonable effort has been
made to convey runoff from all new impervious coverage to
best management practices) may be assumed to represent the
predevelopment conditions for purpose of time-ofconcentration
calculations.
H. Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes or closed depressions in areas
underlain by limestone or carbonate geologic features shall be excluded
from the modeled point of analysis defining predevelopment flows. If
left undisturbed during construction activities, areas draining to closed
depressions may also be removed from peak runoff rates in the post-
§ 170-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-503
1:285
development analysis. New, additional contributing runoff shall not be
directed to existing sinkholes or closed depressions.
I. Where uniform flow is anticipated, Manning's Equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Manning's Equation should not be
used for analysis of pipes under pressure flow or for analysis of
culverts. Manning's "n" values shall be obtained from Table C-3
(Appendix C).19 Inlet control shall be checked at all inlet boxes to
ensure the headwater depth during the ten-year design event is
contained below the top of grate for each inlet box.
J. The Township may approve the use of any generally accepted full
hydrograph approximation technique that shall use a total runoff
volume that is consistent with the volume from a method that produces
a full hydrograph.
K. The Township has the authority to require that computed existing
runoff rates be reconciled with field observations, conditions and site
history. If the designer can substantiate, through actual physical
calibration, that more-appropriate runoff and time-of-concentration
values should be utilized at a particular site, then appropriate
variations may be made upon review and approval of the Township.
19.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 170-503 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-503
1:286
ARTICLE VI
SWM site plan and Report Requirements
§ 170-601. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter and not eligible for the
exemptions provided in § 170-302, the final approval of subdivision and/or
land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit,
or the commencement of any land disturbance activity, may not proceed
until the applicant has received written approval of an SWM site plan from
the Township.
§ 170-602. SWM site plan and report contents.
A. The SWM site plan and SWM site report shall consist of all applicable
calculations, maps, and plans. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to the Township in a format that is clear, concise, legible,
neat and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be
rejected.
B. Appropriate sections from the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, and other applicable local ordinances, shall be
followed in preparing the SWM site plan.
(1) The SWM site plan shall include (but not limited to):
(a) Plans no larger then twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets
and in a form that meets the requirements for recording in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Dauphin County.
(b) The name of the development; name and location address of
the property site; name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, e-mail address, and engineering seal of the individual
preparing the SWM site plan.
(c) The date of submission and dates of all revisions.
(d) A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps.
(e) A North arrow on all drawings and maps.
(f) A location map at a minimum scale of one inch equals 1,000
feet.
(g) Metes-and-bounds description of the entire tract perimeter.
(h) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet.
(i) Existing water bodies within the project area including
streams, lakes, ponds, field delineated wetlands or other
bodies of water, sinkholes, flood hazard boundaries (FEMAdelineated
floodplains and floodways), areas of natural
§ 170-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-602
1:287
vegetation to be preserved, the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site, and overland drainage paths.
(j) The location of all existing and proposed utilities, on-lot
wastewater facilities, water supply wells, sanitary sewers, and
water lines on and within 50 feet of property lines.
(k) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project.
(l) Soil names and boundaries with identification of the hydraulic
soil group classification.
(m) The proposed limit of disturbance line and associated proposed
disturbed acres.
(n) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings,
including plans and profiles of roads and paved areas and floor
elevations of buildings.
(o) Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles, and cross sections of all
open channels, pipes, swales and other BMPs.
(p) The location and clear identification of the nature of
permanent stormwater BMPs.
(q) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
(r) A minimum twenty-foot-wide access easement around all
stormwater management facilities that would provide ingress
to and egress from a public right-of-way. In lieu of providing an
easement to the public right-of-way, a note may be added to the
plan granting the Township or their designee's access to all
easements via the nearest public right-of-way.
(s) Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs.
(t) Construction details of any improvements made to sinkholes.
(u) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership,
operations, and maintenance responsibilities.
(v) Notes and statements:
[1] A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that
the stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered
or removed without prior approval by the Township.
[2] A statement referencing the operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement and stating that the O&M agreement is
part of the SWM site plan.
§ 170-602 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-602
1:288
[3] A note indicating that record drawings will be provided for
all stormwater management facilities prior to occupancy,
or the release of financial security.
[4] The following signature block for the qualified professional
preparing the SWM site plan:
"I,__________, hereby certify that the stormwater
management plan meets all design standards and criteria
of the Lower Paxton Township's Stormwater Management
Ordinance."
(2) The SWM site report shall include (but not limited to):
(a) The name of the development; name and location address of
the property site; name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, e-mail address, and engineering seal of the individual
preparing the SWM site report.
(b) Project description narrative, including expected project time
schedule.
(c) Location map showing the project site and its location relative
to release rate districts.
(d) Drainage area maps for all watersheds and inlets depicting the
time-of-concentration paths.
(e) A detailed description of the existing site conditions. A detailed
site evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in
areas of carbonate geology or karst topography and other
environmentally sensitive areas such as brownfields.
(f) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations,
calculations, assumptions, and criteria for the design of all
stormwater BMPs.
(g) Description of, justification, and actual field results for
infiltration testing with respect to the type of test and test
location for the design of infiltration BMPs.
(h) Calculations showing the total drainage area and impervious
area loading rates to each BMP.
(i) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water
quality, and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic
features and on any existing municipal stormwater collection
system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(j) Description of the proposed changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover including the type and amount of impervious
area to be added.
§ 170-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-602
1:289
§ 170-603. SWM site plan and report submission.
§ 170-604. SWM site plan and report review.
(k) All applicable worksheets from Chapter 8 of the BMP Manual
when establishing volume controls.
(l) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership,
operation, and maintenance responsibilities as well as
schedules and costs for inspection and maintenance activities
for each permanent stormwater or drainage BMP, including
provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements.
(3) Supplemental information to be provided prior to recording of the
SWM site plan, as applicable:
(a) Signed and executed operations and maintenance agreement
(Appendix A).20
(b) Signed and executed easements, as required for all on-site and
off-site work.
(c) An erosion and sedimentation control plan and approval letter
from the Dauphin County Conservation District.
(d) An NPDES permit.
(e) Permits from PADEP and ACOE.
(f) A geologic assessment.
(g) A wetland delineation report.
(h) A highway occupancy permit from PennDOT when utilization of
a PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed or when
proposed facilities would encroach onto a PennDOT right-ofway.
A. The applicant shall submit the SWM site plan and report for the
regulated activity.
B. Three copies of the SWM site plan and report shall be submitted to the
Township and may be distributed as follows:
(1) Two copies for the Township accompanied by the requisite
municipal review fee, as specified in this chapter.
(2) One copy for the Township Engineer.
C. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the Township, Tri-
County Regional Planning Commission, Dauphin County Conservation
District or PADEP.
20.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 170-602 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-604
1:290
§ 170-605. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan and report for a development
site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater
management facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions
are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by the Township, shall
require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with
this chapter.
§ 170-606. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plan and report.
A disapproved SWM site plan and report may be resubmitted, with the
revisions addressing the Township's concerns documented in writing, to the
Township in accordance with this chapter. The applicable Township review
fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan and
report.
§ 170-607. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The Township's approval of an SWM site plan and report authorizes the
regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term
of validity of five years following the date of approval. The Township may
A. The Township shall require receipt of a complete SWM site plan and
report as specified in this chapter. The Township shall review the SWM
site plan and report for consistency with the purposes, requirements,
and intent of this chapter.
B. The Township shall not approve any SWM site plan and report that is
deficient in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole
discretion and in accordance with this article, when an SWM site plan
and report is found to be deficient, the Township may disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor
deficiencies, the Township may accept submission of modifications.
C. The Township shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 calendar
days whether the SWM site plan and report is approved or disapproved
if the SWM site plan and report is not part of a subdivision or land
development plan. If the SWM site plan and report involves a
subdivision or land development plan, the timing shall following the
subdivision and land development process according to the
Municipalities Planning Code.21
D. The Township Building Permit Office shall not issue a building permit
for any regulated activity if the SWM site plan and report has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by the
Township. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to
issuance of a building permit.
21.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 170-604 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-607
1:291
specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any
specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date
the Township signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not
been constructed, or if a record drawing of these facilities has not been
approved within this time, then the Township may consider the SWM site
plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits or approvals.
§ 170-608. Record drawings, completion certificate and final
inspection.
A. The applicant shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all
stormwater BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record
drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the approved
SWM site plan shall be submitted to the Township.
B. The record drawings shall include a certification of completion signed
by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent stormwater
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved SWM site plan
and report.
C. After receipt of the record drawings and certification of completion, the
Township may conduct a final inspection.
§ 170-607 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-608
1:292
ARTICLE VII
Easements
§ 170-701. Easements.
A. Easements shall be established to accommodate the existence of
drainageways.
B. Easements shall be established for all on-site stormwater management
or drainage facilities, including, but not limited to: detention facilitates
(above or below ground), infiltration facilities, all stormwater BMPs,
drainage swales, and drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes, etc.).
C. Easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater
control.
D. All easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide.
E. Easements shall provide ingress to and egress from a public right-ofway.
In lieu of providing an easement to the public right-of-way, a note
may be added to the plan granting the Township or their designee's
access to all easements via the nearest public right-of-way.
F. Where possible, easements shall be centered on side and/or rear lot
lines.
G. The following note shall be placed on the recorded plan, "Nothing shall
be planted or placed within the easement which would adversely affect
the function of the easement, or conflict with any conditions associated
with such easement."
H. A note shall be placed on the SWM site plan identifying the party
responsible for assuring the continued functionality and required
maintenance of any easement.
§ 170-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-701
1:293

ARTICLE VIII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 170-801. Financial guarantee.
§ 170-802. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Township for
the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater
management controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and
this chapter, equal to 110% of the full construction cost of the required
controls in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code.
B. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the financial guarantee, the applicant shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified professional, verifying that all
permanent facilities have been constructed according to the SWM
site plan and report and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of record drawings.
(3) Request a final inspection from the Township to certify compliance
with this chapter, after receipt of the certification of completion
and record drawings by the Township.
A. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall describe the
future operation and maintenance responsibilities. The operation and
maintenance description shall outline required routine maintenance
actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper operation of the
stormwater control facilities.
B. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers, and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the Township, stormwater
control facilities/BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by
the Township.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities/BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
§ 170-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-802
1:295
§ 170-803. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
(3) Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater BMPs shall be
enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded
as deed restrictions or easements that run with the land.
(4) The SWM site plan and operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
(5) The Township may take enforcement actions against an applicant
for failure to satisfy any provision of this chapter.
C. The Township, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, shall
make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report.
The Township may require a dedication of such facilities as part of the
requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is
not an indication that the Township will accept the facilities. The
Township reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and
operating responsibility for any portion of the stormwater management
controls.
D. If the Township accepts ownership of stormwater BMPs, the Township
may, at its discretion, require a fee from the applicant to the Township
to offset the future cost of inspections, operations, and maintenance.
E. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved SWM site plan, or to allow the property to
remain in a condition which does not conform to an approved SWM site
plan, unless the Township grants an exception in writing.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report, the applicant
shall sign the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (Appendix
A)22 covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be privately
owned. The operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be
recorded with the SWM site plan and made a part hereto.
B. Other items may be included in the operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all BMP facilities. The operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Township and the Municipal Solicitor.
C. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the
stormwater BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement, the Township may perform the
services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment
of fees may result in a lien against the property.
22.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 170-802 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-803
1:296
ARTICLE IX
Inspections
§ 170-901. Schedule of inspections.
§ 170-902. Right of entry.
A. PADEP or its designees normally ensure compliance with any permits
issued, including those for stormwater management. In addition to
PADEP compliance programs, the Township or their municipal assignee
may inspect all phases of the installation of temporary or permanent
stormwater management facilities.
B. During any stage of earth disturbance activities, if the Township
determines that the temporary or permanent stormwater management
facilities are not being installed in accordance with the approved SWM
site plan, the Township shall revoke any existing permits or approvals
until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved as specified in
this chapter.
C. Stormwater BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner, or the
landowner's designee according to the inspection schedule described
on the SWM site plan for each BMP.
(1) The Township may require copies of the inspection reports, in a
form as stipulated by the Township.
(2) If such inspections are not conducted or inspection reports not
submitted as scheduled, the Township, or their designee, may
conduct such inspections and charge the owner appropriate fees.
Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
(a) Prior to conducting such inspections, the Township shall
inform the owner of its intent to conduct such inspections. The
owner shall be given 30 days to conduct required inspections
and submit the required inspection reports to the Township.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Township may enter at reasonable times, upon
any property within the Township, to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operations and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of the Township ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Township shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater BMP in the Township such
devices, as are necessary, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
discharges from such stormwater BMP.
§ 170-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-902
1:297
D. Unreasonable delay in allowing the Township access to a stormwater
BMP is a violation of this chapter.
§ 170-902 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-902
1:298
ARTICLE X
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 170-1001. Notification.
§ 170-1002. Enforcement.
§ 170-1003. Declaration of public nuisance; continuing violations.
§ 170-1004. Suspension and revocation.
A. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter or an approved SWM site plan, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, the
Township, through its designee, shall provide written notification, via
certified mail, of the violation to the landowner. Such notification shall
set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for
correction of the violation(s). In the event that the landowner either
refuses or fails to take delivery of the notice served by certified mail,
the notice may be served by first-class mail, postage pre-paid.
B. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to
the penalties provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be
deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Township from pursuing
any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed to occur,
is occurring, or has occurred to comply with the terms and conditions of
this chapter.
A. The Township, through its designee, is hereby authorized and directed
to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. The approved SWM site
plan shall be on file at the project site throughout the duration of the
construction activity. The Township, through its designee, may make
periodic inspections during construction.
B. Adherence to approved SWM site plan:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
undertake any regulated activity on any property except as
provided for by an approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure
required by the SWM site plan pursuant to this chapter.
(3) It shall be unlawful to allow a property to remain in a condition that
does not conform to an approved SWM site plan.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 170-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1004
1:299
§ 170-1005. Violations and penalties.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the Township may be suspended or
revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, Ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act, during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended approval or permit may be reinstated by the Township
when:
(1) The Township or their designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the violation(s) that caused the suspension.
(2) The Township is satisfied that the violation(s) has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by Lower Paxton Township cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter governing water
pollution shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before
a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not exceeding
$1,000 plus costs of prosecution, and in default of payment of such fine
and costs, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days in Dauphin
County Prison.
B. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter other
than as set forth in Subsection A above, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a civil penalty of
not more than $600 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No
judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the
violation by the Magisterial District Judge or Court of Common Pleas. If
the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. In addition to the aforementioned remedy, the appropriate
officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek
equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
C. In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
§ 170-1004 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-1005
1:300
§ 170-1006. Appeals.
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township, or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Board of
Supervisors within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Supervisors
relevant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Dauphin
County Court of Common Pleas with 30 days of the decision of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 170-1005 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1006
1:301

ARTICLE XI
Prohibitions
§ 170-1101. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain (including indoor drains and sinks) or conveyance, whether
on the surface or underground, that allows any nonstormwater
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to
enter the Township's separate storm sewer system or waters of the
commonwealth is prohibited.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the Township separate storm sewer system, which has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved
by the Township, is prohibited.
C. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the Township's
separate storm sewer system or into surface waters of the
commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in Subsection D below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
D. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
§ 170-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1101
1:303
§ 170-1102. Roof drains, foundation drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains, foundation drains, sump pumps and other similar discharges
shall discharge to infiltration areas, vegetative BMPs, or pervious areas to
the maximum extent physically feasible.
§ 170-1103. Alteration of BMPs.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
(14) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
E. In the event that the Township or PADEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection D significantly contribute to
pollution of waters of the commonwealth, or is so notified by PADEP, the
Township will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
F. Upon notice provided by the Township or PADEP under Subsection E,
the discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
Township or PADEP, to cease the discharge, consistent with the degree
of pollution caused by the discharge.
G. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
commonwealth law.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, or structures unless it is part of an
approved maintenance program, without the written approval of the
Township.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, structures, or within a drainage
easement which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP without
the written approval of the Township.
§ 170-1101 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-1103
1:304
ARTICLE XII
Fees and Expenses
§ 170-1201. Review fee.
The fee required by this chapter is the Township review fee. The Township
review fee shall be established by resolution of the Board of Supervisors
of Lower Paxton Township to defray review costs incurred by the Township
and the Township Engineer. The applicant shall pay all fees.
§ 170-1202. Expenses covered by fees.
§ 170-1203. Recording of approved SWM site plan and related
agreements.
A. The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
(1) Administrative and clerical costs.
(2) Review of the SWM site plan and report by the Township.
(3) Preconstruction meetings.
(4) Inspection of stormwater management facilities/BMPs and
drainage improvements during construction.
(5) Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities/BMPs and drainage improvements presented in the SWM
site plan.
(6) Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed, or implemented, as described in the SWM site plan, shall
record the following documents in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Dauphin County, within 30 days of approval of the SWM site plan by the
Township and shall produce a recording receipt to the Township prior to
the issuance of a storm water management permit:
(1) The SWM site plan.
(2) Operations and maintenance (O&M) agreement (Appendix A).
(3) Easements under § 170-701.
B. Lower Paxton Township may suspend or revoke any approvals granted
for the project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply
with this section.
§ 170-1201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1203
1:305
Chapter 176
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 170-1203 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 170-1203
1:306
ARTICLE I
Driveways, Ditches and Drains
[Adopted 3-1-1971 by Ord. No. 6-71 (Art. 907 of the 1960 Code)]
§ 176-1. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct a
driveway or make an opening into a Township street, road or highway or
to install a ditch or drain in or along the Township street, road or highway
without first securing a permit as hereinafter provided and in accordance
with the standards adopted by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 176-2. Application for permit.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct a driveway or make
an opening into or to install a ditch or a drain in or along a Township
street, road or highway shall make application to the Township Engineer, in
writing, for that purpose. Such application shall be upon blanks furnished
by the Township and shall set forth the name of the applicant, the exact
location of the proposed driveway, opening, ditch or drain, the approximate
size, width, depth, grade or relative measurements thereof and the type
of material proposed to be used. The Township Engineer shall issue such
permit if the application conforms with the standards adopted by the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 176-3. Driveway standards.
A. Access drives shall not be closer than 40 feet to a public street
intersection or within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, catch basin or drain
inlet.
B. Driveways shall not exceed a slope of 10% and shall have a leveling
area with a slope not exceeding 2% within 15 feet of the public street
cartway line. Where drives enter a bank through a cut, retaining walls
shall be provided, or in lieu thereof, the side slopes of the cut shall be
graded to not more than foot vertical to one-foot horizontal within 10
feet of the point where the drive intersects with the right-of-way line of
the public street.
C. The center-line elevation of the driveway shall be on grade with the
curb cut or, in lieu of a curbing, not more than two inches above the
cartway surface of the public street.
D. No driveway shall exceed 24 feet in width within 15 feet of the public
street cartway except as increased by a curb radius not greater than
five feet. [Amended 6-3-1991 by Ord. No. 91-07]
E. Nonresidential driveways shall conform with the additional standards
listed in Chapter 203, Zoning. [Added 6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 94-17]
§ 176-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-3
1:307
§ 176-4. Precautions.
During such installation, every necessary and reasonable precaution shall
be taken by the applicant and the parties making the same to keep the
drains open and to maintain the street in a safe and passable condition;
and such permit shall be issued on the express condition that the person
to whom the same is issued shall indemnify, save and hold harmless the
Township from any loss or damage of any kind occasioned by the
construction of such driveway or installation of such ditch or drain.
§ 176-5. Performance of work.
In the event that any work performed pursuant to such permit shall, in the
opinion of the Township Engineer, be unsatisfactory and the same shall not
be corrected in accordance with his instructions within the time fixed by
him, such time not to be less than three days, or in the event that the work
for which the permit was granted is not completed within the time fixed by
such permit, the Township may proceed to correct such unsatisfactory work
or complete any such work not completed and charge the cost thereof, plus
any penalties allowable by law, to the applicant. In default of payment of
such charges and penalties within 30 days after written notice thereof, the
same shall be collected by the Township in the same manner provided by
law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 176-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates or permits a violation
of this article, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in the
enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of
the determination of the violation by the District Justice and/or Court. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
F. All new driveways shall be paved for a minimum distance of 50 feet
from the edge of the cartway. [Added 6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 94-17]
§ 176-3 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 176-6
1:308
ARTICLE II
Sidewalks and Curbing
[Adopted 9-13-1982 by Ord. No. 82-5 (Art. 905 of the 1960 Code)]
§ 176-7. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to provide regulatory and construction
standards for the installation of curbing and sidewalks in Lower Paxton
Township. The Township's overall goal is to provide a safe, equitable,
functional, economical, comfortable and continuous pedestrian access
network.
§ 176-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, certain terms are defined as follows:
ACCESS DRIVE — A private street providing for vehicular movement
between a public or private street and a parking area or service area within
the land development.
ATTACHED SIDEWALKS — A sidewalk located against the interior edge of
the curb.
CROSSWALK MARKINGS — Paint or other materials applied to the roadway
surface to delineate a pedestrian route.
CURB CUT RAMP — A sloped portion of the sidewalk which permits
movement from the sidewalk elevation to the street elevation by depressing
the curb.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre based on the gross
acreage in the development tract.
DETACHED SIDEWALK — A sidewalk separated from the interior edge of
the curb by a mowing strip.
DRIVEWAY APRON — That portion of the driveway extending from the edge
of the street paving or interior face of a curb to the street edge of the
sidewalk.
GROSS ACREAGE — The total land area of a tract with no exclusions.
MOWING STRIP — The open space between the detached sidewalk and
curb.
NET ACREAGE — Acreage remaining in a tract after the reduction of
specified rights-of-way, easements or other land areas.
SIDEWALK WIDTH — The dimension of the sidewalk structure measured
perpendicular to the edge of the sidewalk and excluding adjacent curbs.
SITE DISTANCE — The length of road visible to a driver of a vehicle or
pedestrian at any given point in the road when viewing is unobstructed by
vehicular traffic.
VERTICAL CURB — A curb designed so that the face adjacent to the street
is at approximately 90° to the street surface.
§ 176-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-9
1:309
§ 176-9. Sidewalk and curb requirements.
A. These requirements control facilities intended for or used by the
general public. Facilities intended and used for private on-lot
movement, such as sidewalks providing access to individual structures,
service walks and similar types of walks on private property with
limited pedestrian traffic, are excluded.
B. Sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with Table A23 which
establishes the minimum standards for each Township zoning district.
For residential streets, curbs shall be required in accordance with
Chapter 203, Zoning, including instances where sidewalks are not
required. Curbs shall be required in all instances for streets in
nonresidential areas, including instances where sidewalks are not
required. Additionally, sidewalks and/or curbs may be required as
determined by the Board of Supervisors in the following circumstances:
[Amended 9-28-1989 by Ord. No. 89-12; 6-20-1994 by Ord. No.
94-17]
(1) To continue existing sidewalk and/or curb systems to the terminus
of a service area or block.
(2) To provide access to vehicular parking compounds.
(3) Where unusual or particular conditions prevail with respect to
prospective traffic and/or safety of pedestrians.
(4) Change of any residential building to any other use.
C. Curb cut ramps shall be provided on each corner of all intersections
where sidewalks are constructed, reconstructed or altered, except as
follows: [Amended 6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 94-17]
(1) When safe operation of a wheelchair cannot be ensured due to
hazards peculiar to the particular intersection; or
(2) When the sidewalk slope entering the intersection is in excess of
8% grade.
D. In situations where sidewalks are required on only one side of a street,
the following prioritized considerations shall apply: in all instances the
safety and continuity of the pedestrian access system should always be
of foremost concern.
(1) The sidewalk shall be located on the side of the street generating
the greatest pedestrian volume.
(2) If pedestrian volumes are equal, the side requiring the least
grading and resulting in the lowest grades shall be used.
23.Editor's Note: Table A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 176-9 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 176-9
1:310
§ 176-10. Design standards.
Sidewalks, curbs and curb cut ramps required by § 176-9 shall be designed
in accordance with the following standards:
(3) In a cut-fill situation, locate the sidewalk on the side primarily in
cut.
(4) Select the side requiring the fewest crosswalks.
(5) Select the side with the fewest anticipated obstacles.
(6) Select the side with permitted parking.
(7) Select the side best lit by night lighting.
(8) Select the side with parks or open spaces.
(9) Select the side with southern sun exposure.
(10) Select the side upwind from vehicle exhaust fumes.
A. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks shall be located along the existing street frontage of the
tract, along the side of proposed public and private streets within a
project and adjacent to vehicular parking compounds. These
sidewalk locations may be varied if, in the judgment of the
Township, an alternate system meets the projected need for
pedestrian circulation.
(2) All sidewalks shall be detached sidewalks; however, the Township
may permit attached sidewalks under the following conditions upon
request by the landowner:
(a) When existing natural or man-made conditions cause physical
constraints, such as insufficient distance between an existing
stream or structure and an existing roadway, which shall not
accommodate detached sidewalks; or
(b) When the construction shall complete an existing attached
sidewalk and the length of sidewalk to be completed is less
than 100 feet.
(3) Sidewalks adjacent to public streets shall be located within the
street right-of-way, beginning on the right-of-way line with the
width extending toward the street.
(4) Sidewalks adjacent to private streets, access drives and parking
compounds need not be located at any prescribed setback.
(5) Pedestrian easements provided in lieu of sidewalks along public or
private streets or to give access to community facilities shall have a
minimum width of 10 feet and a minimum walkway width of four
§ 176-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-10
1:311
§ 176-11. Construction specifications.
Construction of sidewalks, curbs and curb cut ramps as required in § 176-9
shall conform to the following specifications. Any reference to the
"Department" in Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT)
Form 408 shall be understood to mean Lower Paxton Township.
feet. These walkways shall be improved to the standards required
by the Township.
B. Curbs.
(1) All new curbs shall be the vertical type. (See Figure A.)
(2) Curbs which continue, replace or become an integral part of an
existing curb system may be a type resembling the existing curbing
when the total length of new curbing is less than 100 feet. Curb
lengths in excess of 100 feet shall require vertical curbs.
C. Curb cut ramps.
(1) The preferred location of the ramps shall be the point of curvature
of the curb intersection radius. (See Figure B.)
(2) For the safety of the blind, the location of curb cut ramps shall be
uniform within a general area.
A. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet unless otherwise
indicated in Table A.24
(2) Cross slope on sidewalks shall be as follows unless otherwise
directed to meet special requirements:
(a) Walks abutting building structures shall slope away from the
building at a 1/4 inch per foot slope.
(b) All other walks and adjacent mowing strips shall be
constructed to discharge drainage with a 1/4 inch per foot
cross slope. Mowing strips shall always drain toward the
street.
(3) Sidewalks adjacent to public streets may be constructed of any
appropriate paving material approved by the Township. Concrete
used in sidewalk work shall be as specified in PennDOT Form 408
for cement concrete sidewalks.
(4) All sidewalks shall be laid to the line and grade shown on the
approved construction plans and shall be constructed in
accordance with PennDOT Form 408 for cement concrete
24.Editor's Note: Table A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 176-10 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 176-11
1:312
sidewalks, except that pre molded expansion joints shall be 1/4 of
an inch in thickness.
(5) All concrete sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of four
inches, except at driveways, where the sidewalks shall have a
minimum thickness of six inches and shall contain one layer of 6 x 6
W 2.9 x W 2.9 welded wire fabric. (See Figure C2.)
(6) In residential areas, sidewalks not adjacent to public streets may
be constructed of bituminous surfacing on a stone base. (See
Figure C3.) Bituminous walks shall be laid to the line and grade
shown on the approved construction plans and shall be constructed
in accordance with PennDOT Form 408 for ID-2 bituminous
wearing course and subbase.
B. Curbs.
(1) All curbs shall be of stone, granite or concrete construction. All
materials used in construction of curbs shall be as specified in
PennDOT Form 408 for plain cement concrete curb, granite curb or
stone curb.
(2) All concrete curbs shall be treated with an anti-spalling compound,
resistant to deicing chemicals.
(3) Vertical curbs shall be 18 inches deep, seven inches wide at the top
and eight inches wide at the base. The distance from the top of the
curb to the flow line of the gutter shall be eight inches. (See Figure
A.)
(4) Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with PennDOT Form 408
for the applicable type curb, except as noted.
(5) To provide for driveways, depressions in the curb may be
constructed and finished during the time of construction. The curb
shall be depressed to 11/2 inches above the street surface for
driveways. (See Figure D.)
(6) If changes must be made to driveway locations, the existing curb
depression shall be completely removed and replaced with the
standard vertical curb. Any damage to the street paving resulting
from the removal of the existing driveway depression shall be
repaired to the satisfaction of the Township.
(7) At all intersections with curbs, the curbs shall be constructed with
a smooth, continuous radius, with expansion joints provided at the
beginning and end of all radii.
C. Curb cut ramps.
(1) Curb cut ramps shall be constructed of concrete as specified in
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) Form 408
for cement concrete sidewalks.
§ 176-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-11
1:313
§ 176-12. Plan submission; contractor or developer responsibilities.
(2) Curb cut ramps shall have a minimum width of two feet six inches
and a maximum grade of 17%. (See Figure E1.)
(3) A one-half-inch curb face with a tolerance of 1/8 inch in the ramp
width portion of the curb cut shall be provided. (See Figure E2.)
(4) The concrete shall be a minimum of four inches thick on a four-inch
subbase as required for sidewalks. (See Figure C1.) The surface
texture of the ramp should be rougher than the texture used on the
surrounding sidewalk and be obtained by a course brooming,
transverse to the slope of the ramp.
(5) A one-fourth-inch expansion joint shall be required where the ramp
joins any rigid pavement or structure. The top of the joint filler shall
be flush with the adjacent concrete.
(6) Care should be taken to assure a uniform grade on the ramp, free of
sags and abrupt grade changes.
(7) The pedestrian crosswalk lines at intersections with curb cut ramps
shall be as shown in Figure B.
A. Plans for construction, reconstruction or alteration of any sidewalks,
curbs or curb cut ramps required by this article, except those included
as part of an approved subdivision or land development plan, shall be
filed with the Codes Enforcement Office during normal business hours
and at no other time.
B. Plans submitted for approval shall consist of four clear blue- or blackline
prints, all of which shall be filed with the Township.
C. The plans shall include the following:
(1) The name and address of the property owner or developer and the
contractor responsible for construction.
(2) A map providing sufficient detail to show the location of the work
within the Township.
(3) A plan providing sufficient detail to show the dimensional location
of the work with regard to existing improvements, property lines
and rights-of-way.
(4) A profile showing the elevation of proposed sidewalks and curbs in
relationship to the existing street elevations. Elevations shall be
shown at twenty-five-foot stations.
(5) Cross sections and details as necessary to indicate that the
proposed facility complies with the design standards and
construction specifications of this article.
§ 176-11 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 176-12
1:314
§ 176-13. Maintenance.
D. The Township shall act on all submissions within 10 calendar days from
the date of submission of complete plans.
E. The contractor shall notify the Township for final inspection of elevation
stakes prior to installing construction materials.
F. Any monuments or property corners which would be covered or
disturbed by the construction shall be reset by a licensed surveyor at
the contractor's expense.
G. The contractor shall clean and remove from the project and adjacent
property all surplus and discarded materials, equipment and temporary
structures within 48 hours after completion of the work.
H. Suitable barricades shall be placed around the work area in such a
manner as to protect both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Such
barricades shall be properly lighted during the night hours.
I. When construction covers only curbs, it shall be the duty of the
contractor to restore all damaged sidewalks, lawn areas, landscaping,
curb cut ramps and street paving. The foundation of the facility shall be
thoroughly compacted before the facility is replaced.
J. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to relocate all existing
utilities which shall be affected by or which shall affect the installation
of sidewalks and also to obtain necessary permits.
A. It is the obligation of the adjacent property owner to maintain
sidewalks, curbs and mowing strips and eliminate any conditions which,
in the opinion of the Township, may be a hazard to the public. The
following conditions shall be considered sufficient cause for requiring
repair or replacement of sidewalks or curbs:
(1) Movement out of vertical alignment in excess of 11/4 inches
resulting in an abrupt change in height of the walking surface
which causes a tripping hazard or permits the accumulation of
stormwater.
(2) The surface is broken up, pitted or disintegrating, causing a safety
hazard.
(3) Movement out of horizontal alignment creating a safety hazard or
drainage problem.
B. The Township shall determine the extent of repairs necessary to
eliminate hazards. When the repair work includes the removal of
sidewalk, the removal or cutback shall only be done with a saw, and the
sidewalk replacement shall follow a neat, straight line in joining old
work.
§ 176-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-13
1:315
§ 176-14. Modifications of requirements. [Added 6-20-1994 by Ord.
No. 94-17]
C. Where the existing condition to be repaired includes a drainage
depression in the sidewalk surface, every attempt shall be made to
replace the depression with a drain pipe under the sidewalk.
A. The requirement for sidewalks and curbs may be modified by the Board
of Supervisors. Modifications of these requirements shall not nullify the
intent and purpose of this article, and the Board of Supervisors shall not
grant modifications unless the request complies with each of the six
conditions listed below:
(1) Where sidewalks and curbs are deemed inconsistent with the intent
of this article.
(2) Where unique physical circumstances or conditions exist providing
no possibility that sidewalks or curbs can be installed.
(3) Where the need for a modification has not been created by the
actions of the applicant.
(4) Where the modification, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the transportation network or land development
activities existing in the vicinity of the request.
(5) Where the modification, if granted, will not impair either
pedestrian movement or roadway drainage.
(6) Where the modification, if granted, will represent the minimum
deviation from the requirements of this article that will afford relief
to the applicant.
B. Applications for any modification of these requirements shall be
submitted in writing. The applicant shall state fully the grounds and
facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based,
the provision or provisions of this Code involved and the minimum
modification necessary.
C. The applicant shall submit a plan and detail providing for the
alternative design should the request for modification be granted.
D. The request for modifications shall be reviewed by the Township
Planning Staff, Township Engineer and the Township Planning
Commission. Advisory comments from these reviews shall be provided
to the Board of Supervisors for consideration. In granting a
modification, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards as it deems necessary.
E. The Board of Supervisors may consider requests for modifications in
conjunction with the associated subdivision or land development plans
when applicable.
§ 176-13 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 176-14
1:316
§ 176-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates or permits a violation
of this article, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in the
enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of
the determination of the violation by the District Justice and/or Court. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
F. The Township shall keep a written record of all action on all requests for
modifications.
§ 176-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-15
1:317

ARTICLE III
Street Excavating and Tunneling
[Adopted 11-7-1988 by Ord. No. 88-16 (Art. 903 of the 1960 Code)]
§ 176-16. Compliance.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform any work
in any street, highway, sidewalk or other public right-of-way involving the
placing of utility facilities or other structures or opening of the surface
without first obtaining a permit from the Township or without complying
with the provisions of this article or in violation of a variance from the terms
of any such permit.
§ 176-17. Permit applications.
A. Applications for such permits shall be made upon the Township form to
the Codes Enforcement Office, and shall contain:
(1) A description of the location of the intended excavation, tunnel, or
installation;
(2) The size of the excavation, tunnel or installation;
(3) The purpose of the excavation, tunnel or installation;
(4) Three sets of final design plans complying with the regulations of
the Pennsylvania One Call Law, and showing the dsign serial
number, the location and pertinent dimensions of the opening, the
proposed excavation or installation and related highway features;
[Amended 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 11-08]
(5) The name of the person, firm or corporation doing the actual
excavating or installation work; and
(6) The name of the person, firm or corporation for whom the work is
being done.
B. Applications for such permits shall be accompanied by:
(1) A check or money order, payable to the Township, in the
appropriate amount, as set forth in § 176-18 (relating to permit
fees);
(2) A maintenance bond as set forth in § 176-21F (relating to
requirements for a maintenance bond); and
(3) A hold harmless and indemnification agreement as set forth in
§ 176-21E (relating to requirements for a hold harmless and
indemnification agreement).
C. Information provided in applications must be accurate. Section 4904 of
the Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 (relating to unsworn falsification
to authorities), makes it a misdemeanor of the second degree for a
§ 176-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-17
1:319
§ 176-18. Permit fees.
person to mislead a public servant in performing an official function by
making any written false statement which the person does not believe
to be true.
D. The Township will examine and determine the genuineness, regularity
and legality of every application and may reject any application if not
satisfied as to its genuineness, regularity or legality or the truth of any
statement contained in the application. The Township may also make
such investigation and require such additional information as it deems
necessary.
A. Permit issuance fees shall be used to defray costs incurred by the
Township in reviewing and processing the application and plans,
including the preliminary review of the site location identified in the
application, and issuing and processing the permit. The issuance fee
shall be as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
B. General permit inspection fees shall be used to defray costs incurred by
the Township in inspections of permitted work or subsequent
inspections, or both, after the permitted work has been completed, to
ensure compliance with the permit and the provisions of this article.
(1) Underground facilities (for example: pipelines, buried cable with
pedestals, conduit, manholes, headwalls, inlet, and grate). This fee
is calculated on the total linear feet of the facility or facilities being
permitted within the right or way regardless of whether the surface
is opened.
(a) Physically connected facility or facilities (first 50 feet or
fraction thereof) (each section): as set forth from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
(b) Additional physically connected facilities (each 100 feet or
fraction thereof): as set forth from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Surface openings of less than 25 square feet (for example: service
connections performed independently of underground facility
installation, pipe line repairs) (each opening): as set forth from time
to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Aboveground facilities (for example: poles or guys or anchors if
installed independently of poles):
(a) Up to 10 physically connected aboveground facilities (each
continuous group): as set forth from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 176-17 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 176-18
1:320
§ 176-19. Issuance of permits.
§ 176-20. Emergency work.
(b) Additional aboveground physically connected facilities (each
pole with appurtenances): as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
(4) Crossings (for example: overhead tipples, conveyers or pedestrian
walkways and undergrade subways or mines): as set forth from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Upon application duly made, in accordance with the provisions of this
article, a permit will be issued by the Codes Enforcement Office, subject
to the provisions of this article and the conditions contained on the
permit and its attachments and supplements. The permit shall be the
applicant's authority to proceed with the work and shall also serve as a
receipt for the fees accompanying the application.
B. During the course of the work, inspections must be made by the
Township. The applicant must notify the Codes Enforcement Office
when the work is ready for inspection as set forth on the permit.
A. Emergency repairs involving the placing of facilities or opening of the
surface within the right-of-way may be performed prior to obtaining a
permit, provided that the following procedure is adhered to:
(1) The utility facility owner shall immediately notify the Codes
Enforcement Office by telephone when the necessity for an
emergency repair occurs during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday. Emergency work occurring at other times
shall be reported to the Codes Enforcement Office on the following
business day.
(2) Prior to opening the surface or placing utility facilities within the
right-of-way, the utility work crew shall record the following
information, in legible handwriting using indelible ink:
(a) Date emergency work is started.
(b) Time emergency work is started.
(c) Location of emergency work site.
(d) Description of emergency work.
(3) The recorded information shall be located at the work site and shall
be available for inspection by any police officer or representative of
the Township.
(4) A permit shall be applied for within five days to confirm and set
forth in detail any work performed.
§ 176-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-20
1:321
§ 176-21. General conditions.
The following conditions shall apply to permits issued under the provisions
of this article:
B. All work performed prior to the issuance of a permit shall conform to
the provisions of this article and the conditions contained on the permit.
A. The permit shall be binding on the permittee, its agents, contractors,
successors and assigns.
(1) The permittee shall be responsible for causing compliance with all
terms and conditions of the permit by its employees, agents and
contractors.
(2) The permit shall be located at the work site and shall be available
for inspection by any police officer or representative of the
Township.
(3) The permittee shall be principally liable to the Township for any
failure to comply with the provisions of this article. The principal
liability of the permittee shall not preclude the Township from
bringing any action against the permittee's contractor,
subcontractor, engineer, architect, assignee or any other person.
B. The work shall be done at such time and in such manner as shall be
consistent with the safety of the public and shall conform to all
requirements of the Township. If at any time it shall be found by the
Township that the work is not being done or has not been properly
performed, the permittee, upon being notified in writing by the
Township, shall immediately take the necessary steps, at its own
expense, to place the work in condition and conform to such
requirements. In case any dispute arises between the permittee and the
Township's inspector, the inspector shall have the authority to suspend
work until the question at issue may be referred to and be decided by
the Codes Enforcement Office.
C. Permittee responsibilities shall include the following:
(1) The permittee shall pay all costs and expenses incident to or arising
from the project, including the prescribed fees therefor, the cost of
making and maintaining temporary restoration of the disturbed
areas and making permanent restoration.
(2) In the event of failure or neglect by the permittee to perform and
comply with the permit or the provisions of this article, the
Township may immediately revoke and annul the permit and order
and direct the permittee to remove any or all structures, equipment
or property belonging to the permittee or its contractors, or both,
from the legal limits of the right-of-way and restore the same to its
former condition.
§ 176-20 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 176-21
1:322
(3) If work is stopped on a project for any reason, other than at the end
of any normal workday, and any ditch or trench, in the opinion of
the Township, remains open for an unreasonable period, the
permittee, if so directed, shall refill the ditch or trench and work
shall not be resumed until the permittee is prepared to proceed
immediately with the work to its completion.
D. Streets shall be protected by the following types of equipment:
(1) To protect the pavement and shoulders, all equipment shall have
rubber wheels or runners and shall have rubber, wood or similar
protective pads between the outriggers and the surface unless
otherwise authorized by the permit.
(2) In the event that other than rubber-equipped machinery is
authorized for use, the pavement, shoulders and sidewalks shall be
protected by the use of matting, wood or other suitable protective
material having a minimum thickness of four inches, unless the
permit requires the permittee to repave the roadway full width.
(3) If the equipment damages the pavement, shoulders or sidewalks,
the permittee shall restore them to their former condition at the
expense of the permittee.
E. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the permittee shall enter into an
agreement to fully indemnify and save harmless and defend, if
requested, the Township, its agents and employees of and from all
liability for damages or injury occurring to any person or persons or
property through or in consequence of any act or omission of any
contractor, agent, servant, employee or person engaged or employed in,
about or upon the work by, at the instance or with the approval or
consent of the permittee; from any failure of the permittee or any such
person to comply with the permit or the provisions of this article; and,
for a period of two years after completion of the permitted work, from
the failure of the street in the immediate area of the work performed
under the permit where there is no similar failure of the street beyond
the area adjacent to the area of the permitted work.
F. No permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor has
deposited, with the Codes Enforcement Office, on the form provided by
the Township, a bond in the sum of not less than $10,000 conditioned to
indemnify the Township for maintenance of the immediate area wherein
the tunnel or excavation was made for a period of two years from the
date of permanent restoration.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection F(2) of this section, each $10,000
bond may be used as security for not more than five openings.
(2) In the event that a street excavation opening would necessitate
overlaying any portion of the street pursuant to § 176-22, the
$10,000 bond used as security for such a project may not be used
as security for any other project.
§ 176-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-21
1:323
§ 176-22. Special conditions for subsurface operations.
G. The permittee shall, upon request, submit to the Codes Enforcement
Office a certificate or certificates of insurance for public liability and
property damage, in form and amount satisfactory to the Township, to
cover any loss that may be incurred for or on account of any matter,
cause or installation of the permitted structures or facilities.
H. As long as the permittee operates and leaves in place any structures or
facilities in, upon or along the right-of-way, the permittee shall maintain
and keep them in good order and repair.
I. If at any time the structure or facility shall become damaged from any
cause whatsoever, the permittee shall have it removed, repaired or
otherwise made safe immediately upon notification from the Township.
J. If there is a failure of the street, including slope, or any other
appurtenance thereto in the immediate area of the permitted work
within two years after completion of the permitted work and there is no
similar failure of the street beyond the immediate area of the permitted
work, the permittee shall have absolute responsibility to make all
temporary and permanent restoration, including restoration of the
immediate area if it has failed.
K. Approval by an inspector of the Township of all or part of any permitted
work shall not constitute acknowledgment that the work was performed
in accordance with the permit, nor shall such approval of the inspector
act as a release of the permittee or waiver by the Township of its right
to seek performance or restitution from the permittee.
A. Drilling, boring, driving or tunneling across improved areas shall
comply with the following conditions:
(1) When crossing under any improved area, the opening for a utility
facility shall be drilled, bored, driven or tunneled on a horizontal
plane at a minimum depth of three feet from the surface of the
street and its swale ditches to the top of the opening.
(a) If the facility is more than 12 inches in diameter, the bored
cylindrical space surrounding the facility shall be filled with
grout.
(b) Wet boring shall be prohibited.
(2) No openings for the purpose of placing utility facilities or other
structures under improved area by drilling, boring, driving or
tunneling shall be made closer than three feet to the edge of the
roadway, unless the permit authorizes a lesser clearance.
(3) Facilities and other structures crossing under the improved area
shall be constructed so as to ensure the safety of the traveling
§ 176-21 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 176-22
1:324
public and to preclude the necessity of entering upon the improved
area to effect future maintenance or replacement.
B. Trenching across improved areas shall be performed by one of the
following two methods:
(1) Utility facility placed in one piece across street.
(a) Traffic shall be routed over 1/2 of the pavement width.
(b) The closed half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth and bridged with steel plates.
(c) Traffic shall be shifted to the bridged half of the pavement.
(d) The remaining half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth.
(e) The facility shall be placed full width.
(f) The open trench shall be backfilled and restored half-width in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
(g) Traffic shall be shifted to the restored half of the pavement.
(h) The bridging shall be removed and the remaining half of the
trench shall be backfilled and restored in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(2) Utility facility placed in more than one piece across street.
(a) Traffic shall be routed over 1/2 of the pavement width.
(b) The closed half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth, the facility placed and the trench backfilled
and restored in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(c) Traffic shall be shifted to the restored half of the pavement.
(d) The remaining half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth, the facility placed and the trench backfilled
and restored in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(3) If it is impossible to trench across an improved area without closing
the street to all traffic, the street shall not be closed for more than a
period of eight consecutive hours.
(4) All trenches left open at the end of the workday shall be marked by
lighted barricades and bridged with steel plates.
C. Requirements for trench openings parallel to a street shall be as
follows:
(1) Trench openings for utility facilities and other structures shall be
made so that the near edge of the opening is at least three feet
§ 176-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-22
1:325
outside the edge of roadway unless the permit authorizes a lesser
clearance, with a minimum depth of three feet from the surface to
the top of the facility.
(2) No trench opening shall be made for a distance of more than 200
feet at any one time, unless authorized by the permit. In addition,
no more than 40 feet of trench shall be left open on the shoulder of
a street at the end of any workday, unless authorized by the permit.
(3) All trenches left open at the end of the workday shall be marked by
lighted barricades and bridged with steel plates.
D. Except for emergency repairs of utility facilities, work shall be stopped
prior to peak traffic hours that exist on a particular street on a
particular day. Steel plates or bridging shall be placed over all openings
made within the improved area which are less than six feet in either
length or width when work is stopped. The plates or bridging shall be
extended to a minimum of 18 inches from each edge of the opening and
shall be secured in a safe manner.
E. The responsibility of the permittee for disposition of the materials shall
be as follows:
(1) The permittee shall keep the improved area free of all material
which may be deposited on the street by vehicles during the
performance of the work authorized by the permit.
(2) The permittee shall be responsible for controlling dust conditions
created by its own operations.
(3) All excess material and material that is not suitable for backfill
shall be removed and disposed of outside the right-of-way as the
work progresses.
(4) All retained suitable material shall be placed or stored on the side
of the operation farthest from traffic unless otherwise authorized
by permit, and in such a manner that there will be no interference
with the flow of water in any gutter, drain, pipe, culvert, ditch or
waterway.
F. All openings made in the improved area shall be backfilled by the
permittee in accordance with the following minimum standards.
(1) The opening shall be backfilled using one of two possible methods:
(a) The opening shall first be backfilled with material suitable for
insulation to a height not to exceed one foot over the top of the
facility, compacted in not more than four-inch layers, and then
backfilled with 2A subbase aggregate or fine material (Type A
or better stone) and compacted throughout its full width in
layers not to exceed four inches if a tamper is used or in layers
not to exceed eight inches if approved vibratory compaction
equipment is used; or
§ 176-22 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 176-22
1:326
(b) The opening shall be backfilled entirely with 2A subbase
aggregate or fine material (Type A or better stone) and
compacted throughout its full width in layers not to exceed
four inches if a tamper is used or in layers not to exceed eight
inches if approved vibratory equipment is used.
G. Base and surface restoration of pavement shall be as follows:
(1) Prior to replacement of the base course, one foot from each edge of
the trench shall be sawed or cut, in a neat straight line, to the
bottom elevation of the existing base course, and the detached
material shall be removed. Drilling shall not be permitted.
(a) The permanent base course shall consist of bituminous
concrete at a minimum depth of six inches on minor streets and
a minimum of eight inches on collector and arterial street.
(b) The bituminous binder of not less than six or eight inches of
BCBC or binder shall then be applied, followed by the wearing
course of not less than 11/2 inches of ID-2.
(c) After application of the wearing course, the edges of the
opening shall be sealed with AC/20 sealer or equivalent, a
width of not less than six inches.
(2) At the option of the permittee, a temporary restoration may be
done prior to permanent restoration. Prior to making the
permanent restoration, one foot from each edge of the opening
shall be sawed or cut, in a neat straight line, to the bottom
elevation of the existing base course, and the detached material
shall be removed. Drilling shall not be permitted.
(a) Temporary restoration, if made, shall be kept in place for a
maximum of 90 days. After backfilling, as provided in
Subsection F of this section, the opening shall be patched with
bituminous concrete to the original grade. If supplies of
bituminous concrete are not available or it is impractical to
install due to the season of the year, A and B patch (cold patch)
may be substituted.
(b) If neither bituminous concrete nor A and B patch are available,
the opening shall be backfilled as provided in Subsection F of
this section and the opening shall be marked by lighted
barricades and bridged with steel plates until stabilized with
blacktop.
(c) Before the maximum ninety-day-period expires, the temporary
restoration shall be removed and permanent restoration made
in accordance with this section.
H. Upon completion of temporary and permanent pavement restoration,
the restoration date shall be painted either on or immediately adjacent
§ 176-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-22
1:327
to the restored opening. The painted dates shall indicate the month and
year numerically. The numerals shall be at least six inches in height.
The paint shall be durable and wear-resistant and shall be color-coded
as follows: blue (water), yellow (gas-petroleum), red (electric), orange
(communications) and green (sewer).
I. Appurtenances to underground installations shall include:
(1) The top of every manhole, valve box or other access to the facility
shall be at the same elevation as the surface in which it is located.
(2) The surface surrounding manhole or valve covers located in
shoulders shall be paved in such a manner to prevent washouts.
(3) All manholes, including those cast in place, shall be constructed in
compliance with current industry standards.
J. Additional restoration shall include the following:
(1) All disturbed portions of the street, including all appurtenances
and structures such as guardrails or drain pipes, shall be restored
to a condition equal to that which existed before the start of the
work authorized by the permit.
(2) If the permittee opens any street pavement having a bituminous
concrete surface, whether to install a new facility or to modify an
existing facility or for any reason other than to make up to five
emergency openings in the street pavement pursuant to § 176-20
(relating to emergency work), and the wearing course is less than
five years old, the permittee shall, in addition to the restoration
conditions outlined in the permit and in this section, overlay the
street pavement in accordance with the following conditions:
(a) When a longitudinal opening longer than 10 feet and wider
than three feet is made in the street pavement, the permittee
shall overlay the traffic lanes in which the opening was made
for the entire length of highway that was opened, as directed
by the Township.
(b) When two or more transverse trench openings are made in the
street pavement less than 100 feet apart, the permittee shall
overlay all traffic lanes in which the openings were made for
the entire length of street between such openings, as directed
by the Township.
(c) When five or more emergency openings have been made by the
permittee in the street pavement less than 100 feet apart
within five years of the last resurfacing, the permittee shall
overlay all traffic lanes in which the openings were made for
the entire length of street between such openings.
(d) Where disturbed lanes adjacent to undisturbed lanes are
overlaid, the edge of the disturbed lane shall be saw cut to a
§ 176-22 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 176-22
1:328
§ 176-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates or permits a violation
of this article, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in the
enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of
the determination of the violation by the District Justice and/or Court. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
depth of 1 1/2 inches for the length of the opening and the
detached material removed, in order to ensure a smooth joint.
A full width overlay may be performed instead of saw cutting
and stripping the disturbed lane or lanes.
(e) Where disturbed lanes adjacent to shoulders are overlaid, the
shoulder shall be raised so that the overlaid pavement and
shoulder edges are at the same elevation.
(3) Regardless of the age of the wearing course:
(a) When both longitudinal and transverse trench openings are
made in the street pavement, the Township may require the
permittee to overlay all traffic lanes in which such openings
were made for the entire length of street that was opened; or
(b) When five or more openings are made by the same permittee in
the street pavement less than 100 feet apart, the Township
may require the permittee to overlay the entire disturbed area.
K. Proposed subsurface utilities shall be designed and installed
maintaining a ten-foot minimum horizontal separation and a three-foot
minimum vertical separation from all existing sanitary sewer facilities
and appurtenances, except sanitary sewer laterals and building sewers,
unless approved otherwise in writing by the Township. Proposed
subsurface utilities shall be designed and installed maintaining a fivefoot
minimum horizontal separation and an eighteen-inch minimum
vertical separation from all existing sanitary sewer laterals and building
sewers unless approved otherwise in writing by the Township. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to prevent proposed subsurface
utilities from crossing existing Sanitary Sewer Facilities. However,
when proposed subsurface utilities must cross Sanitary Sewer
Facilities, said crossing shall occur at a 90° angle, unless approved
otherwise in writing by the Township. [Added 9-20-2011 by Ord. No.
11-08]
§ 176-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-23
1:329

ARTICLE IV
Street Address Requirements
[Adopted 8-2-2005 by Ord. No. 05-14]
§ 176-24. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to establish a standard for the visual display
of street address numbers and to require that said numbers be prominently
displayed on occupied buildings.
§ 176-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, certain terms are defined as follows:
CLEARLY VISIBLE — Displayed in a manner that allows the street address
number to be clearly seen, day or night, from the street in front of the
building, unobstructed by trees, shrubs, vegetation or other structures upon
the property.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any building or structure for which an occupancy
permit is required.
STREET ADDRESS NUMBER — The number that has been legally assigned
to a residence, apartment building, business, or other occupied building
for the purpose of identification, including use by the United States Postal
Service for the delivery of mail.
§ 176-26. Street address number required.
Every occupied building shall have, and shall be maintained thereon, the
legally assigned street address number, upon or near each entrance from a
street of the Township or state, or from any other access way in the manner
and location designated by this article.
§ 176-27. Placement of street address number.
A. A street address number shall be affixed to all occupied single-family
residential buildings by the owner or occupant. Such number shall be
prominently placed on or adjacent to the main entry door that feces the
public or private street providing access to the building.
B. A street address number shall be affixed to all occupied multi-tenant
commercial, office, or industrial buildings with front and rear entrances
by the owner or occupant of all establishments contained therein. Such
number shall be prominently displayed on or immediately adjacent to
both front and rear doors.
C. A street address number for an occupied building that is not visible
from a public or private street shall, in addition to Subsection A or B, be
prominently displayed by the owner or occupant at the intersection of
the driveway entrance to the occupied building and the main roadway.
§ 176-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-27
1:331
§ 176-28. Time limitation for installation, change, etc.
A street address number shall be installed prior to occupancy of any
occupied building. A street address number shall be installed, altered,
substituted, or removed within 30 days after receipt by the owner or
occupant of an occupied building, or any person or agent in charge thereof,
of a written notice from the Township containing instructions for
compliance with these regulations.
§ 176-29. Minimum dimensions and characteristics.
The minimum dimensions of a street address number designated by the
Township shall be as follows:
§ 176-30. Display of street address numbers.
D. For any business located within an occupied mall or shopping center
building having a common street address and multiple entranceways,
the owner or occupant shall affix, on or adjacent to each door, the name
of the business accessed through each rear door or entry way in letters
which are not less than four inches in height, with a minimum stroke
width of 1/2 inch, and contrasting in color with the background on
which they are affixed. The street address number shall be displayed in
Arabic numerals.
A. A street address number affixed to an occupied building shall be
displayed at least 48 inches from the ground. The number shall be a
minimum of four inches in height, with a minimum stroke width of 1/2
inch, and contrasting in color with the background on which they are
affixed. A street address number shall be displayed in Arabic numerals.
B. Any occupied building not visible from a public or private street shall
place a street address number on a post or other means of support at
least 36 inches above the ground at the main driveway entrance, so as
to be easily visible from the street. Said number shall not be less than
four inches in height, with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch, and
contrasting in color with the background on which they are affixed. A
street address number shall be displayed in Arabic numerals.
C. Design (including shape and style), as well as location of a street
address number, shall be such that it is legible and easily readable.
A. Every person or legal entity having ownership, possession, custody,
control or charge of any occupied building shall maintain the clearly
visible display of a street address number as required by these
regulations.
B. Should at least one street address number be affixed to an occupied
building in conformance with these regulations, then additional
noncompliant street address numbers may also be affixed to the
occupied building or placed upon the property of the occupied building.
§ 176-27 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 176-30
1:332
§ 176-31. Enforcement.
§ 176-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation who or which violates any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $50 nor more than $600, plus the costs of prosecution. Each
day during which the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
Owners or occupants are reminded that said additional street address
numbers shall comply with the Lower Paxton Township Zoning
Ordinance.
C. In the event that a street address number, affixed to an occupied
building prior to the effective date of these regulations, is not in
compliance as required herein, it may remain in place until such time as
either modified by the owner or occupant or until such time as the
owner or occupant receives written notice from the Township indicating
that the street address number is in violation of these regulations.
A. The enforcement of these regulations as they pertain to existing
occupied buildings shall be the responsibility of the Lower Paxton
Township Police Department.
B. The enforcement of these regulations, as they pertain to occupied
buildings for which a building permit has been issued after the effective
date of these regulations, shall be the responsibility of the Lower
Paxton Township Community Development Department. No certificate
of occupancy shall be issued for an occupied building under said
building permit until such time as a street address number is installed
in accordance with these regulations.
§ 176-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 176-32
1:333
Chapter 180
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
§ 176-32 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 176-32
1:334
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 180-101. Short title.
These regulations, rules and standards for planning, subdividing and
developing land within Lower Paxton Township, including procedures for
application, administration, and penalties for violation, shall be known,
cited, and referred to as "Chapter 180, Lower Paxton Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance of 2010."
§ 180-102. Purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter shall be to guide and regulate the
harmonious planning, subdivision, and development of land in order to
promote and protect the public health, safety, convenience, comfort,
prosperity, and general welfare of the residents of Lower Paxton Township
by:
A. Ensuring the orderly and effective integration of subdivisions and land
development into the development of the Township,
B. Ensuring sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation.
C. Ensuring conformance of subdivision plans with public improvement
plans and programs.
D. Ensuring coordination of inter-municipal public improvement plans and
programs.
E. Ensuring the protection of water resources and drainageways and other
natural features.
F. Ensuring the efficient movement of traffic.
G. Ensuring the management of stormwater runoff problem areas.
H. Ensuring the equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing
uniform standards and procedures.
I. Ensuring the greater health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
Township.
J. Ensuring the efficient and orderly extension of community services and
facilities at minimum cost and maximum convenience.
K. Providing for and protecting amenity, convenience, future
governmental economic, practical, social and cultural facilities,
development and growth, as well as the improvement of governmental
procedures and functions.
L. Providing uses of land and structures, type and location of streets,
public grounds, and other facilities.
§ 180-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-102
1:335
§ 180-103. Authority to review and approve.
§ 180-104. Application of regulations.
M. Minimizing such problems as may presently exist or which may be
foreseen.
N. Complying with all provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code25 and generally implementing the Comprehensive Plan
of the Township.
A. The Lower Paxton Township Board of Supervisors shall have the
authority to approve or disapprove all preliminary and final subdivision
or land development plan applications as required herein.
B. The Lower Paxton Township Planning Commission is hereby designated
as the agency which shall review and make recommendations on all
subdivision and land development plan applications as required herein,
prior to action on the same by the Board of Supervisors.
C. All applications for subdivision and land development shall be
forwarded, upon receipt by Lower Paxton Township, to the Dauphin
County Planning Commission with appropriate application and fees
submitted and paid by the applicant, for review and report. The Board
of Supervisors shall not approve such applications until the county
report is received or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the
application was forwarded to the County Planning Commission. As
evidence of their review and report, officials of the County Planning
Commission will sign final plans which have been formally approved by
the Township before such plans are presented for recording at the
Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds office.
A. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land
located in Lower Paxton Township shall be effected, and no street,
sanitary sewer, water main, or other facilities in connection therewith
shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or
travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings thereon, unless
and until a final subdivision or land development plan as herein
required has been approved by the Board of Supervisors and publicly
recorded in the manner prescribed herein.
B. No lot in a subdivision may be sold; no permit to erect or alter any
building upon land in a subdivision or land development may be issued;
and no building may be erected or altered in a subdivision or land
development, unless and until a final subdivision or land development
plan has been approved by the Board of Supervisors and recorded, and
until completion of the construction of all of the required improvements
or adequate financial security has been provided as required in the
manner prescribed herein.
25.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 180-102 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-104
1:336
§ 180-105. Interpretation; conflict with other provisions.
C. Unit or condominium land development of real property is included
within the meaning of land development as defined herein and must
comply with these regulations. Such compliance shall include, but not
be limited to, the filing of preliminary and final plans, payment of
established fees and charges, location of each structure and clear
definition of each unit, public easements, common areas, improvements
and all easements appurtenant to each unit.
D. All subdivision and land development plans are subject to zoning
regulations as they apply to use and density requirements, setbacks,
height, parking and other such zoning related requirements.
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, said
provisions shall be held as the minimum requirements for the
promotion of public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and greater
welfare.
B. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to conflict with a
provision of the Zoning Ordinance of Lower Paxton Township, the more
restrictive standard shall apply unless the context of the Zoning
Ordinance intends otherwise. In any case where a provision of this
chapter is found to conflict with a provision of a zoning, building, fire,
safety or health ordinance or code of Lower Paxton Township or law,
rule or regulation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the provisions
which establish the more restrictive standard for the promotion of the
health and safety of the people shall prevail.
C. In the case of any conflicts, discrepancies, ambiguities or other similar
situations requiring interpretation, the Board of Supervisors of Lower
Paxton Township shall have the sole duty and authority to interpret the
provisions of this chapter. The Board of Supervisors may however, rely
upon the advice and technical guidance of those officials of the
Township having regulatory duties in reviewing and enforcing this
chapter.
D. The exhibits attached to this chapter are for illustrative purposes only
and are subject to change by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 180-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-105
1:337

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 180-201. Definitions.
A. All terms not defined in this chapter but which are defined in the Lower
Paxton Township Zoning Ordinance shall have the meanings therein
defined. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall,
for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
C. Defined terms.
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activity and the natural
processes at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
ACCELERATED RUNOFF — Runoff occurring at rates in excess of rates
occurring under natural, undisturbed conditions.
AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS — An enterprise that is actively
engaged in the commercial production and preparation for market of
crops, livestock and livestock products in the production, harvesting
and preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic,
horticultural, silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities. The
term includes an enterprise that implements changes in production
practices and procedures or types of crops, livestock, livestock
products or commodities produced consistent with practices and
procedures that are normally engaged by farmers or are consistent
with technological development within the agricultural industry.
Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an
agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
§ 180-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-201
1:339
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who
has filed an application for development including his heirs, successors
and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including, but not limited to, an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat
or plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AS-BUILT PLANS — Plans prepared and certified by a professional land
surveyor depicting the exact location, orientation, and elevation of all
site improvements which exist as a result of construction activities. Asbuilt
plans are also referred to as "record drawings" or "record plans."
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The 100-year flood elevation as indicated
in a Flood Insurance Study (FIS), as revised, for the Township of
Lower Paxton, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania, prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration,
that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that
has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BMPs (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
from earth disturbance activities; to meet state water quality
requirements; to promote groundwater recharge; and to otherwise
meet the purposes of this chapter. BMPs include, but are not limited to:
infiltration facilities, filter strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet
ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, forested buffers, sand filters,
and detention basins.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Lower
Paxton Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established
by plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or
built upon as a unit.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
required minimum distance between any principal or accessory
structure and adjacent right-of-way, and the line defining side and rear
yards, where required.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street which is improved, designated or
intended for vehicular use.
CHAIRMAN — The Chairman of the Lower Paxton Township Board of
Supervisors.
CHANNEL — A passage for water (or other fluids) to flow through.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by
moderate to large floods.
§ 180-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-201
1:340
CHANNEL, MAIN — The downstream later receiving channel
designated in the Act 167 Plans that accepts the discharge of
undetained post-development peak runoff without causing any harm for
the given design storm.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular shaped portion of land
established at street or driveway intersections in which nothing is
erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as to
limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the
intersection.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Land amenities, parts of buildings, central
services and utilities, and any other elements and facilities owned and
used by all unit owners and are designated as common elements. These
elements may include, but are not limited to:
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel, or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water within a development site
and designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas
set aside for public facilities.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for
common ownership solely by the owners for those portions. Real estate
is not a condominium unless the undivided interest in the common
elements are vested in the unit owners.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION — The community association which
administers and maintains the common property and common elements
of a condominium.
The land on which the building is located and portions of the
building which are not included in a unit.
(1)
The foundation, structural parts, supports, main walls, roofs,
basements, halls, corridors, lobbies, stairways and entrances and
exits of the building.
(2)
(3) The yards, parking area and driveways.
Portions of the land and building used exclusively for the
management, operation or maintenance of the common elements.
(4)
(5) Installations of all central services and utilities.
All other elements of the building necessary or convenient to its
existence, management, operation, maintenance and safety or
normally in common use.
(6)
(7) Such other facilities as are designated as common elements.
§ 180-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-201
1:341
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Dauphin County Conservation
District.
COUNTY — County of Dauphin, Pennsylvania.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way, publicly or privately owned, intended to
furnish access to pedestrians.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street open at one end for vehicular and
pedestrian access with the opposite end terminating in a vehicular
turnaround.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure, including appurtenant
works, which carries surface water under a roadway or other structure.
CURB — A cut stone, asphalt or concrete boundary usually marking the
edge of the roadway, driveway or other paved areas.
CURB CUT — The opening along the curbline at which point vehicles
may enter or leave the roadway or other paved area.
CURVE NUMBER — A numerical designation which reflects amounts of
runoff based on land use and hydrological soil group.
CUT —
DAM — Any artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or any
other fluid or semifluid or any refuse bank, fill or structure for highway,
railroad or other purposes which does or may impound water or any
other fluid or semifluid.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of occurrence and duration and used in
computing stormwater management control systems.
DESIGNEE — An agent of the governing body involved with the
administration, review or enforcement of any provisions of this chapter
by employment, contract, or memorandum of understanding.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DETENTION FACILITIES, REGIONAL — A detention facility that
detains and treats stormwater runoff for two or more development
sites, where the development sites are generally considered to be
independent and typically would contain their own separate detention
facilities.
(1) An excavation.
The difference between a point on the original ground and
designated point of lower elevation on the final grade.
(2)
(3) Also, the material removed from an excavation.
§ 180-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-201
1:342
DETENTION FOND — A vegetated pond designed to collect water
runoff for a given storm event and release it at a predetermined rate;
also known as a "dry pond."
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, earth disturbance activity, mining,
dredging or drilling operations, the placement of manufactured homes,
streets and other paving, utilities and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase
"provisions of development plan" when used in this chapter, shall mean
the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific parcel or tract of land for which a
development activity is proposed.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of
the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all
overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed toward it.
DRAINAGE —
DRAINAGE AREA — That area in which all of the surface runoff
resulting from precipitation is concentrated into a particular point of
interest.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, swale,
culvert, storm sewer or other structure designed, intended or
constructed for the purpose of diverting surface waters from or
carrying surface waters off streets, public rights-of-way, parks,
recreational areas or any parts of any subdivision or land development.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management or
drainage purposes.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, swale, culvert, storm sewer,
or other system designed, intended, or constructed for the purpose of
(1) Surface water runoff.
The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means which include runoff controls to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development, the means for preserving the water supply and the
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
(2)
§ 180-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-201
1:343
diverting surface waters from or carrying surface waters off streets,
public rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas or any part of any
subdivision or land development.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the design and analysis of
a stormwater management or drainage system, if any, to be used for a
given development site.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Pipes, swales, natural features and man-made
improvements designated to carry drainage.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch,
pipe, swale, channel, or similar depression into which surface water
flows.
DRIVEWAY — A private access drive providing access for vehicles to
a parking area, space, garage, dwelling or other structure, including
nonresidential structures.
DWELLING or DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons including
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or
more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again
being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road
maintenance, building construction and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted for the limited use of land for
public, quasi-public or private purposes.
EASEMENT, DRAINAGE — An easement required for the installation
and maintenance of storm sewers, drainage ditches, other drainage
facilities, and/or required for the preservation or maintenance of a
natural watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream.
ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL — An individual licensed and registered
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to engage in the
practice of engineering. A professional engineer may not practice land
surveying unless licensed as set forth in P.L. 534, No. 230; however, a
professional engineer may perform engineering land surveys.
ENGINEER, TOWNSHIP/MUNICIPAL — A registered professional
engineer in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania designated by the
Township to perform the duties of Engineer as herein specified.
§ 180-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-201
1:344
ENGINEERING LAND SURVEYS — Surveys for:
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The engineering specifications of
the Township regulating the installation of any required improvements
or for any facility installed by any owner, subject to public use.
EROSION — The process involving the detachment and movement of
soil or rock fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface or
channels by water, ice, wind, chemical action and gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions
resulting thereof.
EXCEPTIONAL-VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality,
which satisfies Pennsylvania Code Title 25 Environmental Protection,
Chapter 93 Water Quality Standards 93.4b(b) (relating to
antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed subdivision, land development or construction.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the ground surface prior
to excavation or filling.
FILL —
The development of any tract of land including the incidental
design of related improvements, such as line and grade extension
of roads, sewers and grading but not requiring independent
engineering judgment; providing, however, that tract perimeter
surveys shall be the function of the professional land surveyor.
(1)
The determination of the configuration or contour of the earth's
surface, or the position of fixed objects thereon or related thereto
by means of measuring lines and angles and applying the principles
of mathematics, photogrammetry or other measurement methods.
Geodetic or cadastral survey, underground survey and
hydrographic survey.
(2)
(3) Erosion and sedimentation control surveys.
(4) The determination of the quantities of materials.
(5) Tests for water percolation in soils.
The preparation of plans and specifications and estimates of
proposed work as described herein.
(6)
Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a
new location above the natural surface of the ground or on top
(1)
§ 180-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-201
1:345
FINISHED GRADE — The proposed elevation of the land surface of a
site after completion of all site preparation work.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) — An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration.
FLOOD HAZARD, AREAS OF SPECIAL — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
FLOOD, BASE (100-YEAR FLOOD) — A flood that on the average, is
likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a 1% chance of
occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year.)
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or as delineated by applicable Department of
Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration,
Flood Hazard Boundary - mapped as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to proposed and existing structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the 100-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA). In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the 100-year frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent
evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to
50 feet from the top of each of the banks of the stream.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
FUTURE — Post-development (as with future condition or runoff).
FUTURE CONDITIONS — Proposed land use.
of the stripped surface and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
The difference in elevation between a point on the original ground
and designated point of higher elevation on the final grade.
(2)
(3) The material used to make a fill.
§ 180-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-201
1:346
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY —
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Supervisors of Lower Paxton
Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
GRADE —
GRADE, EXISTING — See definition of "existing grade."
GRADE, FINISHED — See definition of "finished grade."
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually
broad and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to
convey surface water.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS MODEL CALIBRATED (Hydrologic Engineering Center
Hydrologic Modeling System) — A computer-based hydrologic model
technique adapted to the Paxton Creek, Spring Creek and Multi-Creek
Watersheds for the Act 167 Plans. The model has been calibrated by
adjusting key model input parameters.
HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface water having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania
Code, Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality
Standards, 93.4b(a).
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — See "condominium association."
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D)
according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for
bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resource Conservation
Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture defines
the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United
States and their group classification. The soils in the area of interest
may be identified from a soil survey report, which can be obtained from
the local NRCS office or Dauphin County Conservation District office.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN OR DISTRICT — Those floodplain areas
specifically designated in the Township of Lower Paxton Zoning
A right-of-way required for the expansion of existing streets to
accommodate anticipated future traffic.
(1)
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
(2)
A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in
percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
(1)
(To) Grade — To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment
or bottom of excavation.
(2)
§ 180-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-201
1:347
Ordinance (§ 203-504D) as being inundated by the 100-year flood.
Included would be areas identified as the Floodway (FW) and the Flood
Fringe (FF).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the percolation of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces
include, but are not limited to: any roof, parking, or driveway areas,
and any new streets and sidewalks. For purposes of stormwater runoff
analysis, any surface areas existing or proposed to be gravel or crushed
stone shall also be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
IMPROVEMENTS — Any man-made, immovable item which becomes
part of, is placed upon or is affixed to, real estate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A constructed device, such as a
seepage pit, trench drain or infiltration pond, designed to facilitate the
infiltration of runoff into the soil.
INLET —
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by
depressions, sinkholes, limestone towers and steep-sided hills,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks,
such as limestone or dolomites and sometimes gypsum.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
(1) A surface connection to a closed drain.
(2) A structure at the diversion end of a conduit.
(3) The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number or occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling
or single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than
(a)
(3)
§ 180-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-201
1:348
LAND/EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading,
excavating, digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or
any other activity that causes an alteration to the natural condition of
the land.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he
is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or
other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY — A street, roadway, or highway which
carries a large volume of traffic at relatively high speeds with access
controlled at designated points and not specifically from adjacent
properties.
three residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
The addition of an accessory building, where such addition
is not more than 1,000 square feet, or any accessory farm
building, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal
building. [Amended 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
(b)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the
confines of an enterprise which would be considered an
amusement park. For purposes of this subsection, an
"amusement park" is defined as tract or area used principally
as a location for permanent amusement structures or rides.
This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired acreage by an
amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area have
been approved by the proper authorities.
(c)
Where an addition of no more than 15% of the square footage
is being added to an existing building, but in no case of an
addition of more than 2,000 square feet, a building permit
and site plan approval is required to be obtained from the
appropriate officer of the Township, but submission of a land
development plan and review by the Planning Commission and
approval by the Board of Supervisors may be waived, only
when:
The building is added to the existing structure and is not
separated; and
[1]
[2] There is no change to any street or public way; and
There is no interference or substantial change to drainage
or the flow of water; and
[3]
The appropriate building officer of the Township
determines that the same is otherwise in compliance with
all zoning and land development requirements.
[4]
(d)
§ 180-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-201
1:349
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot as
shown on a subdivision plan excluding space within any street rightsof-
way, but including the area of any easement or utility right-of-way.
LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE — An interior lot having frontage on two
streets.
LOT, REVERSE-FRONTAGE — A lot extending between and having
frontage on an arterial street and a minor street, and with vehicular
access solely from the latter.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Paxton Creek, Spring Creek
or Multi-Creek watershed hydrologic models.
MAINTENANCE — Provisions to ensure proper functioning, safety,
structural integrity, weed and pest control, aesthetic appeal or any
other measures required to maintain facilities to a standard as
approved under the requirements of this chapter.
MANNING'S EQUATION (MANNING'S FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include
closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MASTER DEED — A legal instrument under which title to real estate is
conveyed and by which a condominium is created and established.
MINIMUM SEPARATION DISTANCE — The minimum distance between
the discharge of runoff from impervious surfaces and the receiving
stream, storm sewer, or property line, whichever is smaller, whether
the discharge is from a point or non-point source. It is intended to
provide ample, natural, undisturbed vegetated pervious areas to allow
for infiltration of increased volumes of runoff caused by development.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erections thereon of a single mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME, DWELLING — See definition of "dwelling, mobile
home."
MODIFIED RATIONAL METHOD — Variation of rational methodology;
used to generate hydrographs and required detention volume.
§ 180-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-201
1:350
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created
pursuant to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the
"Municipalities Authority Act of 1945."
MUNICIPALITY — Any city of the second class A or third class,
borough, incorporated town, township of the first or second class,
county of the second class through eighth class, home rule municipality,
or any similar general purpose unit of government which shall hereafter
be created by the General Assembly.
NATURAL DRAINAGE FLOW — The pattern of surface and stormwater
drainage from a particular site before the construction or installation of
improvements or prior to any grading operations.
NON-POINT-SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act, which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service [previously Soil
Conservation Service (SCS)].
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting
into any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area, which may impede,
retard or change the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or is placed where
the flow of the water might carry the same downstream to the damage
of life and property.
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes not under pressure.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — See definition of "common open space."
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Open space owned by a public agency and
maintained by it for the use and enjoyment of the general public.
OUTFALL —
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake,
tidewater, or artificial drain,
(1) The point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain;
"Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where the
municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of
the commonwealth.
(2)
§ 180-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-201
1:351
PARKING LOT STORAGE — The use of impervious parking areas as
temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during
rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of storm runoff at a
given point and time resulting from a specified storm event.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, partnership,
copartnership or corporation.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Surface such as soil which allows for the
infiltration of water to the ground.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater or other fluids.
PLAN, COMPREHENSIVE — The development policy plan (master plan)
and/or future land use plan and/or official map or other such plans, or
portions thereof, as may be adopted, pursuant to statute, for the area of
the Township in which the subdivision or land development is located.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision or land development
plan, prepared for official recording as required by statute, to define
property rights and proposed streets and other improvements. In all
cases where only one plan is required, it shall be a final plan.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision or land development
plan, in lesser detail than a final plan, showing approximate proposed
street and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of
a final plan.
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan indicating the salient existing
features of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of a
proposed subdivision or land development.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The committee duly appointed by the
Board of Supervisors of Lower Paxton Township to carry out the duties
as described herein and to make recommendations to the governing
body relative to subdivision, land development and other related
matters.
PMF (PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD) — The flood that may be
expected from the most-severe combination of critical meteorological
and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area.
The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP)
as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, or discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to: any pipe, ditch, channel, runnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa Code § 92.1.
POLLUTANT — Any introduced gas, liquid or solid that makes a
resource unfit for a specific purpose.
§ 180-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-201
1:352
POLLUTION — The presence of matter or energy whose nature,
location or quantity produces undesired environmental effects.
PRESENT — Pre proposed development (as with present conditions or
runoff).
PRESENT CONDITIONS — Refer to "existing conditions."
PRINCIPAL BUILDING or PRINCIPAL USE — The basic or predominant
purpose for which a building or land area is occupied or intended to be
occupied as opposed to accessory or incidental uses; usually classifiable
as residential, commercial, industrial or public in nature.
PRIVATE ROAD — A legally established right-of-way, other than a public
street, which provides the primary pedestrian and vehicular access to
one or more lots and constructed to the design standards contained in
this chapter.
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS — Persons who provide expert or
professional advice, including, but not limited to, architects, attorneys,
certified public accountants, engineers, geologists, land surveyors,
landscape architects or planners.
PROFILE LINE — The profile of the center line of the finished surface
of the street, which shall be midway between the sidelines of the street.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activity
in the Township is planned, conducted or maintained.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Board of Supervisors intended to inform and/or obtain public
comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of
July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once a week for two consecutive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Such
notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular
nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication
shall not be less than seven days from the hearing.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — A professional engineer licensed by
the Pennsylvania Department of State, and other persons licensed or
otherwise qualified by law to perform the work required by this chapter.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas.
(1)
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities.
(2)
(3) Publicly owned and operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 180-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-201
1:353
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate
peak flow.
REAL ESTATE — Any fee, leasehold or other estate or interest in, over
and under land, including structures, fixtures and other improvements
and interests by which, by custom, usage or law, pass with a
conveyance of land though not described in the contract of sale or
instrument of conveyance. Real estate includes parcels with or without
upper or lower boundaries and spaces that may be filled with air or
water.
REDEVELOPMENT — Development activities on land which has
previously been developed.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions, which impact
upon proper management of stormwater runoff and which are governed
by Chapter 170, as specified in § 170-105C.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface
waters or the Township's storm sewer system, or five acres or more
regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on
any portion of, part, or during any stage of, a larger common plan of
development.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The 100-year base flood
elevation as either indicated in a Flood Insurance Study (FIS), as
revised, for the Township of Lower Paxton, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, or, in the absence of a Flood
Insurance Study, the 100-year flood elevation computed using
acceptable hydrologic and hydraulic engineering principles without
respect to a computed floodway.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of the existing conditions peak
rate of stormwater runoff for a development site to which the future
conditions peak rate of runoff must be controlled to protect
downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — Those subwatershed areas in which postdevelopment
flows must be reduced to a certain percentage of
predevelopment flows as required to meet the plan requirements and
the goals of Act 167.
RESERVE STRIP — A strip of land adjacent to a street intended to
control access to the street from an adjacent property.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored
and not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released
from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event
of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the twentyfive-
year return period rainfall or runoff event would be expected to
§ 180-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-201
1:354
recur on the average once every 25 years, or have one out of 25 (4%)
chance of occurring in any given year.
REVERSE-FRONTAGE LOT — See definition of "lot, reverse frontage."
RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREET — A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic
and/or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or however
designated.
RISER — A vertical pipe or structure extending from the bottom of a
pond that is used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a
specified design storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches, and other similar activities.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
RUNOFF CAPTURE VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured
(retained) and not released into surface waters of the commonwealth
during or after a storm event.
SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM (COMMUNITY) — A sanitary sewage
collection method serving more than one lot within a subdivision or land
development owned and operated by a private entity in which sewage
is carried from the site by a system of pipes to a privately owned and
operated centralized treatment and disposal facility.
SANITARY SEWER (PUBLIC) — A sanitary sewage collection method
owned and operated by a public utility, municipal authority, or other
public entity, in which sewage is carried from the site by a system of
pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant.
SCS — Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin
located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material
transported by water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to properly design, construct, implement or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by wind, water or gravity. Once this matter is
§ 180-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-201
1:355
deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually referred to as
"sediment."
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar material and into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEMIPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface such as stone, rock or other
materials which allows some infiltration of water to the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SEPTIC SYSTEM — An underground sewage disposal system with a
septic tank and drain field used for the decomposition and disposal of
domestic wastes; also referred to as an "on-lot system."
SERVICE DRIVE (PRIVATE) — A service way providing a secondary
means of private access to abutting property and not intended for
general traffic circulation.
SETBACK LINE — See definition of "building setback line."
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin,
even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SIDEWALK — A paved, surfaced or leveled area, paralleling and usually
separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic or other objects.
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizontal. Slopes are
usually expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet
per 100 feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called Curve Number (CN).
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment of a mass
of soil to increase or maintain its stability or otherwise to improve its
engineering properties.
SPEED, DESIGN — The selected speed for which the horizontal and
vertical alignment, sight distances and other engineering elements of a
roadway are planned and designed.
SPEED, OPERATING — The speed at which vehicles routinely travel
over a portion of a roadway in a free-flow condition. For purposes of
this chapter, the operating speed shall be considered to be the 85th
percentile of the distribution of observed speeds of vehicles traveling
over the portion of a roadway in question.
§ 180-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-201
1:356
SPEED, POSTED — The speed limit that is specifically stated for a
segment of a roadway by way of regulatory signs placed along said
segment of roadway.
SPILLWAY (EMERGENCY) — A depression in the embankment of a
pond or basin, or other overflow structure, that is used to pass peak
discharges greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
pond or basin.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations - protection of "designated" and "existing" uses (See 25
Pennsylvania Code Chapters 93 and 96) - including:
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD (MODIFIED PULS) — A reservoir
routing procedure based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow
minus outflow equals the change in storage for a given time interval)
and based on outflow being a unique function of storage volume.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm
"event" occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years.
See "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits and related
appurtenances which collects and carries intercepted surface runoff,
street water and other wash waters or drainage, hut excludes domestic
sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such
as "cold water fishery" or "potable water supply," which is listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained, under
state regulations.
(1)
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Earth
Disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
(2)
Water quality involves the chemical, biological, and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After earth disturbance
activities are complete, these characteristics can be impacted by
addition of pollutants such as sediment, and changes in habitat
through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result of changes
in land surface area from those activities. Therefore, permanent
discharges to surface waters must be managed to protect the
stream bank, streambed, and structural integrity of the waterway,
to prevent these impacts.
(3)
Protection and maintenance of water quality in special protection
streams pursuant to 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 93.
(4)
§ 180-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-201
1:357
STORMWATER CONTROL FACILITIES — Any structure, device, dam,
channel, swale, pit, trench or any other measure taken or method
employed to control stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER CONTROL PLAN (DRAINAGE PLAN) — The
documentation of the design and analysis of proposed stormwater
management controls, if any, to be used for a given development
chapter site, the contents of which are established in Chapter 170,
Stormwater Management, Drainage and Erosion Control.
STORMWATER DETENTION — Any storm drainage technique that
retards or detains runoff, such as detention or retention basin, parking
lot storage, rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells or any
combination thereof.
STORMWATER DETENTION BASIN — A vegetated pond designed to
drain completely after storing runoff only for a given storm event and
releasing it at a predetermined rate; also known as a "dry pond."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Any structure, natural
or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction,
conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to,
detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes and
infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The planned control of runoff
to allow water falling on a given site to be absorbed or retained on site
to the extent that after development the peak rate of discharge leaving
the site is not greater than if the site had remained undeveloped; a plan
showing all present and proposed grades and facilities for stormwater
management and best management practices (BMPs).
STREAM — A watercourse with definite bed and banks, which confines
and conveys perennially or intermittently flowing water.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a
regulated water of this commonwealth.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be
used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon
which a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of the other
streets upon which the lot abuts, at the midpoint of the frontage of the
lot thereon. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade
of the street at such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET WIDTH — The shortest distance between the lines delineating
the cartway or right-of-way for a street.
§ 180-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-201
1:358
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
SUBDIVIDER — The owner or authorized agent of the owner of a lot,
tract or parcel of land to be subdivided for transfer, sale or development
under the terms of this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the
Township Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required
improvements for which financial security was posted pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter) of those improvements required as a
condition for final approval have been completed in accordance with
the approval plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied
or operated for its intended use.
SUBWATERSHED AREA (SUBAREA) — The smallest drainage unit of
a watershed for which stormwater management criteria has been
established in the Stormwater Management Plan.
SURFACE DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan showing all present and
proposed grades and facilities for stormwater drainage.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all
perennial and intermittent rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets,
impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, reservoirs,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, natural seeps and estuaries,
and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of surface water, or
parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries
of the commonwealth.
SURVEYOR, PROFESSIONAL LAND — An individual licensed and
registered under the laws of this commonwealth to engage in the
practice of land surveying. A professional land surveyor may perform
engineering land surveys but may not practice any other branch of
engineering.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most-distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total
of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
§ 180-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-201
1:359
TOPOGRAPHICAL MAP — A map showing the elevations of the ground
by contours or elevations.
TOPOGRAPHY — The configuration of a surface area showing relative
elevations.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are
fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus
debris. Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the
"A" horizon.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Paxton, Dauphin County,
Pennsylvania, Board of Supervisors, its agents or authorized
representatives.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has
not been graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction
of a building or other improvements and on which no development or
building has occurred.
UNIT — A part of the property, structure or building designed or
intended for any type of independent use, which has direct exit to a
public street or way or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a
public street or way, and includes a proportionate undivided interest
in common elements, which are assigned to the property, structure or
building.
UTILITY, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE —
VEGETATIVE COVER — Such cover shall consist of trees, shrubs,
flowers, grass or similar natural cover.
VERGE — An area adjacent to a roadway and located between the curb
and sidewalk which is intended to be maintained in grass cover and
used as a planting space for street trees.
WATER POLLUTION — The addition of pollutants to water in
concentrations or in sufficient quantities to result in measurable
degradation of water quality.
WATER TABLE — The upper surface of groundwater, or that level below
which the soil is seasonally saturated with water.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel of conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
Any agency which under public franchise or ownership, or under
certificate of convenience and necessity, provides the public with
electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation,
water, sewage collection or other similar service, or
(1)
A closely regulated private enterprise with a franchise for
providing a public service.
(2)
§ 180-201 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-201
1:360
WATERSHED — A region or area that contributes surface water to a
defined point.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes but is not limited
to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan, the United States Forest
Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Coastal
Zone Management Plan and a wetland area designated by a river basin
commission. This definition is used by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the United States Army Corps of Engineers.)
§ 180-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-201
1:361

ARTICLE III
Plan Processing Procedures
§ 180-301. Intent.
§ 180-302. Preapplication sketch plans.
§ 180-303. Preliminary subdivision or land development plan
applications.
A. The procedures established in this article are intended to define the
steps by which an applicant shall design, make application, record
plats, and construct improvements and by which the Township Planning
Commission may review and Board of Supervisors shall approve or
disapprove plans and otherwise administer these regulations.
B. For all subdivision and land development applications, a preliminary
plan and final plan procedure is provided. It is at the discretion of the
applicant to submit either a preliminary plan followed by a final plan or
a combined preliminary/final plan. However, submission of the
preliminary/final plan excuses the applicant from submitting a separate
preliminary plan and stands as both a preliminary and final plan. All
preliminary/final plans must conform to all preliminary and final plan
processing procedures and content requirements. Plans must be clearly
labeled "PRELIMINARY/FINAL PLAN." Provisions are also provided for
the submission of sketch plans for informal review by the Township.
A. Prior to the formal submission of a subdivision or land development
plan, the applicant is urged to submit a sketch plan to the Township
Planning Commission for advice on the requirements necessary to
achieve conformity to the standards of these regulations as well as to
alert the applicant as early as possible to factors which must be
considered in the design of a subdivision or land development, such as
pertinent elements of any county or Township land use, thoroughfare or
other community plans. Review of a sketch plan is not required and is
only an informal, advisory process to guide the applicant with the
eventual preparation of a formal preliminary or final plan, as applicable.
B. Sketch plans should be accompanied by a letter of transmittal and a
project narrative necessary to explain existing or proposed site
conditions which are not self-explanatory on the actual sketch.
C. Application. The applicant, 14 days prior to the meeting of the Planning
Commission at which review of the sketch plan is desired, shall file with
the Zoning Officer 10 copies of a sketch plan of the proposed
subdivision or land development and other applicable maps,
information and data. The Township staff, Township Engineer, County
Planning Commission and other departments or agencies will not
provide a formal review of the plan and issue written comments but
merely provide a general overview and provide commentary at the
Planning Commission meeting at which the plan is being discussed.
§ 180-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-303
1:363
A. Application. A plan clearly labeled "PRELIMINARY PLAN" complying
with the requirements of Article IV shall be prepared for each
subdivision or land development and submitted to the Township in the
form of 16 paper prints no greater than 24 inches by 36 inches sheets.
In addition, two copies of all applicable supplementary data, plans and
reports; four copies of the completed Sewage Facilities Planning
Module; one correct and complete Application for Subdivision and Land
Development Review Form and Subdivision and Land Development
Plan Submission Checklist as contained in Exhibit 1 herein;26 and the
required Township filing fees must be submitted prior to review by the
Township. The applicant shall also file with the Township one completed
application form and the appropriate filing fees as required by the
Dauphin County Planning Commission for review of the subdivision or
land development application. All plans and accompanying information
must be submitted to the Township during normal business hours no
less than 28 days prior to the regularly scheduled Planning Commission
meeting at which consideration is requested.
B. Administratively complete applications. Upon receipt of an application
for subdivision or land development review, the Township will
determine if the filing contains all required information as prescribed
by this chapter to constitute a complete and thorough application. Upon
receipt of an incomplete application, the Township shall, within seven
calendar days, notify the applicant or the applicant's representative
that the application for a subdivision or land development plan is
incomplete and will not be further processed. All materials submitted
will be made available to be picked up by the applicant or their
representative, and no further review will be provided.
C. Review. The Township shall, as applicable, submit copies of the
application to the Planning Commission, the Township Engineer, the
Dauphin County Planning Commission, the Township Authority, the
Township Public Works Department, the Township Public Safety
Committee, and other public agencies or departments as necessary for
review. The Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, shall act on any such preliminary plan not later
than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the Board of
Supervisors or the Planning Commission (which ever first reviews the
application) following the day the application is filed, provided that
should the said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days following
the filing of the application, the said ninety-day period shall be
measured from the 30th day following the day the application has been
duly filed. In the event that any modification of requirements from this
article is requested by the applicant or is deemed necessary by the
Planning Commission, the alteration and the reason for its necessity
shall be entered in the records of the Planning Commission.
26.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-303 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-303
1:364
D. The Dauphin County Planning Commission shall review the application
and shall return one copy of a written report stating their suggestions
for modifications and design changes to the Planning Commission
within 30 days of their receipt of same or forfeit their right to review.
E. Processing of sewage facilities planning modules. All subdivision and/or
land development plans shall comply with Section 5 of the Act of
January 24, 1966, P.O. 1535, No. 537, known as the "Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act," as amended, and the Rules and Regulations of
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
adopted thereunder, Chapter 71 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code.
Such act and regulations require the Township to adopt an Official
Sewage Facilities Plan which provides for sewage services adequate to
prevent contamination of waters and/or environmental health hazards
with sewage wastes. Further, the Township shall revise said plan when
it is determined that a proposed method of sewage disposal for a new
subdivision or land development conforms to a comprehensive program
of pollution control and water quality management.
(1) The proposed subdivision and/or land development of a parcel of
land and its associated sanitary sewage facilities shall be as
described in detail by the applicant as part of a Sewage Facilities
Planning Module for Land Development. Said Planning Module
shall be submitted with the preliminary plan or in the case of a
combined submission with the preliminary/final plan.
(2) The Township shall review the Planning Module for the proposed
subdivision and/or land development, and determine if the
proposed method of sewage disposal conforms to and is included in
the approved "Official Plan" of the Municipality of Lower Paxton
Township.
(3) The Township shall review the subdivision and/or land development
plan described in the attached Planning Module and determine if it
conforms to applicable zoning, subdivision, other municipal
ordinances and plans, and to a comprehensive program of pollution
control and water quality management.
(4) The Board of Supervisors shall act upon the Planning Module in
conjunction with or after action on the preliminary plan or in the
case of a combined submission with or after action on the
preliminary/final plan. At no time shall the Township act upon a
Planning Module prior to acting upon a preliminary plan or a
preliminary/final plan. Planning Modules approved by the Board of
Supervisors shall be submitted to and approved by DEP as a
revision to the "Official Plan" of the Township.
(5) Planning Modules for subdivisions and/or land development,
approved by the Board of Supervisors and DEP, shall continue as an
amendment of the "Official Plan" until such time as:
§ 180-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-303
1:365
(a) A final plan is not submitted to the Township within five years
of the date of approval of the preliminary plan unless the plan
is in accordance with a previously approved and updated
phasing schedule or extended in writing by the Board of
Supervisors.
(b) The preliminary/final or final subdivision and/or land
development plan is withdrawn or abandoned, as indicated in
writing by the applicant.
(6) Planning Modules for subdivisions and/or land development,
approved by the Board of Supervisors and DEP. shall serve to revise
the "Official Plan" for only the site specific location referenced
within the Planning Module. Sanitary sewer capacity identified
within a Planning Module for a site specific location, approved by
the Board of Supervisors shall not be transferred to or used at any
other location within the Township.
(7) The approval of a Planning Module by the Board of Supervisors
does not obligate the Township to provide building permits and/or
sanitary sewer connection permits. The availability of such permits
may be limited by DEP and/or the operators of treatment plants
receiving Township sanitary sewage.
F. Resubmission of plans. When action on a plan has been tabled or
postponed by the Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors due to
outstanding comments, deficiencies or other issues with the
application; tabled at the request of the applicant; or conditionally
recommended for approval by the Planning Commission subject to
addressing review comments; and the applicant must resubmit a
corrected application to the Township, all plans and accompanying
information must be resubmitted to the Township during normal
business hours no less than 21 days prior to the regularly scheduled
Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors meeting at which
reconsideration is requested. If the revised plan is to be resubmitted to
the Planning Commission for review, nine copies of all plans and two
copies of all reports and accompanying documents must be submitted;
otherwise, for submissions to the Board of Supervisors, two copies of all
plans, reports and accompanying documents must be submitted; and, in
either case, must be accompanied by a formal written response
sufficiently addressing in detail all outstanding review comments or
questions. Based upon the number and significance of any remaining
comments, the Zoning Officer, in consultation with the Township
Engineer, will determine whether a plan is complete and ready to be
included on the agenda of the Planning Commission or Board of
Supervisors for consideration. A withdrawn application must be filed as
an entirely new application to be further considered by the Township.
G. Before acting on any application, the Board of Supervisors may hold a
public hearing thereon after proper public notice.
§ 180-303 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-303
1:366
H. When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the
provisions of this article, statute or other ordinance relied upon.
I. Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
described herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as last presented unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of
communication of the decision, in which case, failure to meet the
extended time or change in manner of presentation of communication
shall have like effect. (A sample "Agreement to Extend the Time for
Rendering and Communicating a Decision on Certain Preliminary and/
or Final Subdivision/Land Development Plans" is contained in Exhibit 5
herein).27
J. Approval or disapproval. The Board of Supervisors shall review the
preliminary plan at a regularly scheduled public meeting following the
submission of the written review and recommendations of the Township
Planning Commission, Township Engineer, and County Planning
Commission, or at some other public meeting or meetings of the Board
prior to the end of the statutory ninety-day review period. Upon
completion of its review, the Board of Supervisors shall determine
whether the plan shall be approved, approved with conditions
acceptable to the applicant, or disapproved. The decision shall be made
in writing and shall be communicated to the applicant personally or
mailed to him at his last known address not later than 15 days following
the decision. If the plan is approved with conditions, the applicant shall
respond to the Board of Supervisors indicating acceptance or rejection
of such conditions. Such response shall be made in writing, signed by
the applicant, and received by the Township within 15 calendar days of
receipt by the applicant of the Board of Supervisors' decision to
approve the plan with conditions. Approval of the plan shall be
rescinded automatically upon the applicant's failure to accept such
conditions in the manner and within the time frame noted above.
K. Approval of the preliminary plan constitutes approval of the proposed
subdivision or land development with respect to the general design, the
approximate dimensions and other planned features. Preliminary
approval binds the applicant to the plan as approved. Material changes
to the plan shall not be permitted once approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
L. Following the approval of the preliminary plan, including the
satisfaction of all conditions of approval, the applicant shall provide the
Township with four complete signed and sealed paper copies of the
preliminary plan, one reproducible Mylar copy of the same and two
27.Editor's Note: Exhibit 5 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-303
1:367
§ 180-304. Final subdivision or land development plan applications.
signed and sealed copies of all approved reports for the Township's
records.
M. Plan status.
(1) Approval of the preliminary plan shall assure the applicant for a
period of five years from the date of approval, or such other longer
period as may be set forth on a detailed phasing schedule
submitted by the applicant and approved by the Township, that:
(a) The general layout and approximate dimension of streets, lots,
and other features are approved and shall be the basis for the
preparation of the final plan;
(b) The general terms and any special conditions under which the
approval of the plan was granted will not be changed; and
(c) The applicant may install improvements in accordance with the
approved preliminary plan and other requirements contained
in this chapter. The Township Engineer shall be responsible for
inspection and approval of the required improvements as
provided for in this chapter.
(2) Preliminary plan approval does not constitute approval of the final
plan and, therefore, does not authorize the recording of the
subdivision or land development plan, the sale or transfer of lots, or
the construction of buildings or other structures on the property.
(3) The effects of changes to this chapter on plan status are more fully
described in Article XI herein.
A. Application. Within five years after the approval of the preliminary plan,
a plan clearly labeled "FINAL PLAN" with all necessary supplemental
data, plans and reports as contained herein shall be officially submitted
to the Township. Failure to submit a final plan within five years of the
date of approval of the preliminary plan shall subject the preliminary
plan to all intervening governing ordinances unless the plan is in
accordance with a previously approved and updated phasing schedule
or extended in writing by the Board of Supervisors. A preliminary plan
not consistent with the above shall not be used as a basis for any
development or construction. Any subsequent development shall be
preceded by a new preliminary plan application.
B. When filing an application for final approval, a final plan complying with
the requirements of Article IV shall be prepared for each subdivision or
land development and submitted to the Township in the form of 16
paper prints no greater than 24 inches by 36 inches sheets. In addition,
two copies of all applicable supplementary data, plans and reports; one
correct and complete Application for Subdivision and Land
Development Review Form and Subdivision and Land Development
§ 180-303 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-304
1:368
Plan Submission Checklist as contained in Exhibit 1 herein;28 and the
appropriate filing fees must be submitted prior to review by the
Township. The applicant shall also file with the Township one completed
application form and the appropriate filing fees as required by the
Dauphin County Planning Commission for review of the subdivision
or land development application. All plans must be submitted to the
Township during normal business hours no less than 28 days prior
to the regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting at which
consideration is requested.
C. Administratively complete applications. Upon receipt of an application
for subdivision or land development review, the Township will
determine if the filing contains all required information as prescribed
by this chapter to constitute a complete and thorough application. Upon
receipt of an incomplete application, the Township shall within seven
calendar days notify the applicant or the applicant's representative that
the application for a subdivision or land development plan is incomplete
and will not be further processed. All materials submitted will be made
available to be picked up by the applicant or their representative, and
no further review will be provided.
D. Review. The Township shall, as applicable, submit copies of the
application to the Planning Commission, the Township Engineer, the
Dauphin County Planning Commission, the Township Authority, the
Township Public Works Department, the Township Public Safety
Committee, and other public agencies or departments as necessary for
review of the application. The Board of Supervisors, upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall act on any such
final plan not later than 90 days following the date of the regular
meeting of the Board of Supervisors or the Planning Commission
(whichever first reviews the application) following the day the
application is filed, provided that should the said next regular meeting
occur more than 30 days following the filing of the application, the said
ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day following the
day the application has been duly filed. In the event that any
modification of requirements from this article is requested by the
applicant or is deemed necessary by the Planning Commission for
approval, the alteration and the reason for its necessity shall be entered
in the records of the Planning Commission.
E. The Dauphin County Planning Commission shall review the application
and shall return one copy of a written report stating their suggestions
for modifications and design changes to the Planning Commission
within 30 days of their receipt of the same or forfeit their right to
review.
F. Resubmission of plans. When action on a plan has been tabled or
postponed by the Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors due to
outstanding comments, deficiencies or other issues with the
28.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-304
1:369
application; tabled at the request of the applicant; or conditionally
recommended for approval by the Planning Commission subject to
addressing review comments; and the applicant must resubmit a
corrected application to the Township, all plans and accompanying
information must be resubmitted to the Township during normal
business hours no less than 21 days prior to the regularly scheduled
Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors meeting at which
reconsideration is requested. If the revised plan is to be resubmitted to
the Planning Commission for review, nine copies of all plans and two
copies of all reports and accompanying documents must be submitted;
otherwise, for submissions to the Board of Supervisors, two copies of
all plans, reports and accompanying documents must be submitted;
and, in either case, must be accompanied by a formal written response
sufficiently addressing in detail all outstanding review comments or
questions. Based upon the number and significance of any remaining
comments, the Zoning Officer, in consultation with the Township
Engineer, will determine whether a plan is complete and ready to
be included on the agenda of the Planning Commission or Board of
Supervisors for consideration. A withdrawn application must be filed as
an entirely new application to be further considered by the Township.
G. Before acting on any application, the Board of Supervisors may hold a
public hearing thereon after proper public notice.
H. When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the
provisions of this article, statute or other ordinance relied upon.
I. Failure of the Board of Supervisors to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
described herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as last presented unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of presentation of
communication of the decision, in which case, failure to meet the
extended time or change in manner of presentation of communication
shall have like effect. (A sample "Agreement to Extend the Time for
Rendering and Communicating a Decision on Certain Preliminary and/
or Final Subdivision/Land Development Plans" is contained in Exhibit 5
herein).29
J. Approval or disapproval. The Board of Supervisors shall review the final
plan at a regularly scheduled public meeting following the submission
of the written review and recommendations of the Township Planning
Commission, Township Engineer, and County Planning Department, or
at some other public meeting or meetings of the Board prior to the end
of the statutory ninety-day review period. Upon completion of its
review, the Board of Supervisors shall determine whether the plan shall
be approved, approved with conditions acceptable to the applicant, or
29.Editor's Note: Exhibit 5 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-304 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-304
1:370
disapproved. The decision shall be made in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his last
known address not later than 15 days following the decision. If the plan
is approved with conditions, the applicant shall respond to the Board
of Supervisors indicating acceptance or rejection of such conditions.
Such response shall be made in writing, signed by the applicant, and
received by the Township within 15 calendar days of receipt by the
applicant of the Board of Supervisors' decision to approve the plan with
conditions. Approval of the plan shall be rescinded automatically upon
the applicant's failure to accept or reject such conditions in the manner
and within the time frame noted above. However, no plat shall be finally
approved unless the streets on such plat have been improved as may be
required by ordinance, and any walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights,
fire hydrants, shade trees, landscaping, water mains, sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, stormwater management facilities, and other site
improvements as may be required by this article and any applicable
municipal requirements have been properly installed in accordance
with such requirements. In lieu of the completion of any site
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plan,
financial security, as delineated in this article, must be provided and
accepted by the Board of Supervisors.
K. Following the approval of the final plan, including the satisfaction of all
conditions of approval, the applicant shall provide the Township with
eight complete signed and sealed paper copies of the final plan, one
reproducible Mylar copy of the same, two signed and sealed copies of
all approved reports and the required electronic data files in the format
required in Article IV, § 180-404E(16).
L. Recording.
(1) The final plan shall be recorded within 90 days of meeting all
conditions imposed on the final plan or, if no conditions, then within
90 days of the approval by the Board of Supervisors. The signed
and sealed plans shall be filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recorder of Deeds, and the signed and sealed Mylar shall
be retained for the Township's records. Whenever plan approval by
the Board of Supervisors is required, the Recorder of Deeds shall
not accept any plan for recording unless such plan officially notes
the approval of the Board of Supervisors and the review of the
Dauphin County Planning Commission.
(2) Recording shall entitle the applicant to sell, transfer or develop the
land shown on the plan in accordance with the approved plan,
subject to any conditions attached thereto. Where final plans are
approved for only a portion, section or phase of the entire
subdivision or land development, sale, transfer or development
may proceed only on that approved portion, section or phase.
M. When a final plan has been approved, no subsequent change or
amendment in zoning, subdivision or other governing ordinance shall
§ 180-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-304
1:371
§ 180-305. Improvement and maintenance guarantee.
be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence
and complete any aspect of the approved development in accordance
with the terms of such approval within five years from such approval.
Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid
five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
approval.
N. When the applicant has failed to substantially complete the required
improvements set forth on the approved plan within five years of the
aforesaid approval date and when changes in a zoning, subdivision, or
other governing ordinance have occurred which affect the design of the
approved plat, the subdivision or land development shall be subject to
the changes in the zoning, subdivision, or other governing ordinance.
A. No plan shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plan
have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by this chapter,
and any sidewalks, walkways, pathways, curbs, gutters, street lights,
parking lots, fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, landscaping, landscape berm grading and other
improvements as may be required by this chapter have been installed in
accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the completion of any
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plan,
including improvements or fees otherwise required by this chapter, the
applicant may deposit with the Township financial security in an
amount sufficient to cover the costs of such plan improvements or
common amenities, including basins and other related drainage
facilities, recreational facilities, open space improvements, traffic and
transportation improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which may
be required in accordance with any land use ordinance. The applicant
shall not be required to provide financial security for the cost of any
improvements for which financial security is required by and provided
to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in connection with
the issuance of a highway occupancy permit for the project.
B. When requested by the applicant, in order to facilitate financing, the
Board of Supervisors shall furnish the applicant with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the final plan contingent upon the
applicant obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plan or
record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial security
agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of contingent approval
shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the financial security
agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a written extension is
granted by the Board of Supervisors; such extension shall not be
unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the request of
the applicant.
C. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Township may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
§ 180-304 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-305
1:372
withheld, federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such
lending institutions shall be deemed the preferred and acceptable
method of financial security for the purposes of this article. Said
instruments of financial security shall be prepared in a format
containing an "evergreen clause" which causes said security to renew
automatically on an annual basis unless otherwise authorized by the
Township. (Sample "Security Agreements" and a sample "Irrevocable
Letter of Credit" are contained in Exhibits 6 and 7 herein. These
documents are recommended formats and may be amended as
necessary by the Board of Supervisors).30
D. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the
party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
commonwealth and maintains an office within 100 miles of the
Township's Administration Building upon which the financial security
can be readily secured by the Township in the event of a default by the
applicant.
E. Such security shall provide for, and secure to the public the completion
of any improvements which may be required on or before the date fixed
in the formal action of approval or accompanying agreement for
completion of the improvements.
F. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the applicant. In addition, the applicant shall include an additional 10%
of the total amount of the financial security to cover engineering
inspection fees associated with the installation of said improvements;
the preparation of as-built plans and related work. Annually, the
Township may adjust the amount of the financial security by comparing
the actual cost of the improvements which have been completed and
the estimated cost of the completion of the remaining improvements as
of the expiration of the 90th day after either the original date scheduled
for completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said
adjustment, the Township may require the applicant to post additional
security equal to said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by
the applicant in accordance with this subsection.
G. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by an applicant and prepared by a professional engineer
licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such engineer
to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The Township, upon
the recommendation of the Township Engineer, may refuse to accept
such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant and the Township
30.Editor's Note: Exhibits 6 and 7 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 180-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-305
1:373
are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be
recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer licensed
as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Township
and the applicant. The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be
presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the
event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said
engineer shall be paid equally by the Township and the applicant.
H. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period.
I. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of final plans by
sections or stages of development subject to such requirements or
guarantees as to improvements in future sections or stages of
development as it finds essential for the protection of any finally
approved section of the development.
J. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release or authorize the partial release, from time to
time, of such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to
the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such requests
shall be in writing addressed to the Board of Supervisors and shall
detail the specific improvements that are being requested for release.
The Board of Supervisors shall have 45 days from receipt of such
request within which to allow the Township Engineer to certify, in
writing, to the Board of Supervisors that such portion of the work upon
the improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved
plan. Upon such certification the Board of Supervisors shall authorize
release by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount as
estimated by the Township Engineer fairly representing the value of the
improvements completed or, if the Board of Supervisors fails to act
within said forty-five-day period, the Board of Supervisors shall be
deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The Board
of Supervisors may, prior to final release at the time of completion and
certification by its engineer, require retention of 10% of the estimated
cost of the aforesaid improvements.
K. Where the Board of Supervisors accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion, the Board of Supervisors
may require the posting of financial security to secure structural
integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said
improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as
depicted on the final plan for a term not to exceed 18 months from the
§ 180-305 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-305
1:374
date of acceptance of dedication. Said financial security shall be of
the same type as otherwise required in this Section with regard to
installation of such improvements, and the amount of the financial
security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of installation of said
improvements.
L. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Township, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
M. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition of the final approval of a plan as
set forth in this section, the Township shall not condition the issuance of
building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement
of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted
upon the final plan upon actual completion of the improvements
depicted upon the approved final plan. Moreover, if said financial
security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or
buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following: the
improvement of the streets providing access to and from existing public
roads to such building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise
permanently passable condition, as well as the completion of all other
improvements as depicted upon the approved plan, either upon the lot
or lots or beyond the lots in question if such improvements are
necessary for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or
buildings.
N. Release of financial security. When the applicant has completed all of
the necessary and appropriate improvements, the applicant shall notify
the Board of Supervisors, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of
the completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Township Engineer. The Board of Supervisors shall,
within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the
Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The
Township Engineer shall, thereupon, file a report in writing, with the
Board of Supervisors, who shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the
applicant by certified or registered mail. The report shall be made and
mailed within 30 days after receipt by the Township Engineer of the
foresaid authorization from the Board of Supervisors; said report shall
be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said
improvements, either in whole or in part and if said improvements or
any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
Township Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for
such non approval or rejection.
§ 180-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-305
1:375
O. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant, within 15 days of
receipt of the Township Engineer's report, in writing, by certified or
registered mail, of the action of said Board of Supervisors with relation
thereto.
P. If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to comply
with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements
will be deemed to have been approved, and the applicant shall be
released from all liability pursuant to this performance guaranty or
other security agreement.
Q. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the applicant shall proceed to
complete the same, and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
R. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as a limitation of the
applicant's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Board of Supervisors or the
Township Engineer.
S. The applicant shall reimburse the Township for the reasonable and
necessary expense incurred for the inspection of improvements
according to a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors and as from time to time amended.
T. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense in
connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant shall,
within 15 days of the date of billing, notify the Township that such
expenses are disputed as unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case
the Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land
development due to the applicant's request over disputed engineer
expenses.
U. If within 45 days from the date of billing, the Township and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Township shall
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional engineer
licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to review the
said expenses and make a determination as to the amount thereof
which is reasonable and necessary.
V. The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence and
review such documentation as the professional engineer, in his or her
sole opinion, deems necessary and render a decision within 30 days of
appointment. The applicant shall be required to pay the entire amount
determined in the decision immediately.
W. In the event that the Township and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed, then, upon application of either
party, the President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial
district in which the Township is located (or if at the time there be no
§ 180-305 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-305
1:376
§ 180-306. Reimbursement of review costs.
President Judge, then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint
such engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Township
Engineer nor any professional engineer who has been retained by,
or performed services for, the Township or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
X. The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if the
amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or greater than
the original bill. If the amount of payment required in the decision is
less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the Township shall pay the
fee of the professional engineer, but otherwise the Township and the
applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the fee of the appointed professional
engineer.
A. The applicant shall reimburse the Township for costs that the Township
has incurred by the Township Engineer and/or professional
consultant(s) that the Township, in its sole discretion, deems necessary
in order to adequately and properly review a plan and supporting data,
and reporting the findings to the Township. The fees shall be
established annually by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The
Township shall advise the applicant of the reimbursement amount
required within 30 days of being billed by the Township Engineer and/
or other professional consultant(s). The applicant shall reimburse the
Township within 30 days of receipt of the Township's notice of payment
due.
(1) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review
fee, the applicant shall, within 15 days of the receipt of the notice of
payment due, notify the Township that such fees are disputed, in
which case the Township shall not delay or disapprove a plan
submission due to the applicant's fee dispute. If no fees are
disputed, the Township may condition the approval of plan
submissions upon the Township having received full payment as
stated in the notice of payment due.
(2) If, within 45 days of the notice of payment due, the applicant and
Township cannot agree on the amount of expenses incurred by the
Township, the applicant and Township shall jointly, by mutual
agreement, appoint another professional engineer or professional
consultant of the same profession or discipline as the Township
Engineer or professional consultant whose fees are being disputed
to make a determination as to the amount thereof which is
reasonable and necessary.
(3) In the event the municipality and the applicant cannot agree upon
the professional engineer or professional consultant to be
appointed, then, upon application of either party, the President
Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of Dauphin County shall
§ 180-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-306
1:377
§ 180-307. Dedication of improvements.
appoint such professional engineer or professional consultant, who,
in that case shall be neither the Township Engineer or professional
consultant nor any professional engineer or consultant who has
been retained by, or performed services for, the Township or the
applicant within the preceding five years.
(4) The professional engineer or professional consultant appointed,
either by mutual agreement of the Township and applicant or by
the President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas, shall hear such
evidence and review such documentation as the professional
engineer or professional consultant, in his or her sole opinion,
deems necessary and render a decision within 30 days of
appointment. Such decision shall be final and binding upon both
the Township and the applicant. The applicant shall be required to
pay the entire amount determined in the decision within 10 days of
such decision.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer or professional
consultant for determining the reasonable and necessary expense
shall be paid by the applicant if the amount of payment required in
the decision is equal to or greater than the original bill. If the
amount of payment required in the decision is less than the original
bill by $1,000 or more, the Township shall pay the fee of the
professional engineer or professional consultant, but otherwise the
Township and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the fee of the
appointed professional engineer or professional consultant.
A. All improvements shall be deemed to be private improvements and only
for the benefit of the specific project until such time as the same have
been properly offered for dedication and formally accepted by the
Board of Supervisors in accordance with current Township procedures.
No responsibility of any kind with respect to the improvements shown
on the final plan shall be transferred until the improvements have been
formally accepted. No improvement shall be accepted for dedication
until all improvements are fully constructed, inspected by the Township
and until as-built plans have been completed by the applicant and
reviewed and found to be acceptable to the Township.
B. Prior to the dedication of improvements, the applicant shall maintain
said facilities in good condition and for the intended use. All streets
serving occupied dwellings shall be paved and maintained in a passable
condition and shall be plowed within 24 hours following a snowfall.
C. Prior to the acceptance of improvements, the applicant shall submit, in
a form suitable to the Township, the required number of originals of the
following documents for the Township's review:
(1) Legal description.
§ 180-306 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-307
1:378
§ 180-308. Digital plan requirements.
Requirements of this section are intended to apply to final recording plan
submissions only. A .pdf exhibit shall be provided for use during public
meetings with all submissions.
(2) Right-of-way or easement plat.
(3) Deed of dedication.
(4) Release of liens.
(5) Maintenance guarantee.
(6) Other customary documentation as may be required.
A. All data submitted shall be in compliance with the Manual of Practice
for professional land surveyors in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as amended.
B. All digital files submitted shall be based on accurate geometric
calculations,
C. Digital submissions shall have all layers clearly and separately
represented. Included with all digital submissions on a metadata file
shall be included outlining the following:
(1) A list of layers used with a description of what those layers
represent.
(2) A list of all point files and break lines with a description of any
abbreviations.
D. All plans must be in Pennsylvania State Plane Coordinate System South
Zone, utilizing the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
Units shall be in US survey feet.
E. All plans must be submitted in AutoCAD drawing (.dwg), AutoCAD
interchange (.dxf), or ArcView Shapefile (.shp), on CD-ROM or other
agreeable format acceptable to the Township.
F. Digital file layering must be established in the files that place the
following elements on separate layers:
Township line
Road center line
Property lines
Road names
Parcel boundaries
Utilities
§ 180-307 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-308
1:379
Traffic signs and signals
Stormwater management
Floodplains
G. Annotation submitted digitally shall be identical to the annotation
submitted on the Mylar hard copy filed with Lower Paxton Township. All
other miscellaneous annotation and information, such as North arrow
and scale, shall be put on separate layers or as misc line/misc text.
H. Private utilities, such as gas, water, phone service, electric, etc., will be
included and shall be clearly labeled and put on separate layers or as
misc line/misc text.
§ 180-308 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-308
1:380
ARTICLE IV
Plan Specifications and Requirements
§ 180-401. Intent.
Plans, maps, data and reports shall be prepared and furnished by the
applicant as required to assure accurate surveying and engineering; to
provide adequate information for designing and preparing plans; and to
facilitate the timely and accurate review, processing and recording of plans.
Plans and maps shall be neat, legible, uncluttered, well organized, easily
readable, and in conformance with good and acceptable engineering and
drafting practices and to provide clear and concise documentation of all
required data.
§ 180-402. Sketch plan requirements.
A. Sketch plans shall be clearly labeled "SKETCH PLAN" and include
sufficient information to clearly indicate the character and extent of the
proposed subdivision or land development and its relationship to
existing conditions and facilities within the area in which it is to be
located. It is recommended that the sketch plan submission include a
map covering sufficient area to establish the location of the site and an
informal plan of any existing or proposed streets, buildings, lot
arrangement, utilities, significant natural features, design standards
and other elements within the subdivision or land development
requirements including topographic contours, if appropriate.
B. Prior to the preparation of any plans, the applicant should consult the
Dauphin County Conservation District concerning the preparation of
plans for erosion and sedimentation control.
C. The applicant should determine the feasibility of providing public
sewerage and public water to the development site.
D. If the site is located within an area planned or currently receiving
public sewer and/or water services, the applicant should consult with
the Lower Paxton Township Authority and the appropriate water utility
to determine the availability of service and the requirements for
obtaining sewer and water service for the proposed project.
E. If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned and
maintained by the individual owners of lots within the subdivision or
land development, the applicant should present evidence to the
Township that the subdivision can be supplied by a certified public
utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a
municipal corporation authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of
public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment letter or agreement to serve the area in question,
whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
§ 180-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-402
1:381
§ 180-403. Preliminary plan requirements.
The applicant shall submit, as part of an application for preliminary plan
review of a subdivision or land development plan, the following information
on the required 24 inches by 36 inches preliminary plan sheets.
F. If on-lot sewage systems are proposed, an initial investigation of soil
types on the property is recommended to determine the feasibility of
providing the subdivision or land development with on-lot systems.
G. The applicant should determine whether or not the site is located in an
identified flood hazard area, in which case applicable floodplain
management requirements shall be followed in the layout and design of
the subdivision or land development.
A. Title block:
(1) Identification of the plan as a preliminary plan.
(2) Name of the subdivision or development.
(3) Township and county name.
(4) Name, address, and telephone number of the legal and/or equitable
owner(s), applicant(s), and authorized agent(s) as applicable.
(5) Written and graphic scale of plan.
(6) Name, address, and telephone number of plan preparer.
(7) Date of plan preparation and date of all subsequent revisions.
B. Signature blocks: Space for date, signature and type of formal action by
each of the following shall be provided in accordance with the form of
the certifications contained in Exhibit 3 of this chapter:31
(1) Lower Paxton Township Board of Supervisors.
(2) Lower Paxton Township Planning Commission.
(3) Lower Paxton Township Engineer.
(4) Dauphin County Planning Commission.
(5) Other officials as appropriate.
C. Plan content.
(1) Location map, at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 1,000
feet, showing the location of the proposed subdivision or land
development in relation to named streets, boundaries, previous
subdivisions, and other prominent features.
31.Editor's Note: Exhibit 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-403
1:382
(2) North arrow and graphic and written scales on all plan sheets.
(3) Metes and bounds description showing dimensions, bearings,
curve data, lengths of tangents, radii, arc lengths, chord lengths,
and central angles for all property lines, including the entire
perimeter of the tract to be subdivided or developed as well as all
street right-of-way lines and center lines. A primary control point
and identification of all existing property corners shall be shown on
the plan. All surveys must be on the Pennsylvania State Plane
Coordinate System, South Zone. Coordinates must be provided for
all property corners of the parent tract.
(4) All existing, natural features on the property and extending a
minimum of 100 feet beyond the property's boundary including, but
not limited to the following, water courses, wetlands, marshes,
floodplains, rock outcrops, sinkholes, vegetated areas, wooded
areas and other significant natural features.
(5) All existing and man-made structures on the property and
extending a minimum of 100 feet beyond the property's boundary
including but not limited to, buildings, structures, roadways and
rights-of-way, driveways, sanitary and storm sewers, manholes,
septic systems, wells, water mains, culverts, fire hydrants, utility
poles, overhead and/or underground electric, cable and
communication lines; gas, oil and other transmission mains, and
other significant man-made features on and adjacent to the tract.
All utility lines, storm drainage facilities, and structures shall be
identified as to size, depth, material type, and top and invert
elevations.
(6) The location of easements, rights-of-way, and other restrictions and
any protective covenants running with the land which exist at the
time of the filing of the plan.
(7) All zoning districts and zoning district lines must be prominently
labeled on the plan.
(8) Existing contours on the property and extending a minimum of 100
feet beyond the property's boundary at a vertical contour interval
of two feet. Spot elevations shall also be provided where additional
detail is required. Reference information for all elevations must be
based upon the National Geodetic Survey (NGS), North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988 or current version. One permanent
on-site benchmark must also be provided and referenced.
(9) Plan scale shall not exceed one inch equals 60 feet. If multiple plan
sheets are used, match lines and a key map shall be provided
indicating the sheet orientation and view with respect to the
subject property for each plan sheet. The minimum text size shall
be a Leroy pen height of L 80 as typically defined by drafting
standards.
§ 180-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-403
1:383
(10) Tax parcel number, current deed reference(s) and source(s) of title
to the land being subdivided or developed shall be included, as
shown by the County Recorder of Deeds.
(11) Name, deed book reference, subdivision plan reference and lot
number of all adjoining property owners. The identity of property
owners shall reflect ownership of the properties as they exist
currently or no earlier than one year prior to plan submittal.
(12) Lot layout of the entire parcel which is to be subdivided or
developed. The lot, tract or parcel drawing shall include the
following:
(a) All proposed lots shall be depicted indicating the lot area in
square feet and acres; approximate dimensions for all
proposed lot lines and curves.
(b) Location and description of all existing and required survey
monuments and markers shown on the plan.
(c) Lot numbers in progressive order to identify each lot or tract.
(d) The location, size and use of all existing buildings.
(e) The building setback lines prescribed for the applicable zoning
district.
(13) In the case of land development applications, the approximate
location, dimension, configuration and elevation of all proposed
buildings, structures, retaining walls, curbing, parking areas,
streets, walkways, drainage facilities, proposed utilities, access
drives, site and street lighting, street trees, site landscaping and all
other significant planned facilities on the property shall be shown.
(14) Proposed contours shall be provided at a two-foot contour interval
for all proposed grading and/or construction activities that change
the grade and elevation of the existing ground. The proposed
finished floor elevation of all buildings and structures shall also be
shown. Spot elevations shall also be provided where additional
clarification is required.
(15) Streets, utilities, and other proposed features on the subdivision or
land development and extending 100 feet beyond the property's
boundaries, in accordance with the following:
(a) The location, right-of-way, pavement width and name, if known,
of all streets.
(b) A typical street cross section for each proposed street and a
typical cross section for any existing street which shall be
improved as part of the application. Each cross section shall
include the entire right-of-way width and depict all relevant
design information including, but not limited to, existing and
§ 180-403 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-403
1:384
proposed pavement section, curbing, sidewalks, base drain,
cross slopes, and related information required for
construction. Where the Township believes that one typical
section will not adequately provide sufficient information for
review and construction purposes, multiple cross sections shall
be provided as directed.
(c) Vertical and horizontal alignment for each proposed street,
sanitary sewer and storm sewerage systems, under drains,
water distribution system, and other utilities, above or below
grade, as applicable. All street profiles shall be drawn at a
minimum scale of V -60 feet horizontal and one inch equals five
feet vertical and shall show, at a minimum, the existing center
line profile, the proposed grade at the center line, all proposed
vertical curve data for streets including sight distance
information. The profiles shall also indicate all storm sewer
information, inlets, sanitary sewers and manholes, utility lines,
and other information for those items located within the
roadway right-of-way. Where storm or sanitary sewerage
facilities are located outside of the street right-of-way or
cannot be easily and accurately superimposed on the street
profiles, separate profiles shall be provided.
(d) All water distribution, storm sewer and sanitary sewer systems
shall provide all hydrant locations, structure and pipe
locations, pipe size, slope and type of material, top and invert
elevations of all structures, lateral locations, and other related
information.
(16) The size, type, location and beneficiary of all existing and proposed
easements and rights-of-way. Any easement or right-of-way to be
conveyed to Lower Paxton Township and/or Lower Paxton Township
Authority shall be provided with metes and bounds descriptions.
(17) Existing and proposed on-lot well and sewage disposal system
locations, as well as soil probe and percolation test locations for all
proposed on-lot sewage disposal systems.
(18) The location and details of sidewalks, street lights, curbs,
driveways, street trees, landscaping amenities, utilities and all
other proposed site improvements.
(19) The size, location, pavement markings and signage for fire lanes
and the location of any building's fire department connection in
accordance with the requirements of the Township Fire Marshall
and the current International Fire Code (IFC).
(20) If construction is planned to occur in phases, a phasing plan and
schedule indicating when each final phase will be filed with Lower
Paxton Township.
(21) Construction details for all proposed improvements.
§ 180-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-403
1:385
(22) Required and provided sight distances at all intersections and
driveways. Clear sight triangles along the center lines of all
intersecting streets and driveways shall also be provided.
(23) Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds, parking areas, common open space, or other
public, semi-public or community purposes. All parcels to be
dedicated shall designate the time or the development stage at
which the dedication will occur and the entity to which dedication
shall be made. Reservations or dedications, if any, by the applicant
of any area designated for use as public grounds shall be suitable in
size and location for their designated purposes and shall also
indicate the type, location and specifications for any equipment or
planned facilities. Consideration should be given to lands that are
outlined in the Township Greenway Plan.
(24) The location of the proposed subdivision and/or land development
with respect to any identified floodplain areas or districts,
including information on the 100-year base flood elevations. A
reference of the source of the floodplain data must be noted on the
plan.
(25) Streets in and bordering a subdivision or land development shall be
coordinated, and be of such widths and grades and in such
locations as necessary to accommodate prospective traffic and to
facilitate fire and police protection and streets must coordinate
with existing structures, buildings and topography in existing or
proposed adjacent neighboring developments.
(26) Easements and rights-of-way shall be provided for existing and
proposed drainage facilities, water courses and utilities as herein
required.
(27) Street and site lighting facilities shall be provided in all
developments as herein required, irrespective of whether the
streets and/or driveways are proposed for dedication to the
Township or to be privately maintained.
D. Plan notes and conditions: All necessary or recommended
supplementary subdivision or land development plan notes or
conditions shall be prominently lettered on the plan. This shall include,
but not be limited to:
(1) The following plan information shall be included in tabular form on
the plan:
(a) Type of development.
(b) Zoning district or districts.
(c) Total tract area.
(d) Total area to be developed.
§ 180-403 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-403
1:386
(e) Total area of proposed recreation.
(f) Total number of lots or dwelling units.
(g) Minimum lot size proposed.
(h) Proposed water supply.
(i) Proposed sewage disposal.
(j) Linear feet of new streets.
(k) Linear feet of new storm sewer.
(l) Total number of inlets.
(m) Total linear feet of street widening.
(n) Total number of storm manholes and junction boxes.
(o) Total number of endwalls.
(2) Applicable zoning standards, in tabular from, for required and
provided front, rear and side yard setbacks, minimum lot area,
minimum lot width, minimum lot coverages, maximum building
height and parking calculations.
(3) A statement of intended use or purpose for all lots except those
intended for single-family detached dwellings.
(4) A statement indicating that all easements and rights-of-way have
been shown on the plan and that all utilities have been contacted. A
current Pennsylvania One Call listing of all utility information and
appropriate serial number must also be included.
(5) A statement indicating that the applicant shall comply with all
Township regulations in effect at the time of the filing of the
preliminary plan.
(6) A statement that the applicant will be responsible for paying for the
installation of all street and traffic control signs required for the
project as deemed necessary by Lower Paxton Township.
(7) A statement of any deed restrictions or covenants which may be a
condition of the sale of the property.
(8) In case of a plan which requires access to a highway under the
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the
inclusion of the following plan note:
"Access to the state highway shall be authorized only by a highway
occupancy permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT). Approval of this plan is made with the
express understanding by the applicant that the individual lot
owner(s) shall be responsible for obtaining the required highway
§ 180-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-403
1:387
occupancy permit(s). Plan approval does not represent any
guarantee or assurance by Lower Paxton Township that a highway
occupancy permit will be issued by PennDOT for any lot shown
hereon. A highway occupancy permit from PennDOT shall be
required prior to the issuance of a building permit by Lower Paxton
Township."
(9) Other specifics or clarifications as deemed necessary by the
Township to complete the plan.
E. Certifications, dedications, and reports:
(1) A certification of ownership and dedicatory statement as outlined
in Exhibit 2 shall be signed by the property owner(s) verifying
ownership and acceptance of the plan.32
(2) A certification statement, in a form as outlined in Exhibit 4,33
signed and sealed by the plan preparer (professional engineer or
professional land surveyor) verifying the accuracy of the
engineering and survey information contained on the plan. Any
plan establishing property boundaries or creating new lot lines,
right-of-way lines, or similar efforts shall be prepared and sealed by
a professional land surveyor.
(3) A completed "Sewage Facilities Planning Module for Land
Development" or other equivalent documentation submitted to the
Township and ready for submission to DEP in compliance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act and
Chapter 71 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code.
(4) A wetlands delineation report as required under Article V,
§ 180-518.
(5) A traffic impact study when required under Article VI, § 180-602A.
(6) A hydrogeologic study and water quality testing report as required
under Article VII, § 180-701.
(7) A stormwater management drainage plan addressing the
requirements outlined under Chapter 170, Stormwater
Management, Drainage and Erosion Control.
(8) A listing of all local, state, federal and other outside agency permits
and approvals which are ultimately required for final plan approval
and construction.
(9) In the event that the plan proposes the extension of sewer service
into the project from existing sewerage facilities owned and
maintained by the Lower Paxton Township Authority, a report from
the Authority indicating that the proposed design has been
32.Editor's Note: Exhibit 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
33.Editor's Note: Exhibit 4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-403 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-403
1:388
§ 180-404. Final plan requirements.
The applicant shall furnish, as part of an application for final plan review
of a subdivision or land development plan, the following information on the
required 24 inches by 36 inches final plan sheet(s):
reviewed and is sufficient to meet the technical requirements of
the Authority and that the Authority has the capacity and ability to
serve the project in accordance with their rules and regulations.
(10) If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned
and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or land development, applicants shall present evidence
to the Board of Supervisors that the subdivision is to be supplied by
a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of
a certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment letter or agreement to
serve the project in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be
acceptable.
(11) Other engineering or related data and information that the
Township may reasonably require in order to review, evaluate, and
understand the subdivision or land development plan application.
A. Title block:
(1) Identification of the plan as a final plan.
(2) Name of the subdivision or development.
(3) Township and county name.
(4) Name, address, and telephone number of the legal and/or equitable
owner(s), applicant(s), and authorized agent(s) as applicable.
(5) Written and graphic scale of plan.
(6) Name, address, and telephone number of plan preparer.
(7) Date of plan preparation and date of all subsequent revisions.
B. Signature blocks: Space for date, signature and type of formal action by
each of the following shall be provided in accordance with the form of
the certifications contained in Exhibit 3 of this chapter:34
(1) Lower Paxton Township Board of Supervisors.
(2) Lower Paxton Township Planning Commission.
(3) Lower Paxton Township Engineer.
34.Editor's Note: Exhibit 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-404
1:389
(4) Dauphin County Planning Commission.
(5) Dauphin County Recorder of Deeds.
(6) Other officials as appropriate.
C. Plan content:
(1) Location map, at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 1,000
feet, showing the location of the proposed subdivision or land
development in relation to named streets, boundaries, previous
subdivisions, and other prominent features.
(2) North arrow and graphic and written scales on all plan sheets.
(3) Metes and bounds description showing dimensions, bearings,
curve data, lengths of tangents, radii, arc lengths, chord lengths,
and central angles for all property lines, including the entire
perimeter of the tract to be subdivided or developed as well as all
street right-of-way lines and center lines. All bearings shall be
shown to the nearest second and all distances shall be shown to the
nearest one-hundredth of a foot. All property areas shall close to
within an error of closure of one foot in 10,000 feet or greater. A
primary control point and identification of all existing property
corners shall be shown on the plan. All surveys must be on the
Pennsylvania State Plane Coordinate System, South Zone.
Coordinates must be provided for all property corners of the parent
tract.
(4) All existing, natural features on the property and extending a
minimum of 100 feet beyond the property's boundary including, but
not limited to the following, water courses, wetlands, marshes,
floodplains, rock outcrops, sinkholes, vegetated areas, wooded
areas and other significant natural features.
(5) All existing and man-made structures on the property and
extending a minimum of 100 feet beyond the property's boundary,
including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, roadways and
rights-of-way, driveways, sanitary and storm sewers, manholes,
septic systems, wells, water mains, culverts, fire hydrants, utility
poles, overhead and/or underground electric, cable and
communication lines; gas, oil and other transmission mains, and
other significant man-made features on and adjacent to the tract,
All utility lines, storm drainage facilities, and structures shall be
identified as to size, depth, material type, and top and invert
elevations.
(6) The exact location of easements, rights-of-ways, other restrictions
and any protective covenants running with the land, which exist at
the time of the preparation and filing of the plan.
§ 180-404 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-404
1:390
(7) All zoning districts and zoning district lines must be prominently
labeled on the plan.
(8) Existing contours on the property and extending a minimum of 100
feet beyond the property's boundary at a vertical contour interval
of two feet. Spot elevations shall also be provided where additional
detail is required. Reference information for all elevations must be
based upon the National Geodetic Survey (NGS), North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988 or current version. One permanent
on-site benchmark must also be provided and referenced.
(9) Plan scale shall not exceed one inch equals 60 feet. If multiple plan
sheets are used, match lines and a key map shall be provided
indicating the sheet orientation and view with respect to the
subject property for each plan sheet. The minimum text size on
plans shall be a Leroy pen height of L 80 as typically defined by
drafting standards.
(10) Tax parcel number, current deed reference(s) and source(s) of title
to the land being subdivided or developed shall be included, as
shown by the County Recorder of Deeds.
(11) Name, deed book reference, subdivision plan reference and lot
number of all adjoining property owners. The identity of property
owners shall reflect ownership of the properties as they exist
currently or no earlier than one year prior to plan submittal.
(12) The exact lot layout of the entire parcel which is to be subdivided or
developed. The lot, tract or parcel drawing shall include the
following:
(a) All proposed lots shall be depicted indicating the exact lot area
in square feet and acres and the exact dimensions for all
proposed lot lines and curves. Bearings and dimensions for all
property lines; corporation lines; center and right-of-way lines
of streets; easements and rights-of-way; and other boundary
lines with distances, radii, arcs, chords and tangents of all
deflection angles shall be shown to the nearest second; to the
nearest one-hundredth of a foot and to an error of closure of
not more than one foot in 10,000 feet.
(b) Location and description of all existing and required survey
monuments and markers shown on the plan.
(c) Lot numbers in progressive order to identify each lot or tract.
(d) The location, size and use of all existing buildings.
(e) The building setback lines prescribed for the applicable zoning
district.
(13) In the case of land development applications, the exact location,
dimension, configuration and elevation of all proposed buildings,
§ 180-404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-404
1:391
structures, retaining walls, curbing, parking areas, streets,
walkways, drainage facilities, proposed utilities, access drives, site
and street lighting, street trees, site landscaping and all other
significant planned facilities on the property.
(14) Proposed contours shall be provided at a two-foot contour interval
for all proposed grading and/or construction activities that change
the grade and elevation of the existing ground. The proposed
finished floor elevation of all buildings and structures shall also be
shown. Spot elevations shall also be provided where additional
clarification is required.
(15) Streets, utilities, and other proposed features on the subdivision or
land development and extending 100 feet beyond the property's
boundaries, in accordance with the following:
(a) The location, right-of-way, pavement width and name of all
streets.
(b) A typical street cross section for each proposed street and a
typical cross section for any existing street which shall be
improved as part of the application. Each cross section shall
include the entire right-of-way width and depict all relevant
design information including, but not limited to, existing and
proposed pavement section, curbing, sidewalks, base drain,
cross slopes, and related information required for
construction. Where the Township believes that one typical
section will not adequately provide sufficient information for
review and construction purposes, multiple cross sections shall
be provided as directed.
(c) Vertical and horizontal alignment for each proposed street,
sanitary sewer and storm sewerage systems, under drains,
water distribution system, and other utilities, above or below
grade, as applicable. All street profiles shall be drawn at a
minimum scale of one inch equals 60 feet horizontal and one
inch equals five feet vertical and shall show, at a minimum, the
existing center line profile, the proposed grade at the center
line, all proposed vertical curve data for streets including sight
distance information. The profiles shall also indicate all storm
sewer information, inlets, sanitary sewers and manholes,
utility lines, and other information for those items located
within the roadway right-of-way. Where facilities are located
outside of the street right-of-way or cannot be easily
superimposed on the street profiles, separate profiles shall be
provided.
(d) All water distribution, storm sewer and sanitary sewer systems
shall provide all hydrant locations, structure and pipe
locations, pipe size, slope and type of material, top and invert
§ 180-404 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-404
1:392
elevations of all structures, lateral locations, and other related
information.
(16) The exact size, type, location and beneficiaries of all existing and
proposed easements and rights-of-way. Any easement or right-ofway
to be conveyed to Lower Paxton Township shall be provided
with metes and bounds descriptions.
(17) Existing and proposed on-lot well and sewage disposal system
locations, as well as soil probe and percolation test locations for all
proposed on-lot sewage disposal systems.
(18) The location and details of sidewalks, street lights, curbs,
driveways, street trees, landscaping amenities, utilities and all
other proposed site improvements.
(19) The size, location, pavement markings and signage for fire lanes
and the location of any building's fire department connection in
accordance with the requirements of the Township Fire Marshal
and the current International Fire Codes (IFC).
(20) Construction details for all proposed improvements.
(21) Required and provided sight distances at all intersections and
driveways. Clear sight triangles along the center lines of all
intersecting streets and driveways shall also be provided.
(22) Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved for schools,
parks, playgrounds, parking areas, common open space, or other
public, semi-public or community purposes. Reservations or
dedications, if any, by the applicant of any area designated for use
as public grounds shall be suitable in size and location for their
designated purposes and shall also indicate the type, location and
specifications for any equipment or planned facilities.
(23) The location of the proposed subdivision and/or land development
with respect to any identified floodplain areas or districts,
including information on the 100-year base flood elevations. A
reference of the source of the floodplain data must be noted on the
plan.
(24) Streets in and bordering a subdivision or land development shall be
coordinated, and be of such widths and grades and in such
locations as necessary to accommodate prospective traffic and to
facilitate fire and police protection and streets must coordinate
with existing structures, buildings and topography in existing or
proposed adjacent neighboring developments.
(25) Easements and rights-of-way shall be provided for existing and
proposed drainage facilities, water courses and utilities as herein
required.
§ 180-404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-404
1:393
(26) Street and site lighting facilities shall be provided in all
developments as required herein, irrespective of whether the
streets and/or driveways are proposed for dedication to the
Township or to be privately maintained.
D. Plan notes and conditions: All necessary or recommended
supplementary subdivision or land development plan notes or
conditions shall be prominently lettered on the plan. This shall include,
but not be limited to:
(1) The following plan information shall be included in tabular form on
the plan:
(a) Type of development.
(b) Zoning district or districts.
(c) Total tract area.
(d) Total area to be developed.
(e) Total area of proposed recreation.
(f) Total number of lots or dwelling units.
(g) Minimum lot size proposed.
(h) Proposed water supply.
(i) Proposed sewage disposal.
(j) Linear feet of new streets.
(k) Linear feet of new storm sewer.
(l) Total number of inlets.
(m) Total linear feet of street widening.
(n) Total number of storm manholes and junction boxes.
(o) Total number of endwalls.
(2) Applicable zoning standards, in tabular form, for required and
provided front, rear and side yard setbacks, minimum lot area,
minimum lot width, minimum lot coverage, maximum building
height and parking calculations.
(3) A statement of intended use or purpose for all lots except those
intended for single family detached dwellings.
(4) A statement of all waivers granted by the Board of Supervisors for
said plan.
(5) A statement indicating that all easements and rights-of-way have
been shown on the plan and that all utilities have been contacted. A
§ 180-404 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-404
1:394
current Pennsylvania One Call listing of all utility information and
appropriate serial number must also be included.
(6) A statement indicating that the applicant shall comply with all
Township regulations in effect at the time of the filing of the final
plan,
(7) A statement that the applicant will be responsible for paying for the
installation of all street and traffic control signs required for the
project as deemed necessary by Lower Paxton Township.
(8) A statement that the applicant shall provide, at the completion of
construction, a complete set of as-built plans as required under this
chapter.
(9) A statement of any deed restrictions or covenants which may be a
condition of the sale of the property.
(10) In case of a plan which requires access to a highway under the
jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the
inclusion of the following plan note:
"Access to the state highway shall be authorized only by a highway
occupancy permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT). Approval of this plan is made with the
express understanding by the applicant that the individual lot
owner(s) shall be responsible for obtaining the required highway
occupancy permit(s). Plan approval does not represent any
guarantee or assurance by Lower Paxton Township that a highway
occupancy permit will be issued by PennDOT for any lot shown
hereon. A highway occupancy permit from PennDOT shall be
required prior to the issuance of a building permit by Lower Paxton
Township."
If requested by the Township, a copy of the PennDOT highway
occupancy permit application shall be submitted for consistency
review by the Township with the final subdivision or land
development plan.
(11) Other specifics or clarifications as deemed necessary by the
Township to complete the plan.
E. Certifications, dedications, and reports:
(1) A certification of ownership as outlined in Exhibit 235 shall be
signed by the property owner(s) verifying ownership and
acceptance of the plan.
(2) Any lands to be dedicated or reserved for public, semipublic or
community use shall be identified and a dedicatory statement shall
be signed by the owner(s) in a form as outlined in Exhibit 2 offering
35.Editor's Note: Exhibit 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-404
1:395
land for dedication to public use for all appropriate streets, rightsof-
way, easements, recreation areas, etc.
(3) A certification statement, in a form as outlined in Exhibit 4, signed
and sealed by the plan preparer (professional engineer or
professional land surveyor) verifying the accuracy of the
engineering and survey information contained on the plan. Any
plan establishing property boundaries or creating new lot lines,
right-of-way lines, or similar efforts shall be prepared and sealed by
a professional land surveyor.
(4) A letter from the Dauphin County Conservation District indicating
that a final erosion and sedimentation control plan has been
submitted for the project and that the plan as submitted is
adequate to address the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection under the Rules and Regulations,
Chapter 102, "Erosion Control," P.L. 1987, June 22,1937, as
amended.
(5) When applicable, evidence that either approval of the DEP Sewage
Facilities Planning Module or similar documentation has been
granted by DEP or that such approval is not required.
(6) A wetlands delineation report when required under Article V,
§ 180-518.
(7) An approved traffic impact study when required under Article VI,
§ 180-602A.
(8) An approved hydrogeologic study and water quality testing report
as required under Article VII, § 180-701.
(9) An approved stormwater management drainage plan addressing
the requirements outlined under Chapter 170, Stormwater
Management, Drainage and Erosion Control, including an executed
stormwater operations and maintenance agreement (Chapter 170,
Appendix E).
(10) Evidence of receipt of all required outside agency permits and/or
approvals required for the project (i.e., DEP, United States Army
Corps of Engineers, Dauphin County Conservation District, utility
companies, etc.).
(11) In the event that the plan proposes the extension of sewer service
into the project from existing sewerage facilities owned and
maintained by the Lower Paxton Township Authority, a report from
the Authority indicating that the proposed design has been
reviewed and is sufficient to meet the rules and regulations and
other technical requirements of the Authority and that the
Authority has the capacity and ability to serve the project in
accordance with their rules and regulations.
§ 180-404 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-404
1:396
(12) If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned
and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or land development, applicants shall present evidence
to the Board of Supervisors that the subdivision is to be supplied by
a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of
a certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment letter or agreement to
serve the project in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be
acceptable.
(13) An executed security agreement and financial security in a form
prescribed in this chapter and in an amount approved by the
Township Engineer.
(14) If applicable or required by the Board of Supervisors, an
appropriately executed Developer's Agreement which sets forth the
responsibilities of all parties regarding certain aspects of the
subdivision or land development such as the phasing or deferral of
improvements; maintenance of facilities; the design, installation
and inspection of any required on-site improvements or voluntary
off-site improvements; the contribution to any future infrastructure
improvements, or the like.
(15) Statement of all deed restrictions or covenants which may exist or
be a condition of sale or development of the property. Where a
homeowners' association will exist to own and maintain certain
lands or improvements, a copy of the homeowners' association
documents shall be submitted to the Township.
(16) Once approved, final plan submissions shall include a scanned, full
size (.pdf) copy and an electronic file of the complete plan set and
any other technical plans on a compact disk (CD). The digital file
shall comply with the requirements in Article III, § 180-308. Digital
Plan Requirements.
(17) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications as
may be required by the Board of Supervisors in the enforcement of
these regulations.
§ 180-404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-404
1:397

ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 180-501. Intent.
The design standards established in this chapter are intended to be
fundamental requirements to be applied with professional skill in the
subdividing and planning of land so as to produce attractive and
harmonious neighborhoods, convenient and safe streets, and economical
layouts of residential and other land development. The design standards
are further intended to encourage and promote flexibility and ingenuity in
the layout and design of subdivisions and land developments, in accordance
with modern and evolving principles of site planning and development.
§ 180-502. Application.
The following principles, standards, and requirements will be applied by
the Board of Supervisors and Planning Commission in their review and
evaluation of all subdivision and land development plan applications:
A. The standards and requirements contained herein shall be considered
the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety,
convenience, and general welfare.
B. Where literal compliance with the standards and requirements
contained herein is clearly impractical, the Board of Supervisors may
modify or waive such standards through the modification of
requirements process set forth in this chapter.
C. Subdivision and land development plans shall be given due
consideration to "Official Plans" of the Township, Dauphin County
region, or to such parts thereof as may be adopted pursuant to statute.
The Township Greenway Plan shall also be considered in the design and
dedication of open space and recreation areas.
D. Proposed land uses shall conform to the Lower Paxton Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended.
E. Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property, such as may arise
from fire, flood, disease, or other causes, shall not be planned for
development purposes unless such hazards have been eliminated or
unless the plan shall show adequate safeguards against them, which
shall be approved by the Township and/or appropriate regulatory
agencies.
F. Whenever a subdivision or land development plat or plan is submitted
which sets forth new streets or other ways of ingress and egress other
than a single cul-de-sac street, two separate points of ingress to and
egress from the land affected, or any significant portion thereof, must
be designated thereon. Such points of ingress and egress must be
designed and built to conform to the design and construction
requirements of Lower Paxton Township for public streets. An applicant
§ 180-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-502
1:399
§ 180-503. Streets.
may request a modification of this requirement and shall in support
thereof, present evidence that due to topography, site distance,
wetlands, environmental constraints, configuration of land, distance
between intersections or other unique factors not created by the
applicant, it is impractical to have a second way of ingress and egress.
Upon due consideration of these factors, the Board of Supervisors, at
their sole discretion, may grant the request for said modification.
A. General standards.
(1) Proposed streets shall be properly related to such street plans or
parts thereof as have been officially adopted by Lower Paxton
Township and shall be coordinated with existing or proposed
streets in adjoining subdivisions or land developments. Further,
proposed streets shall be properly related to county, regional or
State transportation plans as have been prepared and adopted as
prescribed by law.
(2) Streets shall be laid out to preserve the integrity of their design.
Local access streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by
through traffic and, where possible, collector and arterial streets
shall be designed for use by through traffic.
(3) Streets shall be related to the topography so as to establish usable
and desirable lots and satisfactory street grades.
(4) Proposed street arrangements shall make provisions for
continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas; the proper
projection of streets into adjoining undeveloped or unplanned
areas; and the continuation of proposed streets to the boundaries
of the tract being subdivided.
(5) New half or partial streets shall be prohibited except where
essential to the reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance
with the other requirements and standards of these regulations and
where, in addition, satisfactory assurance for dedication of the
remaining part of the street can be obtained; a cul-de-sac shall be
constructed at the end of such half street which shall be of a
permanent nature, unless a temporary cul-de-sac is approved.
(6) Names of new streets shall not duplicate or conflict with existing or
planned street names, or approximate such names by the use of
suffixes. Cognizance should be given to existing or planned street
names within the postal delivery district served by the local post
office. New streets shall bear the same name or number of any
continuation of alignment with an existing or planned street.
(7) Proposed private streets (streets not offered for dedication to the
Township) are prohibited, unless they meet the design standards of
these regulations.
§ 180-502 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-503
1:400
(8) Streets in and bordering a subdivision and or land development
plan shall be coordinated with, and be of such widths and grades
and at such locations so as to accommodate prospective traffic and
facilitate fire and police protection.
(9) Whenever a subdivision or land development abuts a street which
does not meet Township design criteria, the street shall be widened
to meet such criteria and provided with additional right-of-way. The
roadway shall also be provided with curbing, sidewalks, and
drainage facilities as prescribed herein.
(10) Where a lot has more than one side of street frontage and there is a
driveway on one side, if it is necessary to determine which side of
the lot fronts for purposes of this chapter, the lot shall be
considered to front on the street on which the driveway exists. In
all other cases, the lot shall be considered to front on the street
which the lot has the greatest frontage. If the lot frontage and
driveway are not determinative, the lot shall be considered to front
on the predominant street bordering the lot.
B. Street classification. Six functional classifications of streets and
roadways are defined by the Lower Paxton Township Comprehensive
Plan to include interstate, freeway, principal and minor arterials,
collectors and local streets. Of these classifications, freeways do not
exist in the Township, and interstates are not addressed by this article
given that these roadways are under the jurisdiction of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and do not typically involve
design activities associated with subdivision and land development
applications. Also, for purposes of this chapter, local streets shall also
be referred to as "minor streets." The following classifications
represent roadways within the Township that are regulated by the
provisions of this chapter:
(1) Arterial. This classification includes highways which provide
intracounty or intermunicipal traffic with volumes greater than
5,000 vehicles per day. Generally, these highways should
accommodate design speeds of 55 miles per hour. The following is a
list of those streets and roadways, which for the purposes of this
chapter, are classified as arterial streets. Newly planned streets
meeting this classification shall be designed to meet arterial street
design criteria.
Name of Street
Colonial Road (SR 3017)
Linglestown Road (SR 0039)
Locust Lane (SR 3024)
North Mountain Road (SR 3019)
Nyes Road (SR 2019)
§ 180-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-503
1:401
Name of Street
Rutherford Road (SR 3017)
U.S. Route 22 (SR 0022)
Union Deposit Road (SR 3020)
(2) Collector. This classification is intended to include those highways
which connect minor streets to arterial highways and serve as
traffic corridors connecting residential areas with commercial,
industrial, shopping and other services. They may also penetrate
residential areas. Generally, these highways experience traffic
volumes between 1,000 to 5,000 vehicles per day and shall be
designed to accommodate design speeds of 35 miles per hour. The
following is a list of those streets and roadways, for purposes of this
chapter that are classified as collector streets. Newly planned
streets meeting this classification shall be designed to meet
collector street design criteria.
Name of Street
Balthaser Street
Blue Mountain Parkway
Blue Ribbon Avenue
Blue Ridge Avenue (SR 2029)
Continental Drive
Crums Mill Road
Dartmouth Street
Devonshire Heights Road
Devonshire Road
Earl Drive
East Park Drive
Fairmont Drive
Goose Valley Road
Grove Road
Jonestown Road
Londonderry Road
Lyters Lane
McIntosh Road
North Lockwillow Avenue
Parkway East
Parkway West
§ 180-503 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-503
1:402
Name of Street
Prince Street
South Arlington Avenue
South Houcks Road
Valley Road
Wenrich Street
(3) Minor. This classification is intended to include streets and roads
that provide direct access to abutting land and connections to
higher classes of roadways. Traffic volumes are less than 1,000
vehicles per day and travel distance is generally short. These
streets and roads shall be designed for speeds of 25 miles per hour.
For purposes of this chapter, all roadways not classified as
collector, arterial or above are classified as minor streets. Newly
planned streets meeting this classification shall be designed to
meet minor street design criteria.
(4) A map of the Township road network is enclosed in Exhibit 9.36
C. Street width.
(1) Minimum street right-of-way and cartway widths shall be required
as presented in Table 503.1. Alternate street design types may be
entertained at the sole discretion of the Township under the
modification of requirements procedure based upon the type and
intensity of the development proposed, the merits of the proposed
alternative and a complete technical evaluation of all relevant
information.
(2) Provisions for additional street width (cartway and right-of-way)
including for private streets may be required when determined to
be necessary by the Board of Supervisors in specific cases for:
(a) Public safety and convenience.
(b) Parking in commercial and industrial areas and in areas of
highdensity development.
36.Editor's Note: Exhibit 9 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 180-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-503
1:403
Table 503.1 - Street Widths and Materials
Cartway Width Material Specifications
Street
Classification
ROW
Width
(feet)
With
Curbing
(feet)
Base
Material
Surface
Material
Arterial
streets
As determined by the Board of Supervisors
after consultation with the Township Engineer
and the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT)
Collector
streets
60 36 SAMD HMA
Base
Course, PG
6422, 0.3 to
< 3 million
ESALS, 25.0
mm Mix, 5
inches depth
-ANDBase
(No.
2A Crushed
Aggregate),
6 inches
depth
SAMD HMA
Wearing
Course, PG
6422, 0.3 to
< 3 million
ESALS,
9.5mm Mix,
1-1/2 inches
depth, SRL*
-AND-SAMD
HMA Binder
Course, PG
64-22, 0.3 to
< 3 million
ESALS, 19.0
mm Mix, 2
two depth
Minor streets
(industrial/
commercial
use)
60 34 Same as
collector
streets
Same as
collector
streets
§ 180-503 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-503
1:404
Table 503.1 - Street Widths and Materials
Cartway Width Material Specifications
Street
Classification
ROW
Width
(feet)
With
Curbing
(feet)
Base
Material
Surface
Material
Minor streets
(residential
use)
50 32 SAMD HMA
Base
Course, PG
6422, 0 to <
0.3 million
ESALS,
25.0mm
Mix, 3
inches depth
-ANDBase
(No.
2A Crushed
Aggregate),
6 inches
depth
SAMD HMA
Wearing
Course, PG
6422, 0.3 to
< 3 million
ESALS,
9.5mm Mix,
1-1/2 inches
depth, SRL*
-ANDSAMD
HMA
Binder
Course, PG
64-22, 0.3 to
< 3 million
ESALS, 19.0
mm Mix, 2
inches depth
Turnaround
of cul-de-sac
(diameter)
120 100 Same as
street
classification
Same as
street
classification
*Skid resistance level (SRL) determination
Average Daily Traffic SRL Alternates
20,000 and above E None
5,000 to 20,000 H E, H, blend of
E/M, blend of
E/G
3,000 to 5,000 G E, H, G blend
of H/L, blend
of E/L
1,000 to 3,000 M E, H, G, M,
blend of H/L,
blend of G/L,
blend of E/L
1,000 and below L Any
§ 180-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-503
1:405
Note: All blends are 50% by weight and shall be accomplished
by an approved method.
SAMD HMA — Superpave asphalt mix design, hot mix asphalt
D. Street pavement construction and drainage.
(1) All streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the latest edition of PennDOT Publication 408, Specifications, and
PennDOT Publication 72M, Standards for Roadway Construction.
Reference is made to Article VIII, Improvement and Construction
Requirements, of this chapter for additional requirements.
(2) All street pavement structures shall be constructed using
Superpave asphalt mix design (SAMD), hot mix asphalt (HMA)
paving materials to the minimum thicknesses and proportions as
referenced herein, subject however to the provisions contained in
§ 180-503D(3) below. Applicants shall be required to submit
estimates of average daily traffic (ADT) volumes for both site
generated traffic and for estimated pass through traffic from
adjacent developed and undeveloped land in order to determine the
roadway classification and SRL designation. Alternate pavement
types such as concrete, brick pavers and the like may be approved
by the Township under the modification of requirements process,
either in part or in its entirety, based upon a thorough technical
review of the proposed alternative as submitted by the applicant.
(3) A pavement design, in accordance with the current edition of
PennDOT Publication 242, Pavement Policy Manual, shall be
required for all new and improved roadways that will accommodate
a total of 100 or more equivalent 18-kip single-axle loads (ESALS)
in a given weekday in all directions. The pavement design
parameters will be determined by the applicant's consultant and
approved by the Township Engineer and shall take into account the
supporting road networks' capacity to handle additional heavy
vehicle loading. No proposed pavement section determined by the
pavement design may be less than the minimum requirements
contained in Table 503.1 of this article.
(4) If poor subgrade soils are present, the Township may require that
the applicant conduct a subgrade soils evaluation for new,
reconstructed and widened streets.
(a) This evaluation shall include, at a minimum:
[1] Gradation test to determine the percent of given particle
sizes of the different soil types of the project. Gradation
test results shall be used to determine the unified soils
classification for the subgrade material.
[2] In-place moisture content and optimum moisture content.
§ 180-503 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-503
1:406
[3] In-place density and dry mass density.
[4] California bearing ratio (CBR).
(b) These tests shall be performed on the existing subgrade
material (in-situ soils) upon which the proposed streets will be
built. Select borrow materials placed as part of the street
construction must also be tested prior to the placement of the
pavement. Stabilization measures will be required as part of
the project if the tested CBR values are equal to or less than
five. Under no circumstances will in-situ subgrade soils or
select borrow materials with a CBR equal to or less than three
to be used for street construction.
(c) The exact number of tests required will be determined at the
discretion of the Township Engineer, given the size of the
proposed project, the location of the proposed street system
and existing soil conditions. At a minimum three representative
tests will be required. All test locations must be approved by
the Township Engineer and must be documented by the
applicant.
(5) Where a new subdivision or land development proposes a street
system that ties into an existing street with a substandard
pavement section, cross slope or exhibits rutting, cracking, base
failure or other poor qualities, the Township may require the
applicant to apply remedial measures to the streets within and
bordering the subject property in order to provide proper access to
the site and to accommodate prospective traffic. Required remedial
measures may include, but shall not be limited to, milling and
overlaying, placement of HMA scratch or leveling courses, crack
sealing or crack repair, select base repair, sawcutting and
pavement replacement or even pavement reconstruction. At the
time of filing the preliminary plan, or in the absence of a
preliminary plan, then the final plan, the applicant shall evaluate
the condition of the existing pavement and the Township shall
determine the need for any remedial work.
(6) All streets shall be provided with a complete storm sewer collection
and conveyance system designed in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter 170, Stormwater Management, Drainage and Erosion
Control.
(7) Pavement base drains shall be designed and installed on all new,
reconstructed, and widened streets to drain subsurface water
beneath the pavement structure. Pavement base drains shall
comply with the construction requirements as contained in Article
VIII of this chapter. Combination storm sewer/underdrain may be
used in lieu of base drain wherever a conflict exists between the
proposed base drain and proposed storm sewer system.
E. Off-street parking.
§ 180-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-503
1:407
(1) Private parking lots and associated access drives for commercial,
institutional, and industrial uses and for multifamily residential
facilities shall be paved in accordance with the following minimum
standard:
1" depth, SAMD HMA wearing course.
2" depth, SAMD HMA binder course.
6" depth, PennDOT No. 2A crushed aggregate base course.
Engineering judgment shall be applied in all instances in
determining the required pavement thickness based upon traffic
volumes, vehicle loadings, and soil conditions specific to the site
being developed.
(2) Alternate designs with an equal or greater structural number will
be considered by the Township.
(3) Any and all portions of driveways within the public right-of-way
accessing parking areas shall conform to the construction
standards listed herein.
F. Cul-de-sac or dead-end streets.
(1) Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as cul-de-sac
streets or for future access to adjoining properties.
(2) Any dead-end street, for access to any adjoining property or
because of an authorized phased development, shall be provided
with a temporary cul-de-sac, within the subdivision or land
development; and shall be provided with a temporary easement
guaranteed for public use until such time as the street is extended
and dedicated to the Township for public use. Temporary culs-desac
shall be paved with a minimum of six inches of PennDOT No. 2A
subbase material and two inches of either HMA binder or wearing
course. The minimum diameter of temporary culs-de-sac shall be
80 feet.
(3) The maximum length of a dead end street or cul-de-sac shall be no
more than 600 feet and shall not furnish access to more than 20
residential dwelling units.
(4) The minimum length of a cul-de-sac street shall be 250 feet.
(5) The length of a cul-de-sac shall be measured from the face of the
curb of the nearest intersecting street at the open end of the cul-desac
street to the center point of the bulb of the cul-de-sac.
(6) Culs-de-sac shall be fully paved to Township standards for the
respective street classification.
(7) "Eyebrow" protrusions and "hammerhead" type turnarounds are
prohibited on all streets as a type of cul-de-sac.
§ 180-503 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-503
1:408
(8) A second cul-de-sac shall not branch off of or intersect from a culde-
sac street.
(9) Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to the tract
boundary with sufficient additional width provided along the
boundary line to permit extension of the street at full width.
(10) A minimum of two locations, evenly spaced around the cul-de-sac
bulb shall be signed as no parking areas to allow for snow storage.
The restricted areas shall be a minimum of 30 feet in length and
generally opposite from the entrance portion of the cul-de-sac and
shall extend from the curbline of the cul-de-sac to the right-of-way
line. The areas shall be kept free of driveways, mailboxes,
landscaping, light standards, fire hydrants and other features that
would be adversely impacted by the plowing and accumulation of
snow and ice. Said restriction areas shall be clearly labeled and
noted on the plan.
(11) Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be towards the open
end. If drainage is toward the closed end it shall be collected and
piped away in an underground storm sewer system. Provision shall
also be made for the overland conveyance of stormwater from
storm events of greater frequency for that which the storm sewer
system has been designed.
(12) The center line grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 10%,
and the grade of the diameter of the turnaround portion of the culde-
sac shall not exceed 5.0%. The minimum grade of the cul-de-sac
bulb shall be 1.0% along both the center line and curbline.
(13) Cul-de-sac streets serving commercial and/or industrial uses shall
be adequate for the type of use to be serviced as approved by the
Township Engineer but in no case shall exceed 800 feet in length.
(14) Interior planting islands within the cul-de-sac turnaround area are
required; however, a perpetual maintenance agreement is required
and shall be implemented to the satisfaction of the Township. The
agreement shall provide a guarantee for the maintenance and
replacement of all planting materials and other facilities. Where
islands are provided, the design shall accommodate access and
circulation for the largest anticipated vehicle and for emergency
access assuming on-street parking of vehicles.
G. Alleyways.
(1) Alleyways shall not be permitted as an acceptable form of street
within the Township unless specifically authorized by the Board of
Supervisors in conjunction with the design and approval of a
Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) in accordance with
the provisions of the Lower Paxton Township Zoning Ordinance. If
authorized, alleyways shall be privately owned and maintained; be
§ 180-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-503
1:409
located within an easement or right-of-way having a minimum
width of 20 feet; have a minimum cartway width of 15 feet; meet
the paving standards for Minor Streets as contained herein; and
be reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer regarding all
other design aspects.
H. Street alignment.
(1) Streets shall be logically related to the terrain and topography so
as to produce usable roads with reasonable alignments and grades.
(2) Horizontal street alignments shall be measured along the center
line. Horizontal circular curves shall be used for all changes in
direction and shall have minimum center line radii as shown in the
following table for each street classification:
Street Classification
Minimum Horizontal Center line
Radius
(feet)
Arterial As required by PennDOT Design
Standards
Collector 350
Minor or private street 150
(3) Straight portions of the street must be tangent to the beginning or
ending of curves and there must be a tangent length of at least 50
feet at all intersections unless the street is superelevated then
sufficient separation must be provided for proper superelevation
transition. For curves on arterials and collector streets, proper
superelevation must be provided as required by the Township and
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Broken-back and
compound curves shall be prohibited.
(4) Proper stopping sight distance must be provided with respect to
horizontal and vertical alignment, measured along the center line,
from the height of the driver's eye (3.5 feet above grade) to the
height of an object on the roadway (2.0 feet). See the following
table for the minimum stopping sight distances which must be
maintained along a roadway alignment:
Design Speed
(miles per hour)
Minimum Stopping Sight
Distance
(feet)
60 570
55 495
50 425
45 360
§ 180-503 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-503
1:410
Design Speed
(miles per hour)
Minimum Stopping Sight
Distance
(feet)
40 305
35 250
30 200
25 155
I. Driveways.
(1) Private driveways on corner lots shall be located at least 40 feet
from the nearest edge of the driveway to the point of intersection of
the nearest edge of pavement or cartway.
(2) Driveways shall intersect streets only at right angles.
(3) Driveways shall not be located closer than five feet from an inlet or
fire hydrant.
(4) Where driveways access a curbed street, the driveway opening
shall contain a depressed curb with a minimum of 1 1/2 inch curb
reveal across the required width of the driveway. At each end of the
driveway opening a two-foot curb transition to full height curbing
shall be provided.
(5) All driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in such a
manner as not to interfere or be inconsistent with the design,
maintenance and drainage of streets or the safe and convenient
passage of traffic. The number of driveways shall be kept to a
minimum necessary to serve the intended use. Multiple driveways
for one lot shall be prohibited unless it can be demonstrated that
such arrangement is necessary for safe and efficient traffic flow,
capacity or unless multiple driveways are necessary to comply with
other provisions of this chapter.
(6) No single private driveway shall serve more than six single-family
residential units. A parking lot may serve more than six residential
units; however, any parking lot that serves more than 24 residential
units shall have a minimum of two points of access to a public
street. The two points of access must, at a minimum, be
constructed to a width of 24 feet with radii designed to
accommodate the largest anticipated vehicles.
(7) No shared driveways shall be approved except where governed by
a recorded easement agreement at a minimum setting forth
maintenance requirements, cross access provisions, cost sharing,
and the like. Said easements must also be reflected graphically on
an approved subdivision or land development plan. Shared
§ 180-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-503
1:411
driveways shall have a minimum width of 15 feet and a maximum
width of 24 feet.
(8) All new private driveways must be paved for a minimum distance of
50 feet from the street right-of-way line with a bituminous surface
material, concrete, brick pavers or other material acceptable to the
Township. Stone, gravel, sand, dirt or other similar type driveways
shall be prohibited. The minimum paving standard for bituminous
driveways shall be six inches of PennDOT No. 2A subbase material
and 2 1/2 inches of HMA wearing course. The minimum paving
standard for concrete driveways shall be six inches of PennDOT No.
2A subbase material and six inches of concrete. Brick pavers shall
be designed for a single axle truck wheel load condition. Driveways
within the right-of-way area must be paved to meet Township street
paving requirements for the adjoining street classification.
(9) Residential driveways shall not be less than 12 feet in width or
more than 24 feet in width within 15 feet of the street right-of-way
line except however; for single-family residential structures having
three car garages then the maximum width may be increased to 30
feet; provided, however, that no more than 30% of the development
shall contain driveways wider than 24 feet.
(10) Driveways shall not exceed a slope of 20% and shall have a leveling
area adjacent to the street sufficient to accommodate the change of
grade. Driveways that serve properties which are lower than the
adjacent roadway must be provided with a vertical alignment that
prohibits the collection of stormwater from the street into the
driveway and property area.
(11) Where driveways enter a property through an embankment
condition, a retaining wall of adequate design shall be provided, or
in lieu thereof, the side slopes of the cut slope shall be graded to no
more than one-foot vertical to two feet horizontal. Grading in the
vicinity of the adjacent street shall be such that required sight
distance is provided. Lot and driveway grading shall be conducted
such that storm drainage and soil erosion do not adversely impact
adjacent streets.
J. Street intersections.
(1) Streets shall be laid out to intersect at right angles.
(2) Intersections involving the junction of more than two streets are
prohibited.
(3) Boulevard type streets or intersections having a center landscaped
island, traffic separators, traffic calming devices or other style
medians shall be prohibited unless a perpetual maintenance
agreement is provided and implemented which shall, to the
satisfaction of the Township, provide a guarantee for maintenance
and replacement of all such areas.
§ 180-503 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-503
1:412
(4) Streets intersecting another street shall either intersect directly
opposite to each other, or shall be separated by the following
distances as measured along the center line of the street being
intersected.
Intersecting Street
Minimum Separation Distance
(feet)
Arterial 800
Collector 600
Minor or private street 300
(5) Intersections shall be approached on all sides by a straight leveling
area, the grade of which shall not exceed 4% within 60 feet of the
intersection of the nearest street right-of-way line.
(6) Unless required to accommodate larger vehicles, the curb or edge
of pavement radii at the intersections of streets shall not be less
than the following:
Intersection
Minimum Simple Curve Radii
(feet)
Collector with collector
street
35
Collector with minor
street
25
Minor street with minor
street
20
Radius corners must be provided on the property lines
substantially concentric with the curb radius.
(7) Where required to accommodate turning movements for larger
vehicles, three centered compound curves along curblines shall be
permitted upon review and approval of the Township Engineer. In
the design of compound curves, the ratio of the flatter radius to the
sharper radius should not exceed 1.50. Sudden changes between
curves of widely different radii shall be prohibited.
(8) Curb cuts and sidewalk ramps must be provided at all corners of
intersections, access to building sites and at other locations
deemed appropriate by the Township in order to provide
accessibility in accordance with the latest requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(9) Where required by the Township, the applicant may be required to
provide a turning analysis, turning templates or other similar
efforts to demonstrate that street and driveway intersections have
§ 180-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-503
1:413
been properly designed to accommodate larger and/or emergency
vehicles.
K. Intersection sight distance and clear sight triangles.
(1) Adequate intersection stopping sight distance shall be provided at
all intersections of streets, and for driveways intersecting a street.
All intersections shall be designed to provide required sight
distance with regard to both horizontal and vertical alignment in
accordance with "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and
Streets," American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO), current edition. Applicants
shall provide field-measured available sight distances at all
proposed intersections onto existing roadways for all turning
movements and provide a report documenting the method of
computation and the available and required sight distance at all
locations. Said analysis and report must be certified by a
professional engineer. For purposes of analysis and design, the
posted speed limit of the intersecting street shall be used in the
computation of required sight distance unless operating speeds
exceed posted speeds by greater than 10 miles per hour, at which
time the operating speed (85th percentile speed) shall be used.
Based upon traffic patterns and roadway operations, the Township
may require the applicant to conduct a speed study to document
the 85th percentile speed if in the opinion of the Township a study
is required. Exhibit 837 depicts required intersection sight
distances for a typical two lane minor road, stop condition with 3%
grades or less. Other conditions must be computed in accordance
with the above requirements.
(2) If the minimum required intersection sight distance cannot be
achieved, the applicant shall be responsible for either relocating
the site's access point to provide adequate sight distance,
restricting turning movements, if applicable, or by making
improvements such as regrading, roadway reconstruction or
similar measures in order to provide adequate sight distance in
order to meet the requirements of this chapter.
(3) Adequate clear sight triangles (areas of unobstructed view) shall be
provided at all intersections of streets, and for driveways (except
single family residential driveways) intersecting a street. The sight
triangle shall be formed by measuring along the center line of the
cartway or driveway, from the point of intersection of the two
streets, a distance as shown in the following table for the
respective classification of the street, forming each leg of the
triangle. The sight triangle is then formed by connecting the
endpoints. Structures, vegetation, grading and other obstructions
in excess of 24 inches in height shall be prohibited within the clear
sight triangle. Clear sight triangles shall be depicted on all
37.Editor's Note: Exhibit 8 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-503 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-503
1:414
subdivision and land development plans for all street and driveway
intersections. Exhibit 838 depicts the typical configuration of clear
sight triangles.
Intersecting Street
Classification
Clear Sight Triangle Leg
(feet)
Arterial or collector 150
Minor, private or driveway 75
(4) If the minimum sight distance can only be achieved by a line of
sight across lands which are not public street right-of-way, a clear
sight easement shall be established on the plan and/or recorded on
each deed for all affected properties. The easement shall prohibit
the placement or existence of structures, vegetation or change of
grade, in excess of 24 inches in height within the clear sight zone.
The easement shall establish the right of the Township to enter
onto the property to clear obstructions, to trim or otherwise restore
the area to meet the required sight distance at the property
owner's expense if after being notified by the Township to remove
obstructions, the property owner has failed to respond in a timely
fashion.
L. Street grades.
(1) The center line grades of streets shall not be less than the minimum
or more than the maximum requirements listed below:
(a) The minimum center line grade or longitudinal slope at the
curbline shall be 1%.
(b) Center line grades shall not exceed the following:
Street Classification Maximum Center Line Grade
Arterial 6%
Collector 8%
Minor or private street 10%
(2) Vertical curves shall be provided at all changes in grade and shall
be designed in relation to the extent of the grade change and to
provide the proper minimum stopping sight distance with respect
to vertical alignment by using the following minimum K values as
shown in the table below. The minimum length of the vertical curve
shall be determined by multiplying the algebraic difference in
grades by the appropriate K value, with an absolute minimum
length of vertical curve of 50 feet.
38.Editor's Note: Exhibit 9 is on file in the Township offices.
§ 180-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-503
1:415
K Value (a)
Design Speed Crest Sag
60 151 136
55 114 115
50 84 96
45 61 79
40 44 64
35 29 49
30 19 37
25 12 26
NOTES:
(a) Values based on sight distance measured along the center
line, from the height of the driver's eye (3.5 feet) to the height
of an object on the roadway (2.0 feet).
(3) On minor or private streets, continuous grades of 10% shall not be
more than 400 feet in length.
(4) Cross slope: The cross slope or the crown on streets shall be at
least 1/4 inch per foot but not more than 3/8 inch per foot as
directed by the Township Engineer. This applies only to straight or
tangent sections of the roadway. Where a horizontal curve is
required to be superelevated to reduce lateral vehicular
acceleration as required by the design speed of the roadway, the
crown requirement shall be eliminated and the roadway provided
with a superelevation design acceptable to the Township Engineer.
M. Street right-of-way grades.
(1) Streets shall have a planting strip located between the curb and the
sidewalk.
(2) Street right-of-way areas, which are not part of the paved cartway,
shall be graded to have a slope of 2% from the top of the curb
upward to a point two feet beyond the right-of-way line.
(3) The portion of the right-of-way which is not provided with paving,
curbing or sidewalks shall be provided with a minimum of four
inches of topsoil and seeded with PennDOT Formula B seed mixture
to establish a good stand of lawn type grass or be sodded with a
similar turf mixture.
(a) Slopes of banks along streets. The slope of banks along streets
measured perpendicular to the street center line shall be no
steeper than the following:
§ 180-503 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-503
1:416
§ 180-504. Easements.
Easements shall be provided for storm drainage facilities, stormwater
management areas, best management practice (BMP) areas, sanitary sewer
facilities, natural features areas, accessways, overhead or underground
public or private utility facilities, and other special purpose easements
in consultation with the Township Engineer, the Lower Paxton Township
Authority, and the various utility companies. All easements must connect to
a public street in order to provide access to said easement area.
[1] One foot of vertical measurement for three feet of
horizontal measurement for fills. Fill slopes shall begin a
minimum distance of two feet behind the right-of-way line
to allow for the proper placement of the sidewalk and for
rounding of the slope.
[2] One foot of vertical measurement for two feet of horizontal
measurement for cuts. Cut slopes shall begin a minimum
distance of two feet behind the right-of-way line to allow
for the proper placement of the sidewalk and for rounding
of the slope. Where site drainage conditions dictate,
additional area behind the right-of-way line shall be
provided to accommodate the placement of drainage
facilities (inlets, swales, etc.) as may be required to
prevent excessive amounts of site runoff from draining
across the verge area.
N. Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) design standards.
(1) Where a subdivision or land development application proposes the
design of a community meeting the requirements of a Traditional
Neighborhood Development (TND), the Township may grant a
modification of certain street design standards contained herein to
allow for alternate designs consistent with TND principles. For
consideration of a modification of street design standards, the
applicant shall provide a design for the Township Engineer's review
and approval generally meeting the design guidelines as contained
in the current edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers'
(ITE) Traditional Neighborhood Development Street Design
Guidelines, ITE Transportation Planning Council Committee 5 P-8.
A. The minimum width of such drainage easements shall be 20 feet and
shall be centered over the drainage or storm sewer facilities. Additional
width may be required by the Township depending on the location,
purpose, depth of facilities and use of the easement. Easement areas
shall be graded to allow for traversable and unobstructed access by
maintenance vehicles and equipment.
B. Easements for stormwater management facilities, BMP areas and
similar structures shall encompass the formal facility to a point 10 feet
§ 180-503 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-504
1:417
beyond the high water elevation, toe of slope, or other logical line of
demarcation to allow proper operation and maintenance of the facility.
C. Sanitary sewer easements shall have a minimum width of 30 feet unless
otherwise approved by the Lower Paxton Township Authority.
D. Easements for the preservation of natural features areas as required
herein shall be of a sufficient size to encompass the areas to provide for
the long-term protection of said natural features. This requirement
shall also include features which are dedicated or designed in
conjunction with the Greenway Plan.
E. Access easements shall have a minimum width of 20 feet and shall be
designed to accommodate the ingress, egress, and regress for the
intended purpose.
F. Utility easements shall be provided as prescribed by the individual
utility company depending upon the purpose and use of the easement.
Where an existing utility easement exists within a subdivision or land
development and construction activity is proposed within said
easement, the applicant shall obtain written approval from the utility
owner authorizing the construction activity as proposed.
G. Wherever possible such utility and drainage easements shall be
centered on the side or rear lot lines of properties.
H. No buildings or other structures, fences, landscaping, walls or
obstructions shall be permitted within easement areas. Additionally, no
change of grade beyond that approved by the Township shall occur
within the easement area.
I. Where a subdivision and/or land development is traversed by a water
course, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a
drainage easement, to a width to be approved by the Township
Engineer, conforming substantially with the line of such water course,
for the purpose of maintaining the unimpeded natural flow, widening,
deepening, relocating, improving or protecting such drainage facilities
or for the purpose of installing drainage facilities. Under no
circumstances shall the easement be less than 25 feet in width and shall
extend outward a minimum of 10 feet from the top of each bank.
J. All easements shall be graphically depicted on the subdivision or land
development plans and shall clearly indicate the location, width,
purpose and beneficiary of the proposed easement. Easements that will
be conveyed to the Township shall be provided with metes and bounds
descriptions tied to the property lines of the property which is
encumbered by said easement.
K. Where drainage easements are depicted on private property for the
benefit of Lower Paxton Township, it shall be construed to mean that
said easement is for access to and maintenance of said facility only in
the event that the landowner fails to maintain said easement and the
§ 180-504 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-504
1:418
§ 180-505. Blocks.
§ 180-506. Building lots.
operation of the facility contained within said easement area is
malfunctioning, is adversely effecting adjacent or downstream
properties or is crucial for the overall public safety and welfare of
the residents of the Township. The Township will not own or maintain
stormwater or other facilities unless otherwise specifically governed by
operation of an agreement.
A. The length, width, shape, and design of blocks shall be determined with
due regard to the provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type
proposed, to the land use and/or zoning requirements of the Township,
the topography of the land being subdivided or developed, and the
requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
B. Blocks shall not exceed 1,600 feet in length, nor be less than 300 feet in
length as measured between the center lines of the intersecting streets.
C. Residential blocks shall generally be of sufficient depth to
accommodate two tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots
bordering an arterial or collector street are used or, where due to the
contour of the land or the necessary layout of the subdivision, there is
insufficient depth between intersecting streets for such two-tier design.
D. Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the elements
of design contained in this Section if the nature of the use requires
other treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for employees and
customers shall be provided along with safe and convenient limited
access to the street system. Space for off-street loading shall also be
provided with limited access to the street system. Extension of streets,
railroad access rights-of-way, and utilities shall be provided as
necessary.
A. General standards.
(1) The size, depth, width and orientation of lots shall conform to
applicable zoning regulations of Lower Paxton Township.
(2) Side lot lines shall, in so far as practical, run perpendicular or
radial from the street right-of-way line.
(3) Where feasible, lot lines should follow municipal boundaries rather
than cross them, in order to avoid jurisdictional problems.
(4) All lots shall be provided with sewer and water service either public
or private in accordance with Township zoning requirements for
the applicable zoning district and for lot size requirements.
(5) If, after subdividing, remnants of land exist, they shall be either:
§ 180-504 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-506
1:419
§ 180-507. Site lighting.
(a) Incorporated in existing or proposed lots; or
(b) Legally dedicated to public use, if acceptable to the Township,
or dedicated to a homeowner's association or similar entity.
B. Lot frontage.
(1) All building lots shall abut an existing or proposed public street.
Flag lots shall not be permitted as a form of lot layout within the
Township.
(2) Double or reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited except where
required to provide separation of residential development from
collector or arterial streets or to overcome specific disadvantages
of topography or orientation.
(3) No residential lots shall be created which front upon a limited
access highway. Furthermore, no major subdivision and/or land
developments shall be created which front upon an arterial street.
A. General.
(1) Adequate site lighting as described herein shall be required in all
subdivisions and land developments. These lighting requirements
provide appropriate standards to ensure adequate nighttime safety
and security while minimizing the spillover of light and glare on
operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, adjacent properties and
other land uses near the light source.
(2) General requirements. Exterior lighting shall be provided along
public and private streets, in parking areas, pedestrian sidewalks
and walkways and nonresidential driveway intersections in
accordance with the standards contained herein and in Zoning
Ordnance Article V, § 203-507. Lighting used for security purposes
shall also conform to the same standards.
(3) Applicability. Outdoor lighting shall be required for safety and
personal security in areas of public assembly and traverse;
including but not limited to, single-family and multifamily dwelling
unit developments, commercial, industrial, public recreational and
institutional uses. In addition to the minimum placement
requirements, the Board of Supervisors may require lighting to be
incorporated for other uses or locations as they deem necessary.
The glare control requirements contained herein and in Zoning
Ordinance Article V, § 203-507, apply to all lighting installations,
including residential applications.
B. Definitions.
HIGH ACTIVITY — Examples include major athletic events, major
cultural or civic events, regional shopping centers, and related uses.
§ 180-506 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-507
1:420
LOW ACTIVITY — Examples include small neighborhood shops,
industrial employee parking, educational facility parking, church
parking, and residential parking.
MEDIUM ACTIVITY — Examples include libraries, hospitals,
restaurants, banks, community recreation centers, large apartment
buildings, industrial buildings, office parks, or neighborhood retail
stores.
C. Illumination levels.
(1) Illumination, where required by this chapter, shall have intensities
and uniformity ratios in accordance with the current recommended
practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
(IESNA), as amended. The following table outlines the design
requirements for site lighting:
Site Lighting Design Requirements
Application
Maintained
Footcandles
Uniformity
Ratio -
Avg./Min.
Roadways, residential 0.4 Avg. 6:1
Roadways, commercial/
industrial
0.9 Avg. 6:1
Parking, residential
Vehicular traffic 0.5 Avg. 4:1
Pedestrian safety,
security and orientation
0.2 Avg. 4:1
Parking, commercial
Vehicular traffic, lowactivity
lots
0.50 Avg. 3:1
Vehicular traffic,
medium-activity lots
1.0 Avg. 3:1
Vehicular traffic, highactivity
lots
2.0 - 4.0 Avg. 3:1
Pedestrian safety, security
and orientation
Low-activity lots 0.2 Avg. 3:1
Medium-activity lots 0.6 Avg. 3:1
High-activity lots 0.9 Avg. 3:1
Walkways and bikeways 0.5 Avg. 5:1
Building entrances 5.0 Avg. —
Service station islands -
Avg./Max.
20/30 4:1
§ 180-507 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-507
1:421
Site Lighting Design Requirements
Application
Maintained
Footcandles
Uniformity
Ratio -
Avg./Min.
Car dealerships - front
row/other
20/10 Max. 5:1 (Max./Min.)
Note: All roadway fixtures shall be equipped with high-pressure
sodium lighting (HPS).
D. Fixture design.
(1) Fixtures shall be of a type and design appropriate to the lighting
application, and aesthetically acceptable to the Township.
(2) For areas such as parking lots, full-cutoff-type fixtures shall be
used.
(3) Fixtures shall be equipped with or be capable of being backfitted
with light-directing devices such as shields, visors or hoods when
necessary to redirect offending light distribution.
E. Control of nuisance and disabling glare.
(1) All outdoor lighting, whether or not required by this chapter; on
private, residential, commercial, industrial, municipal, recreational
or institutional property; shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted
and maintained so as not to present a disabling glare hazard to
drivers or pedestrians, or a nuisance glare concern to neighboring
properties.
(2) Directional fixtures such as floodlights, spotlights and sign lights,
shall be installed or aimed so that they do not shine directly into the
window of a neighboring residence, directly into a roadway, or
skyward.
(3) Flickering, flashing or strobe-type lights shall not be permitted.
(4) Light sources or luminaries shall not be located within buffer yard
areas except for lighting pedestrian walkways.
(5) Unless otherwise permitted by the Board of Supervisors, lighting
shall be controlled by automatic switching devices such as timers,
motion detectors and/or photocells, to extinguish offending sources
between 11:00 p.m. and dawn, to mitigate glare and sky-lighting
consequences.
(6) Vegetation screens shall not be employed to serve as the primary
means for controlling glare. Rather, such control shall be achieved
primarily through the use of full-cutoff fixtures, the appropriate
application of mounting height, wattage, aiming angle, fixture
§ 180-507 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-507
1:422
placement and fixture design, etc. and the additions of shields and
baffles as necessary.
(7) The amount of illumination projected onto another property shall
not exceed 0.10 horizontal footcandles at the property line for
adjacent residential uses and 0.50 horizontal footcandles at the
property line for adjacent commercial and industrial uses.
(8) Externally illuminated signs shall be lighted by fixtures mounted at
the top of the sign and aimed down rather than by fixtures mounted
at the bottom of the sign and aimed up.
F. Installation.
(1) Lighting fixtures shall not be mounted in excess of 20 feet above
the adjacent grade for residential projects, 35 feet above the
adjacent grade for commercial projects; and 40 feet above the
adjacent grade for industrial projects.
(2) Electrical feeds to lighting standards shall run underground, not
overhead.
(3) Lighting standards in public parking areas shall be placed a
minimum of three feet outside the paved area; or three feet behind
curblines or tire stop locations; or on reinforced concrete pedestals
a minimum of 18 inches in diameter and at least 30 inches high
above the pavement grade, or by other acceptable protective
means approved by the Township Engineer.
G. Ownership and maintenance.
(1) Lighting fixtures on private property shall be owned and
maintained by the property owner so as to always meet the
requirements of this chapter. Once approved and installed, no
changes to fixture type, wattage, illumination angle or other
modifications shall be permitted that violate the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Generally, streetlights located within the public street right-of-way
shall be owned and maintained by the local utility company having
jurisdiction. Where applicable, the Township may require the
applicant to enter into an agreement with said utility company
regarding the payment of all costs and fees for the installation of
streetlighting facilities.
(3) If specifically approved by the Township under a development
agreement with the applicant, the Township may, under special
circumstances, allow privately owned and maintained
streetlighting facilities within the street right-of-way line.
H. Plan submission.
§ 180-507 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-507
1:423
(1) Lighting plans submitted to the municipality for review and
approval shall include a layout of the proposed fixture locations;
isofootcandle plots that demonstrate adequate intensities and
uniformity; and manufacturers' catalog cuts that present a
description of the equipment, including glare-reduction devices,
lamps, switching devices, mounting heights and mounting methods
proposed. All proposed development plans shall, at the time of
preliminary plan submittal, include lighting plans indicating
proposed placement of all lighting fixtures incorporated with the
above-referenced specifications. The lighting plans shall also
provide an engineering detail of standards, foundations, fixtures as
well as information on the manufacturer, model, and installation
techniques.
(2) Fixture location/placement. The following are minimum
requirements for placement of street and/or site lighting fixtures
within or adjacent to new subdivisions or land developments:
(a) All intersections involving existing or proposed collector public
streets within or adjacent to the proposed development.
(b) Along all existing or proposed collector streets within or
adjacent to the proposed development at intervals sufficient to
provide the desired lighting levels referenced herein.
(c) All terminal ends of center median islands having concrete
curbing, trees, and/or other fixed objects not having a
breakaway design for speeds of 25 miles per hour or greater.
(d) Any/all defined pedestrian crossings shown on the approved
plans (or required by the Township) located within the
development or along existing roads abutting the development
with said crossing located in areas other than lighted
intersections.
(e) Any signalized intersection abutting the proposed
development.
(f) Any new traffic signal installation required by the proposed
development.
(g) Within private parking lots and along aisleways and access
drives to provide the required lighting levels referenced
herein.
(h) Building access points.
I. Compliance monitoring.
(1) If the Township judges that a lighting installation creates a safety
or personal security hazard, the person(s) responsible for the
lighting shall be notified and requested to take timely remedial
action.
§ 180-507 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-507
1:424
§ 180-508. Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways.
(2) Measurement. For all measurements regarding compliance,
lighting levels shall be measured in footcandles. Measurement
shall be taken with a direct reading portable light meter or other
light-reading equipment recommended by the Township Engineer.
(3) Method. Readings shall be taken by qualified personnel so that the
light reading meter has been exposed long enough to provide a
constant reading. Measurements shall be made after dark with the
light sources in question on, then with the same sources off. The
difference between the two readings shall be compared to the
maximum permitted illumination at the property line at ground
level. This procedure eliminates the effects of moonlight and other
ambient light.
J. Nuisance glare and inadequate illumination levels.
(1) When the Township judges that an installation produces
unacceptable levels of nuisance glare or skyward light or that
illumination levels are insufficient or not being maintained in
accordance with this chapter, the Township shall cause notification
of the person(s) responsible for the lighting and require remedial
action.
(2) Nonconforming lighting. Any lighting fixture, including the bulb(s),
existing as of the effective date of this chapter which does not
conform with the requirements of this chapter shall be considered
a lawful, nonconforming lighting fixture. A nonconforming lighting
fixture shall be made to comply with the requirements of this
chapter when such fixture is replaced, relocated or repaired.
K. Exemption for specified uses.
(1) Because of their unique requirements for nighttime visibility and
their limited hours of operation, public and private recreational
uses such as ball diamonds, playing fields, tennis courts and
volleyball courts are exempt from the above requirements.
(2) Outdoor public and private recreational uses specified above shall
not exceed a maximum permitted post height of 100 feet above the
adjacent ground surface.
(3) Outdoor public and private recreational uses may exceed a total
cutoff angle of 90°, provided that the luminaire is shielded to
prevent light and glare spillover to adjacent residential uses as
described herein.
A. Requirements.
(1) Sidewalks must be installed along both sides of all new interior
streets in all residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions
§ 180-507 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-508
1:425
and land developments within the Township unless otherwise
waived by the Township. Sidewalks must also be constructed along
the side of all exterior streets upon which the subdivision or land
development fronts. Where sidewalks are required to be installed,
curbing, street widening and drainage improvements must also be
provided.
(2) Sidewalks shall not be waived where, in the Township's opinion, it
is desirable to link sidewalks in existing, adjoining or proposed
developments or where it would be desirable to continue sidewalks
that are existing to provide access to community facilities such as
schools, bus stops, shopping areas, and recreation areas.
(3) The Township may, in its sole discretion, waive the requirements
for sidewalks on one or both sides of the street where alternative,
private pedestrian interior pathways located off of the street rightof-
way are planned and provided or where, in the judgment of the
Township, there are unique circumstances, other hardships or
where the absence of sidewalks better serves the particular needs
of the subdivision or land development.
B. Placement.
(1) All sidewalks must be constructed no closer than four inches to the
street right-of-way line and extend toward the curbline. A grass
planting strip shall be provided between the curb and the sidewalk.
(2) Refer to Article VIII, Improvement and Construction Requirements,
for sidewalk construction specifications.
(3) Maintenance of sidewalks within the street right-of-way shall be
the responsibility of the property owner whose property abuts the
sidewalk.
C. Pedestrian pathways and greenways. If sidewalks are waived in favor of
private pedestrian pathways considered more efficient and desirable to
provide circulation or access within the development, and to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, open spaces and other
facilities then the applicant must provide a plan, accompanying the
waiver request, indicating the layout and arrangement of the proposed
pathways. This provision shall not be construed as a mechanism for
developers to merely parallel street right-of-way lines with pedestrian
pathways, but shall be applied where, owing to unique physical
constraints, development theme or building placement, an on-site
pathway is more advantageous to the Township than a formal sidewalk
system. If authorized, the alternative pedestrian pathway must meet
the following general criteria:
(1) Pathways must be located within a minimum ten-foot-wide access
easement for the benefit of the general public. Access to the public
street system must be provided at regular intervals throughout the
development not exceeding 800 feet.
§ 180-508 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-508
1:426
§ 180-509. Curbing.
§ 180-510. Site excavation and grading.
(2) Pathways must be a minimum width of six feet wide and have a
paved travel surface. The material requirements of the travel
surface for pedestrian paths shall be a minimum of six inches of
PennDOT No. 2A subbase material and 2 1/2 inches of bituminous
wearing surface or an equivalent design approved at the discretion
of the Township Engineer. The surface must be graded to provide
positive drainage at a maximum cross slope of 2%. Longitudinal
slopes shall be designed in accordance with good engineering
practice such that acceptable access by pedestrians of all types can
easily traverse the pathway.
(3) Pathways must be privately owned and maintained under a reliable
arrangement acceptable to the Township, including routine
maintenance, trimming, mowing, snow and ice removal,
overlayment or reconstruction as required.
(4) Pathways must be designed to provide the required handicapped
accessibility along the pathway and at all points of intersection
with public streets.
(5) These features shall be designed in conjunction with the Township
Greenway Plan.
A. Curbing must be installed along both sides of all new interior streets to
the proper street width in all residential, commercial and industrial
subdivisions and land developments within the Township. Curbing,
including pavement widening and drainage improvements must also be
constructed along all exterior streets upon which the property fronts.
B. The Township may waive the requirements for curbing and widening
along frontage roadways either in part or in full where, in the judgment
of the Township, there are unique circumstances or other physical
hardships where the absence of curbing and widening better serves the
particular needs of the subdivision or land development.
C. Where curbing and sidewalk is required at intersections, curb cut
ramps shall be installed to provide access to building sites and at other
locations deemed appropriate by the Township accessibility in
accordance with current ADA requirements.
D. Refer to Article VIII, Improvement and Construction Requirements, for
curb construction specifications.
E. In areas where curbing is not required to be constructed, suitable
shoulders, gutters, swales or ditches must be installed to avoid erosion
and must be of sufficient cross section to permit the proper flow of
stormwater.
§ 180-508 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-510
1:427
§ 180-511. Sewage facilities.
A. All proposed site excavation and grading for subdivision and land
development projects shall be clearly depicted on the preliminary and
final plan when filed with the Township for review. Grading associated
with site development activities or areas to be graded outside of street
right-of-way lines shall be clearly depicted by proposed contour lines
and spot elevations as required in this chapter and shall not exceed a
ratio of 2:1 (horizontal to vertical) for cut slopes and 3:1 (horizontal to
vertical) for fill slopes. All excavation and grading shall be governed by
the requirements as contained in PennDOT Publication 408,
Specifications, current edition, regarding suitable soil materials, lift
thickness, compaction criteria, soil testing and related matters. It shall
be the responsibility of the applicant to fully document compliance with
these specifications and to demonstrate the same to the Township upon
request.
A. Each new subdivision or land development shall be provided with
adequate means for sewage disposal and the sewage disposal system
shall be either public, community, or individual on-lot systems owned,
maintained and operated by the owners of each lot. Community sewage
facilities may be located within undivided open space, with appropriate
easements, at the discretion of the Township.
B. As applicable, all preliminary or preliminary/final plan submissions
shall include a completed Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) Sewage Facilities Planning Module for Land
Development on forms provided by DEP. The plan review process shall
not commence until a completed Planning Module or module
exemption, if applicable, has been submitted, including soil test pits
(probes) and soil percolation (perc) test information for each proposed
lot when on-site systems are proposed. The commencement of the
preliminary plan or preliminary/final plan review process shall thus
coincide with the commencement of the Planning Module review
process as outlined below:
(1) Planning Module review shall be in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act of 1965, P.L. 1535, No. 537, as
amended; DEP's Chapter 71 regulations, Administration of Sewage
Facilities; the Township's current Act 537 Plan; provisions for
processing planning modules as outlined in Article III, § 180-303E;
and this and other Township ordinances and regulations.
(2) The developer shall provide the most advanced and highest type of
sanitary sewage disposal facility available consistent with existing
physical, geographical and geological conditions of the site, and in
conformance with all applicable Township, state, county, and
federal ordinances and/or regulations.
(3) Based upon the results of the Planning Module, public, community
or individual on-lot sewage service facilities must be provided.
§ 180-510 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-511
1:428
C. Individual on-lot sewage disposal systems.
(1) Where public sanitary sewers are not planned, readily available or
the applicant is not required to extend an existing public sanitary
sewage system to the subject site based upon the criteria outlined
in § 180-511D(1) below, the use of individual on-lot sewage disposal
systems shall be permitted. The use of such on-lot systems is
governed by regulations of the DEP and enforced by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO).
(2) Prior to the approval of any plan proposing individual on-lot sewage
disposal systems, the applicant shall have conducted proper perc
and probe testing performed on each lot in accordance with DEP
and Township requirements to determine the suitability for such
systems, and shall have secured the approval of the Township SEO
and/or DEP through the use of a Planning Module for Land
Development. Each on-lot sewage disposal system must be
reviewed, inspected and approved by the Township SEO prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the structure.
(3) An individual on-lot sewage disposal system shall be located on the
lot for which it provides service.
D. Public sanitary sewage systems.
(1) Any subdivision or land development plan that is located within the
ultimate public sewer service area designated within the
Township's approved Act 537 Plan and the project's boundary is
located within 1,000 feet of a public sewer system shall connect to
the public sanitary sewer system.
(2) If such a system is not available but will, in the opinion of the
Township become available within a reasonable amount of time,
then the applicant shall install a complete sanitary sewerage
system ("dry system") including collection mains installed in the
street bed or approved right-of-way; service laterals installed to the
rights-of-way lines of streets, lot or parcel property lines or sewer
easements or rights-of-way lines, whichever pertains to individual
situations. All termini shall be capped in a manner that will insure
that all collector mains, laterals and house connections shall be
water tight pending connections with a public sanitary sewerage
system. Building laterals shall also be extended to the building unit
or structure and the internal plumbing system for said structures
shall be constructed to accommodate them as well as any individual
on-lot septic system required.
(3) The preliminary and final plans shall contain the complete design of
the sanitary sewer system in accordance with current Lower
Paxton Township Sewer Authority (Authority) Policies, Procedures,
Rules and Regulations and Construction and Material
Specifications, including the design of all main collection lines,
manholes, laterals, pump stations, and all other appurtenances.
§ 180-511 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-511
1:429
The design of sewage facilities shall include profiles and details
to allow for the review of the complete system. Simultaneously
with the review of the subdivision or land development plan, the
Authority shall review and, if acceptable, indicate in writing their
approval of all aspects of the sanitary sewer system design.
(4) Fees for the review and approval of design; supervision and
inspection for services rendered by the Authority Engineer in
connection with the design and construction of the project's
sanitary sewer system shall be paid by the applicant in accordance
with the fee schedule adopted annually by the Board of Supervisors
for the Authority Engineer.
(5) The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining all permits and
approvals necessary for the construction of the complete sanitary
sewer system as well as any easements or rights-of-way, in a form
prescribed by the Authority, necessary to construct facilities on
property not controlled by the applicant.
(6) Approval of the proposed sanitary sewer system by the Authority
shall be required prior to, or as a condition of, plan approval by the
Township. The system must also be bonded or otherwise secured
with the Authority prior to, or as a condition of, final plan approval.
(7) Construction of the system shall be at the applicant's own expense
and shall not commence until application has been made to, and
written authorization to proceed with such construction has been
obtained from the Authority. The plan for the installation of a
sanitary sewer system must be prepared for the development and
approved by the Authority and the DEP, when applicable. All
construction shall be in conformance with such approved plans and
specifications.
(8) Sanitary sewers and sewage disposal systems shall not be
combined with storm sewers, and shall not be constructed to
receive effluents from any stormwater collection system.
(9) Sanitary sewage facilities located within proposed street rights-ofway
shall be constructed, inspected and tested prior to
commencement of construction of the street.
E. Community sewage systems.
(1) Community sewage systems shall be permitted if it can be shown
that such an approach would provide more reliable and effective
treatment of wastewater than individual on-lot systems.
(2) Community sewage systems may be installed only in subdivisions of
10 lots or more. The maximum permitted building density, as
required by provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance, shall not
be permitted to be altered by the installation of a community
sewage system.
§ 180-511 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-511
1:430
§ 180-512. Water supply facilities.
All subdivisions and land developments shall be provided with adequate
water supply facilities as part of the subdivision or land development plan
approval process.
(3) Systems shall be designed by the applicant and approved by DEP,
the Township and the Authority and permission to construct said
facility shall be received from DEP prior to plan approval and
construction. The systems shall be compliant with the Township's
Act 537 Plan and any rules and regulations of the Authority.
(4) The community sewage system shall be located on a separate lot
under the ownership of an organizational structure approved by
the Township. The lot shall be used solely for the community
sewage system and for no other purposes except passive or active
recreation, silviculture, horticulture and similar uses. The area of
the lot shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the system, the
required area for a complete alternate or replacement system, and
all required setbacks.
(5) All sewage facilities shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from
the property lines of the tract, private lots or from buildings. The
limits of spray fields of a spray irrigation system shall be set back a
minimum of 200 feet from property lines of the tract, private lots or
from buildings, or the requirements of DEP, whichever is more
restrictive.
(6) A planting screen shall be provided to fully screen the facility from
private lots, roadways and adjacent tracts in accordance with
Township landscaping requirements.
(7) Ownership, operation and maintenance of all systems and property
shall be the responsibility of an organization legally formed for said
purpose. The organizational documents governing the ownership,
maintenance and operation of the system shall be provided to the
Township and the Authority for review and comment prior to any
plan approval. Under no circumstances will the Township or the
Authority have any ownership, operation, maintenance or financial
responsibility for any system.
(8) The Township shall have the right to professionally inspect and test
community sewage systems at any time. The Township may require
the owner to provide the results of regular professional testing of
the system as the Township deems necessary. The costs of
inspections and testing shall be the responsibility of the system
owner.
A. On-lot water supply. Where there is no readily available public water
supply system or the applicant is not required to extend an existing
public water supply system to the subject site based upon the criteria
§ 180-511 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-512
1:431
outlined in § 180-512B(1) below, each lot in the development must
be provided with an adequate individual on-lot water supply system
in accordance with minimum standards approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). The Board of
Supervisors shall approve the use of individual on-lot water supply
systems (wells) when the following criterion has been satisfied:
(1) Information submitted by the applicant indicates that justification
of the project necessitates the use of this type of water supply
system.
(2) The hydrogeologic analysis and water quality testing as required in
Article VII of this chapter, as applicable, demonstrates that an
adequate supply of potable groundwater can be provided to meet
the expected demands for the type of development proposed.
(3) The installation of such on-lot systems will not endanger or
significantly decrease or adversely affect the groundwater supplies
to adjacent properties.
(4) That any permit or approval required from any regulatory agency
or other governmental body having jurisdiction for withdrawing
groundwater has been issued for the proposed use.
B. Public water supply.
(1) Where there is an existing public water supply system located
within the distances outlined below from the boundary of the
subdivision or land development, a complete water supply system
connected to the existing public water supply system shall be
provided. Fire hydrants must also be installed in accordance with
the requirements of § 180-513.
(a) For purposes of this section, the term "equivalent residential
consumption" (hereinafter "ERC") shall mean the amount of
water typically used by a residential unit during a one-day
period. Each ERC shall constitute up to 160 gallons of water
use per day. Each residential or nonresidential use shall have a
minimum of one ERC.
(b) Depending on the number of ERCs, residential and
nonresidential development shall be required to connect to an
existing public water supply system, if the system is available
within the following distances:
Number of ERCs
Distance
(feet)
1 200
2 400
3 600
§ 180-512 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-512
1:432
Number of ERCs
Distance
(feet)
4 800
5 1,000
6 or more 1,000 plus 50 additional feet
for each ERC over 5
The above-referenced distances shall be measured from the
nearest existing public water supply system along a state,
Township, or public water utility right-of-way to which the
parcel has access, to the nearest point of the boundary of the
subdivision or land development.
(2) Where plans approved by a public water supplier provide for the
installation of such public water supply facilities within one year,
the applicant shall provide a complete water supply system ready
to be connected to the proposed water main supply system in
accordance with the requirements of the public utility.
(3) Where connection to a public water supply is required, the plan for
the installation of such water supply system must be prepared for
the development with cooperation of the appropriate water utility
company and approved by the Township Engineer. The entire water
system proposed must be depicted on the preliminary and final
plan prior to approval. The layout must indicate the approximate
size and location of all water mains, hydrants, service laterals,
meter pits, storage tanks, booster pump stations, and other
appurtenances. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining all
permits and approvals associated with the design and construction
of the water main extension.
(4) The design of the water system shall follow the current edition of
the Ten States Standards regarding the horizontal and vertical
separation of water lines and sanitary sewer lines. Water mains
shall generally be located within the street cartway five feet from
the curbline.
C. Private centralized community water supply.
(1) Where the applicant is not required to extend an existing public
water supply system to the subject site based upon the
requirements of § 180-512B(1) above and where the applicant
proposes to utilize a private centralized community water supply
for the subdivision or land development, the design and installation
of the system shall be subject to the approval of the Township and
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP), and such system shall be further subject to satisfactory
provisions for its long term ownership, operation and maintenance.
Standards and materials for the construction of any central
§ 180-512 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-512
1:433
§ 180-513. Fire hydrants.
community water supply system shall meet or exceed those
requirements described in the Public Water Supply Manual of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and shall
be subject to the approval of the Township Engineer. The entire
water system proposed must be depicted on the preliminary and
final plan prior to approval. The layout must indicate the type, size
and location of all water mains, hydrants, service laterals, meter
pits, storage tanks, wells, treatment facilities, booster stations,
and other appurtenances. The applicant shall be responsible for
obtaining all permits and approvals associated with the design
and construction of the water main extension. Where a permit is
required by DEP for said system, it shall be presented as evidence
of such review and approval prior to or as a condition of any plan
approval.
(2) Ownership and maintenance of a centralized community water
supply and distribution system shall be the responsibility of an
organization legally formed and operated for such purpose. The
organizational documents governing the ownership, maintenance
and operation of the system as a utility shall be provided to the
Township for review prior to any plan approval. If required, the
applicant shall file and obtain any approvals by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission (PUC) associated with the operation of
the water system.
(3) Wherever a central community water supply system is proposed for
a development, a distribution system shall be designed to furnish
an adequate supply of water (domestic and fire protection) to each
lot based upon the intended use, with adequate water main sizes
and fire hydrant locations to meet the current specifications of the
Township and the International Fire Code (IFC) requirements.
(4) The applicant shall be required to show proof through a water
supply feasibility analysis that the private centralized community
water system will have an adequate supply of potable water for
domestic or other proposed use and that each unit or building will
have an adequate supply for purposes of fire protection and that
such system meets the minimum standards controlling water
storage and production capabilities for domestic and fire use. A
technical study shall be submitted for Township, Township
Engineer and Township Fire Marshal review which shall include all
information as described in the Public Water Supply Manual of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) as
well as other information as may be required by the Township or
DEP.
A. Wherever a centralized community or public water supply system is
provided for a subdivision or land development, fire hydrants suitable
for the coupling of equipment used by fire companies serving the
§ 180-512 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-513
1:434
§ 180-514. Design standards in floodplains.
Township shall be installed in accordance with the utility company's
and/or Township's specifications. The type and location of hydrants
shall be approved by the Township upon review and recommendation by
the Township Fire Marshall or Public Safety Committee. Fire hydrants
shall meet the following general requirements.
(1) All fire hydrants shall be located on a main water supply line having
a minimum diameter of eight inches. The minimum size of the
hydrant tee connection shall be six inches.
(2) Hydrants shall be placed with the steamer nozzle facing towards
the vehicular travel lane and shall be located so that they are
accessible within five feet by fire apparatus. Fire hydrants shall be
placed behind the curbline of streets or within landscaped islands
for private land developments. Landscaping or other obstructions
shall not be placed in front of fire hydrants, and a clear space of
three feet shall be provided around all fire hydrants.
(3) Fire hydrants shall be spaced in a subdivision or land development
so that all proposed buildings will be no farther than 500 feet from
the hydrant measured along vehicular travelways. Also, a fire
hydrant shall be provided at the closed end of all cul-de-sac streets.
(4) Hydrants shall provide two 17/32" I.D. port outlets and one 4 1/2"
I.D. steamer outlet complying with National Standard Thread
(NST) requirements and in accordance with the construction and
installation specifications of the water utility company.
(5) The water system supplying the hydrants must be capable of
meeting maximum domestic consumption at all times plus a
minimum fire flow of 500 gallons per minute (GPM) for residential
developments and 1,000 GPM for commercial and industrial
developments at a minimum residual pressure of 20 pounds per
square inch (psi) for a minimum continuous duration of two hours.
(6) Fire hydrants shall be installed and be fully operational prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any building or dwelling
represented on the subdivision or land development plan.
(7) The placement and design of all fire hydrants shall comply with all
provisions of the International Fire Code (IFC), current edition.
A. General standards.
(1) Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances, land
located in any identified floodplain area or district may be planned
for development with the provision that the developer construct all
buildings and structures to preclude flood damage in accordance
with this and any other laws and ordinances regulating such
development. Reference is made to Article V, Environmental
§ 180-513 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-514
1:435
Protection, § 203-504, of the Lower Paxton Township Zoning
Ordinance for Floodplain District Regulations.
(2) Building sites for residences or any other type of dwellings or
accommodations shall not be permitted in any floodplain area
where the elevation of the structure is located below 1 1/2 feet
above the regulatory flood elevation. Where no floodway has been
identified, the structure shall not be located within 50 feet from the
top of bank of any stream or water course unless a detailed
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is provided by the applicant and
approved by the Township which demonstrates that the floodway is
of a lesser width. If fill is used to raise the elevation of a site, the fill
area shall extend out laterally for a distance of at least 15 feet
beyond the limits of any proposed structures.
(3) All proposed subdivisions and land developments shall provide the
location of all regulatory floodplain areas clearly delineated on the
plan. Subdivision plans and other land development plans
proposing 50 or more lots or dwelling units or containing greater
than 20 acres, whichever is lesser, shall include actual 100-year
base flood elevation data, in an acceptable engineering form
comparable to United States Army Corps of Engineers, HEC-RAS,
which shall be certified as accurate by a professional engineer. The
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis shall include the entire property
from the upstream to downstream limits of all major waterways.
(4) No new construction or development shall be permitted within a
designated floodway of a stream or waterway. When the applicant
is proposing encroachments into floodplain areas associated with a
subdivision or land development application said encroachment
shall only be permitted when in compliance with this and other
ordinances and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP). Where the applicant is proposing
to modify an existing floodplain as defined by a Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study, the applicant
shall be responsible for performing all studies, data collection,
analysis and preparing applications for the Township's review and
approval in order to secure a letter of map revision (LOMR) for the
designated waterway. The limits of the study shall be determined in
consultation with the Township and FEMA.
(5) Buildings sites for structures or buildings other than for residential
uses shall not be permitted in any identified floodway area or
district. Also, such sites for structures or buildings outside the
floodway shall be protected as provided for in § 180-514A(2) above.
However, the Board of Supervisors may allow the subdivision and/
or land development of areas or sites for commercial and industrial
uses at an elevation below the regulatory flood elevation if the
applicant otherwise protects the area to that height or assures that
the buildings or structures will be floodproofed at least up to that
height.
§ 180-514 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-514
1:436
(6) When an applicant does not intend to develop the plan himself and
the Township determines that additional controls are required to
insure safe development, it may require the applicant to impose
appropriate plan and deed restrictions on the land. Such deed
restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and noted on every
recorded plan.
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed or where any existing
trees, shrubs or other vegetative cover will be removed, the
developer shall consult the Dauphin County Conservation District
representative concerning plans for erosion and sedimentation
control and to also obtain a report on the soil characteristics of the
site so that a determination can be made as to the type and degree
of development the site may accommodate. Before undertaking any
excavation or grading, the applicant shall obtain all necessary
permits and approvals from the Township.
(8) Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. Stormwater conveyance
facilities may be located within floodplain areas however;
stormwater management facilities and other best management
practice (BMP) areas shall not be located within any floodplain
areas of the Township. Plans shall be subject to the approval of the
Township.
(9) The Township may require a primarily underground storm system
to accommodate frequent floods and secondary surface system to
accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be
consistent with local and county drainage plans. The facilities shall
be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
(10) Street and driveways. The finished elevation of proposed streets
and driveways shall not be more than one foot below the regulatory
flood elevation. The Township may require profiles and elevations
of streets to determine compliance with the requirements.
Drainage openings shall be sufficient to discharge flood flows
without unduly increasing flood heights or damaging the roadway.
(11) Sanitary sewer facilities. All sanitary sewer systems located in any
designated floodplain district, whether public or private, shall be
floodproofed to not less than 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood
elevation.
(12)Water facilities. All water systems located in any designated
floodplain district, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed
to not less than 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood elevation.
§ 180-514 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-514
1:437
§ 180-515. Landscaping design standards.
(13) Other utilities and facilities. All other public and private utilities
including gas and electric shall be elevated or floodproofed to not
less than 1 1/2 feet above the regulatory flood elevation.
A. General.
(1) The landscaping design requirements contained within this section
shall be applicable to all subdivision and land development
applications that require buffer yards and screen plantings
pursuant to the Lower Paxton Township Zoning Ordinance; require
street trees related to the construction of new streets within
subdivisions; propose new parking facilities associated with new
land development activity; and new multifamily, commercial and
industrial buildings associated with new land development activity.
B. Design tandards for screening in required buffer yards.
(1) No plant material within buffer yards will be permitted in situations
where it may inhibit sight distance, conflict with the circulation and
safety of pedestrians, conflict with utility or stormwater facilities,
or create potential maintenance problems.
(2) Screen plantings shall not consist of evergreen plant species only. A
collective landscape design approach must be used to mix and
combine a variety of deciduous shade and ornamental trees and
deciduous and evergreen shrubs and groundcover. Vegetation must
be distributed throughout the entire planting buffer to achieve a
complete coverage of the buffer.
(3) Buffers on man-made slopes shall have a maximum slope of 25%.
(4) One tree shall be provided for every 500 square feet of required
landscape buffer area. Trees shall be mixed evergreen and
deciduous species with no more than 30% of the screen being
composed of deciduous trees. Trees shall have a minimum height of
20 feet at maturity.
(5) Shrubs within buffer areas must be planted such that one shrub is
provided for each 250 square feet of buffer area. Plantings must be
staggered and arranged in combination with the required trees to
achieve a natural and pleasing appearance at maturity. Shrubs
shall be of a species as to provide screening from the ground to a
height of six feet at maturity. The ground area within the buffer
area shall be covered with grass, groundcover or mulch.
(6) Buffers and screening shall be continuous and no parking facilities
or structures of any sort shall be permitted within the landscape
buffer areas. Buffers may be penetrated with driveways and
walkways provided that said penetrations are perpendicular to the
buffer and are minimized.
§ 180-514 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-515
1:438
(7) All landscaped buffer areas shall be kept clean of all debris, litter,
weeds, and tall grasses, and shall otherwise be maintained in good
form by the landowner or other entity in accordance with the
approved plan.
(8) Existing wooded areas may meet the criteria of the requirements of
a buffer yard with the following conditions:
(a) The existing wooded area encompasses the entire required
width of the buffer yard and no change of grade is proposed
within the buffer area.
(b) The existing wooded area is primarily comprised of acceptable
native woody plant species as described in the Native Plant
List published by the Pennsylvania Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources (PA DCNR).
(c) The existing wooded areas consist of a dense, healthy stand of
trees and other desirable vegetative materials and will provide
a buffer equal to or better than the required buffer when
mature.
(d) Supplemental planting may be required to provide the
required number, species mix and visual screening required by
this section.
(e) All invasive and noxious weeds and trees shall be deadened
and removed from the buffer area.
(9) Decorative fencing, walls and earthen berms of adequate height
and slope are encouraged and may be substituted for a portion of
the required landscaping at the sole discretion of the Board of
Supervisors. Fences and walls shall be of a solid design nature and
consist of low maintenance materials which are aesthetically
pleasing for use in a landscaped buffer. Any walls or fencing shall
be constructed to a minimum height of six feet.
C. Design standards for parking lots and perimeters.
(1) In any parking lot containing 30 or more parking spaces (excluding
a parking garage), 5% of the total area of the parking lot shall be
devoted to interior landscaping. Such interior landscaping shall be
used at the end of parking space rows to break up rows of parking
spaces and to help visually define travel lanes within the parking
lot. No more than 20 parking spaces shall be placed in a row
without the use of a landscaped island.
(2) Landscaping areas situated outside of the physical confines of the
parking lot, such as peripheral areas and areas around buildings,
shall not constitute interior landscaping. For purposes of
computing the total area of any parking lot, all areas within the
perimeter of the parking lot shall be counted, including all parking
§ 180-515 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-515
1:439
and loading and unloading spaces, fire lanes, access and drive
aisles, islands, and curbed areas.
(3) Perimeter plantings around parking lots shall also be provided.
Perimeter landscaped areas shall be a minimum of five feet in
width. A minimum of one deciduous or coniferous tree and two
shrubs shall be provided for each 50 feet of parking lot perimeter
provided. The balance of the perimeter shall be composed of
groundcover, grass, perennials, and the like. Earthen berms and
mounds are encouraged to screen the parking area from public
streets or adjacent properties.
(4) Ground cover alone is not sufficient to meet the parking lot
landscaping requirements. A mixed planting design of deciduous
trees, shrubs, and ground cover shall be provided within the
landscaped islands.
(5) The following design requirements shall be adhered to for all
interior landscaping within parking lots:
(a) Landscaping shall be provided within curbed islands having a
minimum width of six feet and a minimum area of 100 square
feet for single depth islands and a minimum width of six feet
and a minimum area of 200 square feet for islands with a depth
equal to two parking spaces.
(b) Each landscaping island must be provided with a minimum of
one deciduous tree plus one shrub per each 100 square feet of
island area with the balance being composed of groundcover
and perennials.
(c) Island plantings must be coordinated with the location and
height of light standards and utility lines such that conflicts do
not exist.
(d) Landscaping materials shall be protected from intrusion by
cars by the use of curbing, bollards, wheel stops or similar
devices.
(e) Plantings within landscaped islands shall be designed to
provide adequate vehicular sight distance within the parking
lot and for any access thereto.
D. Design standards for site area landscaping.
(1) All multifamily, commercial and industrial developments shall be
provided with site landscaping amenities in addition to any
required landscaping for screens, buffer yards, parking lots,
parking lot perimeters, or street trees. Site landscaping shall be
provided for the following general conditions and shall be depicted
on the landscaping plan referenced herein:
(a) Building foundations and building entrance points.
§ 180-515 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-515
1:440
(b) Front and side yard areas of buildings.
(c) Areas along access drives to adjacent streets.
(d) Areas around entrance or development signs.
(2) All required areas shall be landscaped to the satisfaction of the
Township with a combination of trees, shrubs, groundcover,
planting beds, annuals and perennials and other landscape
features in order to compliment the building and provide for a
suitable site design. Grass cover alone will not be sufficient to meet
landscaping requirements of this section.
(3) Service loading and unloading areas shall be landscaped to screen
the view from adjacent streets and properties.
(4) Where the external storage of materials is permitted on the
property, said areas shall be landscaped to screen the view from
adjacent streets and properties.
(5) Trash disposal areas such as dumpsters or compactors shall be
screened so as not to be visible from parking areas, adjacent
streets and properties. Such areas shall be screened with a
combination of architectural masonry or fencing and landscaped
with coniferous shrubs with a height of at least six feet.
(6) Sewage pumping stations, treatment facilities, utility substations
and similar utility structures shall be landscaped to screen the view
from surrounding areas.
E. Design standards for street trees.
(1) Street trees shall be required in all subdivisions and land
developments based on the following:
(a) For existing and new arterial, collector and minor streets, as
defined herein, a quantity of one street tree for every 50 linear
feet of street frontage shall be provided.
(2) Design requirements. The following design guidelines shall be met
unless otherwise stipulated in this chapter.
(a) Street trees shall be planted no closer than 30 feet on center or
farther than 75 feet on center along each side of the street.
(b) All street trees shall be located within the street verge area
and be centered between the back edge of curb and the front
face of the sidewalk unless otherwise approved by the
Township.
(c) No more than 25% of one species of tree shall be planted as
street trees within a development.
§ 180-515 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-515
1:441
(d) If sidewalks are not required, street trees shall be planted four
feet from the back edge of the curb.
(e) The location of street trees shall not be planted within required
clear sight triangles of intersections.
(f) The placement of street trees shall not conflict with the
placement of underground utilities, storm sewer systems, or
other public infrastructure.
(g) Street trees shall not be planted within 10 feet from any storm
drain inlet, fire hydrant, accessible manhole or utility pole or
structure.
(h) Street trees shall be consistent with the procedures and
requirements of the Lower Paxton Township Zoning Ordinance.
(i) The selection of street tree species shall be approved only after
review by the Township Shade Tree Commission. Applicants
are encouraged to meet with the Shade Tree Commission or a
representative thereto during the design process in order to
solicit input on approved species, planting location and other
landscaping design elements.
F. Credit for preservation of existing trees in required buffer yards.
(1) A landscape credit can be applied toward the required buffer yard
plant material for the preservation of existing trees provided said
existing trees are of a quality native species and are in a condition
that is acceptable to the Township and are worthy of saving and
included within the required buffer area.
(2) A credit of two shade trees can be applied to the required
landscaping for each existing tree that is at least six inches in
diameter measured at breast height and is within the required
buffer yard.
(3) All existing trees must be healthy, vigorous, in good form and
preserved within the site's immediate developable area. Remote
stands of trees which have no buffer value will not be eligible for
consideration.
(4) The existing trees must also be able to tolerate any induced
stresses and changes caused by the proposed development for a
one-year period after construction is completed.
(5) Existing trees with a six-inch or greater diameter considered for
preservation shall be measured at breast height above the existing
grade. Trees targeted by the applicant to be preserved shall be
field-surveyed, identified and shown on the subdivision or land
development plan at the time of submission to the Township.
§ 180-515 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-515
1:442
(6) Existing trees considered for preservation shall be field-marked by
the applicant and protected from construction activities in an
acceptable and appropriate manner. No changes in grade shall be
permitted adjacent to those trees being preserved.
(7) Existing trees considered for preservation within the developable
area shall remain undisturbed and shall be protected and encircled
with an acceptable fence for protection.
(8) The diameter of the undisturbed area shall extend to the drip line of
the tree or by one foot of undisturbed area per inch of tree
diameter measured at breast height from the existing grade,
whichever is greater. The tree can be preserved if at least 2/3 of
designated area can remain undisturbed.
(9) Impervious or construction material shall not be placed under the
dripline or within the designated tree protection fenced area.
(10) If existing trees that meet the preservation criteria but cannot be
saved successfully and die within a one-year period after
completion of the project, the applicant shall be responsible to fully
remove and replace the existing tree with the required landscaping
materials.
G. Landscaping plan requirements.
(1) For all subdivision and land development plans requiring
landscaping design, and at the time of initial submission to the
Township, the applicant shall include a separate landscaping plan
designed by a registered landscape architect in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania. Said plan shall bear the seal and signature of the
registered landscape architect and be certified that the plan meets
all of the requirements of this chapter. The landscaping plan shall
contain the layout, size and identification of all required plant
materials including construction details, specifications, notes and
other information required for construction and maintenance. The
plan shall be designed to accommodate the location of all other
planned site improvements, utilities, and site grading such that
conflicts do not occur either at the time of planting or at maturity.
H. Landscape material and planting specifications.
(1) Installation and minimum size requirements for all planting
materials shall be performed in conformance with good nursery
and landscaping practice. All plant material must comply and
conform to the code of standards set forth and cited in the latest
edition by the American Standard Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1, as
amended, and meet the following requirements:
(2) Minimum plant sizes for all landscape materials shall be as follows:
§ 180-515 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-515
1:443
(a) Deciduous trees: 1 1/2 inches to two inches caliper at six
inches above grade or eight feet to 10 feet height.
(b) Evergreen trees: six feet minimum height.
(c) Deciduous shrubs: 18 inches to 24 inches height.
(d) Evergreen shrubs: 24 inches to 30 inches height.
(3) Requirements for measurements, branching, grading, quality,
balling and burlapping shall follow the code of standards
recommended by the American Association of Nurseryman, Inc., in
the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1, current
edition, as amended.
(4) The plant materials shall be grown in a climate similar to that of the
locality of the project and shall be appropriate for Hardiness Zone 6
planting per U.S.D.A. requirements. All plant materials shall have a
normal habit of growth and shall be sound, healthy, and vigorous
and they shall be free from disease, insects, insect eggs, and larvae.
(5) All trees and shrubs shall be balled and burlapped or be
containerized. Bare root planting shall not be permitted. Trees and
shrubs shall be planted in excavations a minimum of 1 1/2 times
larger than the root ball per ANSI standards and planted in good
soil conditions including the addition of peat moss, fertilizer, and
other customary soil supplements.
(6) All trees shall be guyed or staked for one year following planting.
All guys or stakes shall be removed one year from installation.
I. Landscape surety.
(1) When landscaping improvements are required by this chapter, the
estimated cost of the installation of said landscaping improvements
shall be included with the project's financial security as described
herein to guarantee the required plant materials, landscaping, and
all related appurtenances are correctly provided and installed
according to the approved plan.
(2) No financial security will be required for the preservation of
existing trees that are credited towards the required landscaping.
J. Maintenance of landscaping.
(1) The applicant shall be responsible for maintenance of the required
landscaping during all construction activity of the subdivision or
land development project and, for publicly dedicated facilities until
such time as the Township accepts ownership of said materials. For
required landscaping on private property, the landowner shall own
and maintain all materials and said landscape materials shall not be
removed or substantially altered without approval by the Township.
The Township may require landscaping easements or other
§ 180-515 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-515
1:444
§ 180-516. Street signs and traffic control devices.
controls to assure the long-term viability of landscaping
improvements.
(2) The required landscape maintenance responsibilities of the
applicant shall include but not be limited to watering, mowing,
pruning, weeding, mulching, fertilizing and other maintenance
techniques necessary to ensure the health and long term survival of
the plant materials. The required landscaping shall be maintained
and, if need be, replaced with original plant species or an
acceptable equivalent, in order to remain in compliance with
current landscape regulations and the terms and conditions of the
subdivision or land development plan approval.
A. General.
(1) All subdivision or land developments shall be provided with stop
signs, street name signs, speed limit signs, no parking signs (if
applicable), and other regulatory and/or advisory signs as may be
required by the Township.
(2) Street name and other traffic control signs located within public
rights-of-way shall be owned and maintained by Lower Paxton
Township. Signs located on private property shall be owned and
maintained in good operating condition by the landowner.
(3) Signs and other traffic control devices within proposed public
street rights-of-way will be provided and installed by the Township
and paid for by the applicant. The estimated cost of the signs shall
be required to be included in the financial security for the project
as described in this chapter.
(4) All required street and other traffic control signs shall be erected
prior to any street being passable and opened for vehicular use.
(5) All street signs shall be placed and constructed in accordance with
the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), United
States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, latest edition, and the most-current requirements
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
B. Street name signs.
(1) The subdivision or land development shall be provided with street
name signs at all intersections of public streets within the
development. Street names shall be selected in accordance with
prescribed Township, United States Postal Service, or other
regulatory agency procedures and shall not conflict with existing
street names or create confusion to the traveling public. The
Township shall review and, if acceptable, approve all street names
as proposed by the applicant.
§ 180-515 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-516
1:445
§ 180-517. Utility construction.
C. Stop, speed limit, no-parking, and other regulatory signs.
(1) Stop signs, speed limit signs, no-parking signs and other regulatory
and/or advisory signs shall be placed within the subdivision or land
development as required by the Township. The location of all
required signs shall be depicted on the approved subdivision or
land development plan.
D. Traffic signalization.
(1) Where a subdivision or land development requires the modification
of an existing traffic signal or the installation of a new traffic signal
and related appurtenances to control the flow of traffic, the
applicant shall prepare all required traffic studies and analyses,
traffic signal warrant reports, traffic signal permit and construction
plans and traffic signal permit applications for review and approval
by the Township. All traffic signal design and construction shall be
in accordance with the current requirements of PennDOT
Publication 149, Traffic Signal Design Handbook, and Publication
148, Traffic Standards - Signals; TC - 7800. Additionally, the design
and construction requirements as contained in Article VIII of this
chapter shall be adhered to for the design and/or modification of all
traffic signal facilities.
E. Pavement markings.
(1) Where pavement markings are required for the proper
channelization, control and proper operation of traffic, the
applicant shall provide pavement markings on the plan for review
and approval by the Township. Pavement markings shall include,
but not be limited to, center and edge lines, stop bars, pedestrian
cross walks, through and turn arrows, and the like. Pavement
markings for stop bars, crosswalks and directional arrows shall be
thermoplastic. All pavement markings shall conform to the latest
requirements of PennDOT and the Township.
A. Underground wiring.
(1) All electric, telephone, cable television, and other communication
facilities, both main and service lines servicing new subdivisions or
land developments, shall be provided by underground wiring within
utility easements or within dedicated public rights-of-way unless
special conditions require otherwise. Utilities shall be installed in
accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the
utility or other companies providing such services.
(2) Lots which abut existing easements or public rights-of-way where
overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service
connections have been previously installed may be supplied with
electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but any
§ 180-516 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-517
1:446
§ 180-518. Regulatory wetlands.
new service connections from the overhead utility lines shall be
installed underground. In the case of existing overhead utilities,
should an extension of service, or other such condition occur as
a result of the subdivision and necessitate the replacement or
relocation of such utilities, such replacement or relocation shall be
underground where practicable.
(3) Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the
placement and alignment of poles shall be designed to lessen the
visual impact of overhead lines as follows: Alignments and pole
locations shall be carefully routed to avoid locations along
horizons; clearing swaths through tree areas shall be avoided by
selective cutting and a staggered alignment; trees shall be planted
in open areas and at key locations to minimize the view of the poles
and the alignments; and alignments shall follow rear lot lines and
the rear of buildings and other similar alignments where possible.
(4) Where such utilities lie under the proposed right-of-way or cartway,
said utilities, or provisions for accommodating said utilities (i.e.,
conduits, duct banks, manholes, junction boxes, etc.) shall be
installed prior to construction of the roadway. Utility systems must
also be operational before any person is permitted to occupy any
building to be served by such utility.
B. Underground utility notifications.
(1) In accordance with the provisions of PA Act 38, as amended, all
applicants proposing construction activities shall contact all
applicable utilities and accurately determine by field surveying
means the location, type, size and approximate depths of all
existing underground utilities within and adjacent to the tract
proposed for development and in the vicinity of any proposed offsite
improvement. A list of the applicable utilities, their telephone
numbers, and the PA One Call serial number shall appear on the
subdivision or land development plans submitted for review.
A. For all subdivisions and land developments, the applicant must
determine if regulatory wetlands exist on the property containing the
proposed subdivision or land development. The applicant must also
determine if any wetlands will be impacted off site from the property if
off-site construction activities are proposed. This determination shall be
made in accordance with the current requirements of the Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP) and the United States Army Corps of
Engineers (USACOE) as outlined in the "Wetlands Delineation Manual,"
United States Army Corps of Engineers, 1987, or as amended.
B. All wetlands investigations must be performed by an environmental
professional with the education and experience necessary to perform
said investigations and studies.
§ 180-517 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-518
1:447
§ 180-519. Site retaining walls.
C. If, after an absence/presence site investigation, it is determined that
there are no wetlands on the subject property and no wetlands will be
impacted off site, then the following certification note must be placed
on the plan:
I, (Name of environmental consultant), hereby certify that I have
conducted a wetlands investigation on (date) in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and have determined that there are no
regulatory wetlands on the subject property; that the proposed project
will not impact any off-site wetlands and that no wetland permits
are required from any state or federal governmental agency having
jurisdiction.
Signature & date
D. If there are regulatory wetlands found on the property and/or wetlands
will be impacted off site, then a wetland delineation report must be
submitted to the Township as part of the required plan submission
materials prepared in accordance with the requirements listed above
and generally including the information required by the USACOE as
part of a jurisdiction determination (JD) review. All regulatory wetlands
must be clearly delineated on the subdivision or land development plan.
If wetlands are proposed to be impacted by project activities, required
wetland mitigation areas and construction details must also be included
with the plan set.
E. A copy of completed permit applications such as a water obstruction
and encroachment permit or general permit from DEP and a Section
404 permit from the USACOE shall be provided to the Township for
review.
F. If necessary, the wetlands may be verified by the Township, Township
Engineer, or their consultants through a site visit.
G. If there are wetlands located on the property, the following certification
note shall be placed on the subdivision or land development plan:
I, (Name of environmental consultant), hereby certify that I have
conducted a wetlands delineation study on (date) in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter and have determined that regulatory
wetlands exist on the subject site and this plan accurately depicts the
extent of all wetlands.
Signature & date
H. Any approval by the Township shall be conditioned upon full compliance
with any requirements of any regulatory agency, and no action by the
Township shall be relied on in lieu of a permit issued by the appropriate
agency.
§ 180-518 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-519
1:448
§ 180-520. Monuments and markers.
A. When retaining walls are required to accommodate grade changes as
part of a subdivision or land development plan, said plan shall contain
details relating to the design and construction of the proposed site
retaining walls. Details shall include, but not be limited to, a layout and
grading plan and a site adapted typical design section or sections
showing all construction requirements.
B. Design calculations must be provided for all design conditions and such
wall design shall be prepared and certified by a professional engineer in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania experienced in structural design
and geotechnical engineering principles. Design calculations must
include existing soils information; lateral soil pressure and all loading
conditions; an analysis for overturning, sliding, and foundation bearing
pressure; global stability analysis; and the design of all structural
components including the use of appropriate factors of safety. An
exemption from this requirement shall include small landscaping,
garden, or similar type walls less than four feet in height and which do
not support buildings, parking facilities, or other structurally significant
site features.
C. Retaining walls near or adjacent to street right-of-way lines shall be
placed a minimum distance from the right-of-way line that would allow
the angle of repose of the retained soil material to not encroach on the
right-of-way and affect the roadway, right-of-way, or public
infrastructure contained therein if the retaining wall should fail or be
removed for any reason. No portion of any wall such as foundations,
reinforcing materials, railing, and the like shall be located in any public
right-of way to be owned or maintained by the Township.
D. Retaining walls attached to and substantially part of buildings shall be
reviewed by the Township as part of the building permit application
review process.
E. Any retaining wall greater than four feet in height and subject to
pedestrian traffic in the vicinity of the top of the wall shall be provided
with fencing, railing or other protective measures to the satisfaction of
the Township and in accordance with any applicable building codes.
F. Plans containing retaining walls located on or affecting multiple
properties must provide adequate provisions for private access,
maintenance and repair.
A. Monuments and markers shall be set at all points, as required herein,
for all new subdivision and land development plans approved by the
Township. Monuments and markers shall be set by a professional land
surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All
monuments and markers shall be secured as part of the project's
financial security requirements as required under this chapter. Once
installed, all monuments and markers shall be flagged and visible at the
§ 180-519 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-520
1:449
§ 180-521. Natural features preservation.
time of inspection. The installation requirements for monuments and
markers are as follows:
B. Monuments must be set as follows:
(1) One monument at each intersection of all public street right-of-way
lines.
(2) The intersections of lines forming angles or changes in direction
along the boundary of the perimeter of the parent tract of land
comprising the subdivision or land development unless said points
are already marked by monuments recognized as established
survey corners or are impractical to set due to streams,
topographic conditions or other similar constraints.
(3) Such other intermediate points as may be required by the Township
Engineer.
C. Markers must be set:
(1) At all corners except those required to be monumented.
(2) Prior to the construction of any building or residential unit on the
property.
D. Monuments and markers shall be the following sizes and made of the
following materials:
(1) Monuments shall be four inches square, octagonal or round, and
shall be 30 inches long. Monuments shall be made of precast
concrete, stone or by setting a four inch diameter metal pipe filled
with concrete.
(2) Markers shall be 3/4 inch square or 3/4 inch in diameter and 30
inches long. Markers shall be made of iron pipes or iron or steel
reinforcing bars.
E. Monuments and markers must be placed so that the scored or marked
point coincides exactly with the point of intersection of the lines being
monumented. They must be set so that the top of the monument or
marker is level with or within one inch above the finished grade of the
surrounding ground. Monuments must be marked on top with a copper
or brass plate or dowel set in the concrete.
F. Removal. Any monuments or markers that are removed must be
replaced by a professional land surveyor at the expense of the person
requiring the removal and replacement of said monument or marker.
A. All subdivision and land development plans shall be planned and
designed without impact to and destruction of significant natural
features located on the property. Significant natural features shall not
§ 180-520 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-521
1:450
§ 180-522. Dedication of recreation land and fee requirements.
[Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 12-02]
be physically disturbed or used for any other uses other than public
or private conservation areas and uses for the conservation of open
space, water, soil and wildlife resources; educational facilities of an
environmental nature, and private, passive recreation except to the
extent that it is necessary to provide ingress and egress to a property
or the extension of required utilities into the property where no other
feasible alternative exists. Where access is required through significant
natural features, it shall only be permitted where it can be
demonstrated by the applicant that the design is the least intrusive to
the natural features in question.
B. Significant natural features shall consist of the following elements:
(1) Land areas having a slope equal to or in excess of 25% which are
not the result of man-made changes to the natural terrain.
Excluded from this classification are slopes that are small, isolated
or otherwise occurring as knolls, localized depressions, and the like
which are not environmentally significant.
(2) Regulatory wetland areas as defined in § 180-518.
(3) Areas comprised of rivers, creeks, streams, lakes, dams, ponds, and
other bodies of water or defined watercourses and all land areas
within 25 feet of such features.
C. The requirements of this section shall not be construed to further
restrict any development activity currently permitted by the Township
relating to the use of floodways, flood fringe areas, or approximated
floodplain areas.
D. Slope areas shall be based upon a two-foot contour interval topographic
survey and evaluation of all critical slope areas on the property. The
average natural slope of an area shall be determined by dividing the
horizontal run of the slope into the vertical rise of the same slope and
converting the resulting figure into a percentage value. All slope areas
shall be measured at right angles to the natural contour.
E. Where a subdivision or land development plan contains significant
natural features, conservation easements shall be provided for the
purpose of protecting the natural features from any further
development or destruction.
A. Applicability and intent. All residential subdivision and/or land
development applications submitted to the Township under this chapter
shall provide for suitable and adequate recreation space in order to:
(1) Ensure recreation areas and facilities are adequate to serve the
residents of the Township.
§ 180-521 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-522
1:451
(2) Maintain consistency with the conclusions and recommendations in
the Township's Recreation and Park Plan, the Township's Greenway
Plan and consistency with the Township's Comprehensive Plan
regarding recreation.
(3) Ensure that all residents have the opportunity to engage in varied
recreation activities which includes passive and active forms of
recreation.
(4) Reduce the increasing user pressure on existing recreation areas
and facilities.
(5) Reduce the possibility of overburdening the Township with the
development and maintenance of many small, randomly placed
recreation areas.
(6) Ensure parks and open spaces are designed to conserve sensitive
natural features and are properly integrated into the community.
B. Land dedication versus fee in lieu. The Planning Commission and the
Parks and Recreation Board shall recommend to the Board of
Supervisors whether a land dedication or the payment of fees in lieu
thereof is recommended. This recommendation shall be made at the
time of the preliminary plan review or, in the case of no preliminary
plan, at the final plan review by the Planning Commission and the Parks
and Recreation Board; however, under no circumstances would a park
land dedication or fee in lieu payment be accepted to reduce the
percentage of open space otherwise required under provisions of the
Township Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Commission shall, at a
minimum, consider the following points in reaching their
recommendation:
(1) Whether the land proposed to be dedicated would serve a valid
public purpose and meet the design requirements of usable
recreation space.
(2) Whether the land proposed to be dedicated meets the standards of
the adopted Lower Paxton Township Recreation and Park Plan.
(3) Recommendations received from the Parks and Recreation Board.
C. Land dedication procedures and requirements. For all residential
subdivision and land development plans, the amount of land required to
be dedicated to the Township for public recreational purposes shall be
as follows:
(1) Residential subdivision and/or land development requirements. A
minimum area of 1,024 square feet (0.0235 acres) per dwelling unit
shall be provided as part of a contiguous, usable area that is
contiguous to and may be combined with an existing municipal
park and recreational facility.
§ 180-522 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-522
1:452
(2) Time requirements. Land to be dedicated to the Township must be
dedicated for public use immediately after the recording of the final
plan phase upon which the dedicated parcel is located. The
proposed deed of dedication shall include a legal description and
plat of the area and shall be submitted with the final plan for
approval by the Township Solicitor. Title to land to be dedicated
shall be good and marketable and free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances or other defects as demonstrated by a current title
report or a legal opinion of title provided by the applicant.
(3) As part of the plan submission process, the applicant shall state
what improvements, if any, that the applicant intends to make to
the land to make it suitable for intended purposes, such as grading
or landscaping. The land shall be stabilized and free of construction
debris at the time of dedication. The site shall not contain above
ground or open stormwater management facilities or be comprised
of land that otherwise would not be developed due to physical,
environmental or other developmental limitations.
D. Developer dedication of usable facilities. The Recreation and Park Plan
recommends, in part, that residential developers dedicate land within a
development in an amount equal to 0.0235 acre (1,024 square feet) per
dwelling unit (single-family residential lot equivalent). In practical
application, the dedication of 1,024 square feet per lot could have
unintended and adverse consequences. Specifically, it is not the intent
of this plan for Lower Paxton Township to encourage or accept the
dedication of small, limited-use, difficult-to-maintain tracts of land for
parks and recreational facilities. To ensure that Lower Paxton Township
encourages and accepts the dedication of usable, contiguous, and
combined tracts of land for parks and recreational facilities, the
following conditions are required for all residential subdivision and land
development plans proposing land dedication.
(1) If the proposed dedication of land that does not abut an existing
municipal park and recreational facility, the amount of land
required shall be in an amount equal to 0.047 acre (2,047 square
feet) per dwelling unit (single-family residential lot equivalent).
(2) The increased acreage requirement (0.0235 acre per dwelling unit
to 0.047 acre per dwelling) provided for in Subsection D(1) above
does not apply to the fee-in-lieu of recreation dedication formula.
(3) A minimum of two acres of land is required for dedication of land
for a freestanding park and recreational facility.
(4) If the proposed dedication of land provides less than two acres of
land, and if said land does not abut an existing municipal park and
recreational facility, then the Township shall require the payment of
a fee-in-lieu of land dedication.
§ 180-522 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-522
1:453
(5) Nothing within this chapter shall prohibit a developer from offering
land for dedication as a park and recreational facility that is larger
in area than that required by these regulations.
E. Design requirements for lands to be dedicated. The following criteria
shall be considered in determining whether to approve the proposed
location of and improvements to recreation areas.
(1) The site shall have a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on a public
street and be easily accessible from all areas of the neighborhood/
subdivision or land development.
(2) The recreation area shall consist of one contiguous tract of land
and of usable proportions in terms of tract width and depth. At least
75% of the tract shall have a slope of 6% or less, with soil
conditions suitable for establishment of proper vegetative cover
(see Township Zoning Ordinance § 203-310, Steep slopes).
(3) The site shall not contain utility easements or rights-of-way that
would adversely affect the site, stormwater management facilities,
BMPs, wetlands, steep slopes (>15%), floodplain areas, or be
comprised of lands that otherwise could not be developed due to
physical, environmental or other limitations.
(4) Whenever possible, the site shall be adjacent to other existing
recreational lands to create a comprehensive recreation area.
(5) The size and shape of the site should be suitable for development as
a particular type of recreation area as categorized by the Township
in its Recreation Plan.
(6) Lands to be dedicated should be at least two acres in area.
(7) The site shall be located and designed to conveniently access public
utilities which may be extended by the applicant including sanitary
sewer, water and electric service to be utilized by the property. If
the land to be dedicated is proposed to have recreational facilities
constructed by the applicant, sufficient parking shall be
constructed by the applicant to support these facilities.
(8) If the site has been disturbed or altered prior to dedication, the
applicant shall improve it as near as possible to a condition
acceptable to the Township including, but not limited to, grading,
topsoiling and seeding, and construction of buffering acceptable to
the Township. Slopes of a 3:1 ratio or higher shall be seeded with
ground cover vegetation.
(9) If the subdivision site has been identified on the Township
Greenway Plan, or is otherwise appropriate for construction of a
greenway, the value of the greenway shall be considered as an
alternative to traditional park land and/or fee-in-lieu payments. In
most circumstances, the greenway shall be placed within an
§ 180-522 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-522
1:454
easement or a publicly dedicated right-of-way. Greenway
development shall be in accordance with the Township Greenway
Plan.
(10) The proposed final condition of the tract to be dedicated shall be
fully depicted on the subdivision or land development plan.
F. Fee in lieu of land dedication requirements. Where the Board of
Supervisors determines that the land does not meet the requirements of
§ 180-522E, the Board of Supervisors may accept a payment of a fee in
lieu of such land dedication which shall be payable to the Township as a
condition of approval of the final plan by the Board of Supervisors. The
amount of such fee shall be calculated using the following formula
(0.0235 acre/dwelling unit) multiplied by a recent average of lot prices
per acre as determined by Lower Paxton Township. The formula can
also be described as a mathematical equation as follows:
Recreation area
required
0.0235 acres/dwelling
unit
X
Average
Lot Price
=
Fee-in-Lieu
Payment
G. Limitations on uses of fees. A fee authorized under this section shall,
upon its receipt by the Township, be deposited in an interest-bearing
account. Interest earned on such an account shall become funds in that
account. Funds from such accounts shall be expended only to acquire
lands and to design and construct new recreation facilities within the
Township.
H. Private dedication of land. The Board of Supervisors may accept the
private reservation of the required percentage of land in lieu of public
dedication. The land set aside shall be suitable in size, dimensions and
topography in relationship to the proposed use; shall be convenient to
the residents of the development to be served; and shall be accessible
for maintenance of such recreation areas by maintaining ownership or
by providing for and establishing an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of the private recreation area. When a recreation area is
dedicated to a private organization, the area may remain available for
general public use without fees or charges except in specific cases of
prior reservation of facilities. When the general public is allowed free
and unrestricted use of the private recreation area, no fee-in-lieu
payment is necessary. If use of the private recreation area is restricted
to only residents of the development, 50% of fee-in-lieu funds shall be
payable to the Township as a condition of approval of the final plan or
each phase thereof.
I. Optional recreation procedure. Upon agreement by the applicant, the
Township may accept the construction of recreational facilities; the
donation of recreation equipment or facilities; the payment of fees in
lieu of dedication; the use of easements to accommodate greenways;
the private reservation of land for recreation purposes; the dedication
§ 180-522 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-522
1:455
of land located in other areas of the Township, or a combination of the
above in order to satisfy the recreation requirements of a particular
subdivision or land development.
J. Timing for contributions/dedication. The dedication of land shall occur
by transferable deed immediately following the recording of the final
subdivision or land development plan for the phase in which the
dedication is required. Where a payment of a fee in lieu of dedication is
approved, the payment shall be made as a condition of approval of the
final plan and shall be payable, in full, prior to recording of a final plan.
Where recreation land or facility to be dedicated or privately developed
recreation land or facility is to be developed in a later phase, the
Township may require bonding in an amount to be determined by the
Township Engineer to be 110% of the value of the privately owned
recreation land or facility to be set aside in a later phase.
K. Procedure.
(1) The Township Community Development Staff, upon receipt of a
preliminary plan submission, shall distribute one copy to the Parks
and Recreation Department for review and recommendation. The
review and recommendation by the Parks and Recreation Board
shall include the following:
(a) The amount of land required, or that a fee shall be charged in
lieu of land, or that land and a fee shall be required, and/or that
a stated amount of credit shall be given for Greenways, private
recreation facilities or unique natural and special features.
(b) The location of the land to be dedicated, and/or Greenway
locations.
(2) A copy of the Township Parks and Recreation Board's review and
recommendation shall be forwarded to the Township Planning
Commission and the Township Board of Supervisors. The applicant
shall dedicate the land and/or pay the fee-in-lieu as determined by
the Township Board of Supervisors before the recording of the final
plan or each phase thereof.
§ 180-522 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-522
1:456
ARTICLE VI
Traffic Impact Studies
§ 180-601. Intent.
The intent of a traffic impact study is to identify and plan for safe means of
ingress and egress for proposed developments; to understand the adequacy
of the existing transportation network for the intended use; to identify
any potential transportation impacts of the proposed subdivision and/or
land development; and to determine any roadway or traffic signalization
improvements necessary to mitigate any impacts resulting from the planned
development.
§ 180-602. General provisions.
§ 180-603. Contents.
The study shall be prepared in accordance with the Institute of
Transportation Engineer's (ITE) Traffic Engineering Handbook an ITE's
Transportation Impact Analyses for Site Development, current editions, and
A. A traffic impact study shall be submitted for subdivision and land
developments which meet the following criteria:
(1) Residential: involving 50 or more dwelling units.
(2) Nonresidential: involving 100 or more new peak hour trips.
(3) Other: whenever the Township shall find that there is reasonable
grounds to believe that the existing transportation network may be
inadequate to handle the volume or character of traffic likely to
result from the proposed subdivision or land development.
B. The study shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional
engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with
sufficient prior traffic study and traffic engineering experience to
qualify the engineer to perform the study and render any opinions and
recommendations set forth therein.
C. Study area boundaries shall be determined in accordance with the
publication referenced in § 180-703 below and through discussions with
the Township Engineer. At a minimum, the study area shall include any
intersection that experiences an increase of 50 peak hour directional
trips attributed to the development and other intersections which, in
the opinion of the Township, warrant inclusion in the study. A pre-study
conference between the applicant's Traffic Engineer and the Township
is required prior to undertaking the traffic impact study. Where a
subdivision or land development project requires access to a State
highway and meets the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation (PennDOT) for a traffic study, then PennDOT shall
also be consulted regarding the scope of the study prior to proceeding
with the work.
§ 180-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-603
1:457
PennDOT Publications 212 and 282, current editions, and the requirements
contained herein.
A. General Site Description.
(1) The site description shall include the size, location, existing and
proposed land uses, current zoning, construction phasing, and
completion date of the proposed land development. Any residual
land which, when developed, will utilize the proposed
improvements shall be planned for as the highest and best use for
the residual property and shall be included in the study. A brief
description of other major existing and proposed land
developments within the study area shall be provided.
B. Transportation facilities description.
(1) Proposed internal transportation system. Describe the proposed
vehicular bicycle and pedestrian circulation, ingress and egress
locations, existing or proposed internal roadways including the
widths of cartways and rights-of-way, parking conditions, traffic
channelizations and any other traffic control devices within the site
of the subdivision or land development.
(2) External transportation system. Describe the entire external
roadway system within the study area for the proposed subdivision
or land development including major intersections, traffic control
devices, parking conditions, widths of cartways and rights-of-way,
and vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian circulation. Key intersections
in the study area shall be identified and described. Current
photographs of the study intersections depicting all approaches
shall be included in the study. All planned or programmed public
and/or private highway improvements, including proposed roadway
construction and traffic signalization, shall be noted. Any proposed
roadway improvements planned and approved from surrounding
developments shall also be recorded.
C. Existing traffic conditions.
(1) Existing traffic conditions shall be determined for all roadways and
intersections in the study area. Existing traffic volumes for average
daily traffic, peak highway hour(s) traffic, and peak developmentgenerated
hour(s) traffic shall be collected. Manual traffic counts at
key intersections in the study area shall be conducted,
encompassing the peak highway and development generated
hour(s). A volume capacity analysis based upon existing volumes
shall be performed during the peak-highway hour(s) and the peak
development-generated hour(s) for all roadways and key
intersections in the study area using the methodologies presented
in the current edition of the Transportation Research Board's
Highway Capacity Manual, current edition. Levels of service shall
be determined for all roadways and key intersections. Traffic signal
warrant analyses shall be conducted for all unsignalized
§ 180-603 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-603
1:458
intersections in accordance with PennDOT Publication 212. Gap
studies and queue length analysis shall also be completed for all
key intersections. The analysis of the existing road network will be
based on the current geometric condition and traffic conditions.
D. Future trip projections.
(1) Estimation of vehicular trips to result from the proposed
development shall be completed for the average daily, peak
highway hour(s) and peak development-generated hour(s).
Vehicular trip generation rates to be used for this calculation shall
be based on ITE's Trip General Manual, and ITE's Trip Generation
Handbook, current editions, and/or data collected from sites with
similar trip generation characteristics. This existing data shall be
collected in conformance with the guidelines presented in the ITE
Trip Generation Handbook. Also, provide an estimate of anticipated
truck volumes in the study. These development-generated traffic
volumes shall be provided for the inbound and outbound traffic
movements and the reference source(s) and methodology followed
shall be documented. All turning movements shall be calculated.
These generated volumes shall be logically distributed to the study
area and assigned to the existing roadways, and key intersections
throughout the study area. The methodology used to distribute
trips shall be documented and approved by the Township Engineer.
(2) Provide a detailed distribution and assignment of any pass-by trips.
Document all assumptions used in the distribution and assignment
phase in a manner which permits the duplication of these
calculations. Pedestrian volumes shall also be calculated, if
applicable. If school crossings are to be used, pedestrian volumes
shall be assigned to each crossing. Any characteristics of the site
that will cause particular trip generation problems shall be noted.
(3) Background growth using the latest edition of the PennDOT
Publication entitled "Pennsylvania Traffic Data" and projected
traffic from approved but not yet built subdivisions or land
developments which are proximate to and will have an impact on
the study points shall be included in the projection of future traffic.
(4) All future analyses shall be conducted based upon a full build out in
the planned opening year plus a ten-year horizon period. For
phased projects, the entire project shall be assumed to be built out
in the opening year plus the aforementioned ten-year horizon
period.
E. Transportation impacts.
(1) The study area roadway network is to be analyzed for safety and
capacity sufficiency for future network conditions without the
proposed development and future network conditions with the
proposed development. For each of these conditions, the following
analyses shall be completed:
§ 180-603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-603
1:459
(a) Mainline ADT volumes and turning movement volumes for all
key intersections within the study area shall be determined for
the AM peak hours, PM peak hours and the proposed
development peak hours, if other than either the AM or PM
peak hours of the network. Commercial development shall also
provide a Saturday peak hour analysis.
(b) The effectiveness of the traffic signal control at all key
intersections shall be evaluated by approach in terms of
vehicle stops and delays.
(c) Gap studies will be conducted at the proposed site access
points to evaluate the need for signal control, turn prohibition
or additional site access points to reduce the left volume from
the site driveway(s).
(d) Queue length studies using 95% Highway Capacity Manual
methodologies shall be completed to evaluate the potential for
a backup of traffic from controlled intersections which could
impact other intersections including access points to the
proposed development.
(e) An analysis of the volume and capacity of the network and all
key intersections shall be conducted utilizing the most current
Highway Capacity Manual procedures. Levels of service will be
determined and documented.
(2) The analysis of the future conditions without the proposed
development will document the adequacy of the study area network
to accommodate the traffic in the design year(s) without the
proposed development. This analysis must include a full
consideration of all committed roadway improvements to the study
area network when determining the expected levels of service.
(3) The analysis of the future conditions with the proposed
development will document the impacts created as a result of the
development.
F. Conclusions and recommended improvements. Levels of service for all
street segments and key intersections shall be presented in tabular and
graphic form. All street segments and key intersections showing a level
of service below D for street segments and signalized intersections, and
below E for street segments and unsignalized intersections shall be
considered deficient, and specific recommendations for the elimination
of these deficiencies shall be listed. This listing of recommended
improvements shall include, but not be limited to, the following
elements: internal circulation design, site access location and design,
external street and intersection design and improvements, traffic signal
installation and operation, and transit design improvements. All newly
signalized intersections shall be designed to provide a level of service of
D or better for all approaches for the horizon year. All un-signalized
intersections shall be designed to provide a level of service of E or
§ 180-603 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-603
1:460
§ 180-604. Final report.
A final report shall be prepared to document the results of the traffic
study and the recommended improvements to accommodate the projected
traffic due to the proposed development. Provide an executive summary
which provides a concise description of the study area, results of the
traffic analyses, and any recommended improvements. The presentation
of data and analyses results should be accomplished on either schematic
diagram of the study area, or through the use of charts and/or tables. All
sources of data and methodologies which were used in the study (including
computer programs) must be properly referenced and documented. Any
waiver requests to the referenced procedures must be properly documented
to enable a review of the appropriateness of the modification. Provide all
computer output and calculations in appendices.
§ 180-605. Responsibility for improvements.
Where the traffic impact study indicates that on-site improvements are
necessary or advisable to existing Township and/or state streets and
intersections in order (i) to assure adequate, safe and convenient access
to each lot and structure and parking compound proposed as part of the
development of the subject tract, (ii) to accommodate the traffic due to the
proposed development, (iii) to provide for an acceptable level of service
and delay for the design year, or years for phased projects, with the
development which is at least equivalent to the projected level of service
and delay for the design year(s) without the proposed subdivision or
development, and (iv) to preserve the existing convenience of access to
or ability to exit from abutting lots which gain access from the existing
street, the applicant shall install all such indicated on-site improvements.
The applicant shall install additional traffic lanes, traffic dividers, traffic
control devices, traffic signals, and other measures as appropriate to ensure
that the development of the subject tract does not adversely impact the
existing street system and access to or the ability to exit from lots gaining
access from an affected street. If the traffic impact study indicates that
on-site improvements must be made to a state roadway, the applicant
better for all approaches in the horizon year. All physical on-site
improvements shall be shown on the subdivision and/or land
development plan and approved by the Township Engineer prior to
any plan approval by the Board of Supervisors. Any future phased
improvements shall also be planned and represented by a phasing
schedule outlining the time frame or threshold for implementation
along with the responsible party. For each recommended off-site
improvement, provide a schematic drawing of existing and proposed
conditions as well as a narrative description of the improvement,
including the estimated cost of the improvements. All recommended
improvements shall be clearly feasible from an engineering and
construction perspective. Costs shall be separated for any
recommended off-site improvements and any required on-site
improvements.
§ 180-603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-605
1:461
shall also take all action necessary to obtain any Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation permits and approvals to install the necessary street
widening or traffic signals or traffic control devices. If the traffic impact
study recommends installation of traffic signals or traffic signal
modifications as part of the on-site improvements, the applicant shall
prepare all plans and studies and submit all necessary applications to
enable the installation of the traffic signal or modifications and shall install
the traffic signal or modifications at their cost and expense. If the traffic
impact study indicates that traffic control devices or regulations, including,
but not limited to, stop intersections, speed limit reductions, or parking
prohibitions, are required as part of the on-site improvements, the applicant
shall prepare all traffic studies necessary to justify imposition of such
regulations in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
regulations and shall pay all costs associated with the preparation and
enactment of an ordinance to establish such regulations:
A. The applicant shall bear all costs and expenses in connection with the
on-site improvements required by this article. If the applicant requires
the Township to submit any permit applications or requests for
approvals in the name of the Township, the applicant shall reimburse
the Township for all costs and expenses incurred by the Township in
connection with its review of the application and submission of the
application to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or any
other governmental agency.
B. When the Township determines that a portion or all of the required onsite
improvements or that a portion or all of any agreed to off-site
improvements are not feasible or appropriate at the present time, the
applicant shall enter into a applicant's Agreement with the Township
and deposit financial security with the Township until such time that the
improvements are satisfactorily installed by the applicant and accepted
by the Township in accordance with other provisions of this chapter.
§ 180-605 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-605
1:462
ARTICLE VII
Hydrogeologic Analysis and Water Quality Testing
§ 180-701. Testing required.
A hydrogeologic analysis and water quality testing shall be required prior to
the approval of any subdivision or land development plan representing more
than 10 dwelling units, or a nonresidential use or uses which individually or
collectively have an anticipated daily water usage demand of 4,000 gallons
per day or more, which proposes to utilize an on-site community public
water supply system or individual private wells. However, this requirement
will not apply to any single-family residential development where individual
lots are larger than one acre.
§ 180-702. Test standards and procedures.
A. No person shall propose the use of an on-site public water supply
system or individual wells for a development activity described in
§ 180-801 without first administering the aquifer test required by this
article and meeting the minimum requirements of § 180-803.
(1) Test objective. The objectives of an aquifer test shall be one or
more of the following:
(a) To obtain sufficient data for the calculations of aquifer
performance, including the coefficients of transmissibility and
storage, permeability, long-term well yield, and specific
capacity.
(b) To determine the location and character of geologic
boundaries.
(c) To ascertain the effects of well interference between on-site
wells and surrounding off-site wells.
B. Test standard. The aquifer test shall establish that the proposed well(s)
is (are) capable of supplying potable water at the minimum rate of 400
gallons per day per dwelling unit or in the case of nonresidential use,
the anticipated daily water flow, at a demand rate of not less than 10
gallons per minute for one hour, either with or without the use of a
storage system. The test shall also establish that no significant adverse
impact will result to other existing on-site and surrounding wells.
C. Test supervision and evaluation. The aquifer test shall be conducted
under the supervision of a professional geologist or professional
engineer, using testing procedures hereinafter set forth. The geologist
or engineer shall be responsible for notifying the Township a minimum
of three days prior to the test. He or she will also summarize the test
and its significance and make recommendations as to the suitability of
the well or wells for the intended uses. The final report of the
supervising person shall include an opinion as to whether the proposed
use of the well will have an impact upon other existing wells in the
§ 180-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-702
1:463
immediate surrounding area. The supervising person shall provide the
Township with a copy of all field notes and test results.
D. Test method. The method for conducting the aquifer test shall be as
follows:
(1) An aquifer test shall be conducted for a minimum of 12 hours at a
constant rate of pumping. The test well, shall be the one proposed
for the specified development activity for which the test is
conducted. Two observation wells which have hydraulic continuity
with the pumped well are required. The preferred method of
analysis of the aquifer test data is the nonequilibrium formula,
although other methods are available and may be used. These
include various methods of analysis of either the drawdown or
recovery data.
E. Collection of data. Data shall be collected in conjunction with the
aquifer test as follows:
(1) Prior to the test:
(a) Collection of geologic data of the area to be tested including
well logs, if available.
(b) History of water level fluctuations in the area when available.
(c) The location, relative elevations and static water levels in the
pumped well and the observation well or wells.
(2) During the test: A standard aquifer test field data sheet will be
required for a pumped well and each observation well. The data
sheet shall include columns for listing:
(a) Date.
(b) Elapsed time since pumping started/stopped to the nearest
tenth of a minute.
(c) Depth to water below land surface to the nearest tenth of a
foot.
(d) Drawdown and recovery in feet and tenths of feet.
(e) Observed discharge at specified intervals in gallons per
minute.
(3) Following the test: A report shall be prepared summarizing all
project information and analyses including findings and
recommendations regarding the adequacy of the groundwater
supply for the proposed development. In accordance with
recognized principles of well hydraulics, graphs shall be included
to show time drawdown and time recovery for the pumped well and
the observation wells. A distance drawdown graph will be required
for anticipated rates of pumping. Computation of the coefficients of
§ 180-702 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-702
1:464
§ 180-703. Water quality test.
A water quality test shall be conducted concurrently with any aquifer test
required in § 180-801 of this chapter. Such tests shall be conducted by a
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) certified
laboratory. The quality of the water tested shall meet the minimum public
drinking water standards as set forth by PA DEP's current standards, or
be capable of treatment to attain said standard of quality. If an on-site
community system is proposed, the PA DEP required "new source" analyses
will be required.
transmissibility and storage as well as the rate of pumping, time
and drawdown are required as well as recharge and other
hydrogeologic data which maybe considered necessary to satisfy
the test objectives.
F. Impacts during testing. The applicant shall be fully responsible for
mitigating any impacts to adjacent water supplies which occur as a
result of the testing.
§ 180-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-703
1:465

ARTICLE VIII
Improvement and Construction Requirements
§ 180-801. Intent.
§ 180-802. Preconstruction meeting requirements.
A. The applicant shall design and construct all improvements required
under the Township's subdivision and land development regulations in
accordance with the requirements and specifications as contained
herein.
B. All materials, workmanship and methods of work shall comply with the
current edition, as supplemented and amended from time to time, of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) Publication
408, Specifications and the PennDOT Publication 72M, Standards For
Roadway Construction (RC Drawings), as accepted and commonly used
by the Township, and such specifications shall be considered to be
incorporated into this article as if copied in full. In the event a conflict
arises between the requirements and specifications of this article and
the above-referenced specifications, the Township Engineer shall
resolve the difference, and his opinion shall be binding.
C. Where an item of construction is not covered by the above referenced
specifications or other specifications contained herein, the applicant
shall be required to submit full design information and construction
details in accordance with commonly accepted engineering and
construction practices for review and consideration by the Township
Engineer.
D. Excluding emergency situations, when construction inspection by the
Township is required as a precedent to other construction activities
outlined herein, the applicant, or their authorized representative, shall
provide a minimum of 48 hours' notice to the Township prior to
requesting said inspection.
A. A minimum of two working days prior to beginning the construction of
any improvement under an approved subdivision or land development
plan, the applicant, or their designee, shall, with 48 hours' notice,
arrange a preconstruction meeting with Lower Paxton Township
officials, utility companies, contractors, regulatory agencies and other
interested parties to review the project schedule; status of permits and
approvals; construction and inspection procedures; project submittals;
and other relevant information. At the preconstruction meeting, the
applicant shall provide a detailed construction schedule such that the
Township can coordinate routine inspections of the work. Any project
that begins work without proper notice to the Township shall bear the
risk of either the removal of facilities that have been installed without
proper inspection or ultimately the Township refusing to accept public
facilities which are intended to be dedicated to the Township.
§ 180-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-803
1:467
§ 180-803. Street construction.
A. Pavement construction. Streets shall be designed in accordance with
Article V, Design Standards, herein and shall be surfaced to the grades
and dimensions drawn on the plan, profiles, and cross sections
submitted by the applicant and approved by the Township. Before
constructing the pavement structure for streets, the applicant shall
install all required utilities and provide, where necessary, adequate
underdrains and stormwater drainage facilities for said streets, as
approved by the Township. Unless otherwise required, the pavement
subbase, base course, binder course and wearing surface must be
constructed according to the following specifications and as outlined in
Table 503.1 of Article V, entitled "Street Widths and Materials," as
contained herein.
B. Private driveways, parking lots and other similar paved surfaces are
exempt from the requirements of this section.
(1) Site preparation - earthwork.
(a) Clearing, grubbing, demolition activities, stripping topsoil,
excavating and placing fill materials shall be in strict
conformance with the requirements with PennDOT Publication
408.
(b) Roadways in fill areas shall be compacted in not more than
eight-inch layers in accordance with PennDOT Publication 408
Specifications. Soil testing for each lift shall be performed and
paid for by the applicant as required by these specifications.
The applicant shall be responsible for documenting the
location, number and results of all compaction testing on site
and shall provide the same to the Township.
(2) Subgrade preparation.
(a) The subgrade soil shall be prepared and tested in strict
accordance with PennDOT Publication 408, Section 210. Field
dynamic cone penetration (DCP) tests shall be conducted by
the applicant and observed by the Township on the subgrade
soils prior to the placement of stone subbase. The location and
number of the tests will be determined by the Township for the
specific site conditions. Subgrade conditions that display a
California bearing ratio (CBR) correlation from DCP testing of
less than three shall be deemed unacceptable for street
construction and will require removal prior to proceeding with
additional fill material or the placement of the subbase
material.
(b) Soil cement, geogrids and/or Class 4, Type C geotextile
material may be used in lieu of undercutting to stabilize weak
subgrade areas, at the Township Engineer's sole discretion.
§ 180-803 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-803
1:468
(c) Subgrade areas that have been disturbed by trenching shall be
backfilled and compacted in eight-inch soil layers and
inspected by the Township Engineer or a designated agent
before proceeding with subsequent construction.
(d) Unsuitable material in the subgrade shall be removed and
replaced with material acceptable to the Township.
(e) Any springs or wet areas discovered shall be provided with a
proper under drain system, which shall be properly daylighted
or connected to an approved storm sewer system.
(f) The subgrade shall be sloped to match the pavement cross
slope to facilitate subgrade drainage. At inlet locations, the
subgrade shall be transitioned for a minimum of four feet on
each side of the inlet to accommodate the sumped condition
and to achieve the proper pavement thicknesses.
(g) Subgrade conditions shall be inspected by the Township or
their designated agent prior to the placement of the subbase
material.
(3) Subbase material.
(a) Prior to the placement of the subbase, the subgrade shall be
prepared and tested in accordance with § 180-903B(2)(a)
above. A final proof roll with a tri-axle truck fully loaded with
stone shall be conducted under the observation of the
Township immediately prior to the placement of the subbase.
All defects in the subgrade, including pumping, wheel ruts, soft
patches and other defects shall be fully corrected to the
satisfaction of the Township. Subbase placed without fully
complying with this procedure and without it being witnessed
by Township personnel shall be considered defective and it
shall be removed and retested at the applicant's sole expense.
(b) No subbase shall be placed on wet, frozen or unsuitable
material. Unsuitable material is defined in the PennDOT
Publication 408, Specifications. Unsuitable material must be
completely removed to the satisfaction of the Township.
(c) No subbase shall be placed prior to the installation of curbing,
pavement base drain, storm sewers, sanitary sewers and other
structures and utilities which are located within the roadway
cartway.
(4) Hot mix asphalt (HMA) base course.
(a) Prior to the placement of the HMA base course, the subbase
shall be prepared and tested in accordance with
§ 180-903B(3)(a) above. A final proof roll with a tri-axle truck
fully loaded with stone shall be conducted under the
§ 180-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-803
1:469
observation of the Township immediately prior to the
placement of the HMA base course. All defects in the subbase,
including wheel ruts, soft patches, excessive mud or dirt,
improper slope and other defects, shall be folly corrected to
the satisfaction of the Township. HMA base course placed
without fully complying with this procedure or without it being
witnessed by Township personnel shall be considered defective
and shall be removed and retested at the applicant's sole
expense.
(b) PennDOT Publication 408, Section 309, shall be strictly
enforced for base course placement, except as amended by
applicable Township ordinances, and shall include all testing
requirements to be performed by the applicant under the
supervision of the Township or Township Engineer or designee
at the applicant's sole expense.
(c) Notwithstanding the paving requirements outlined in
§ 180-903B(7)(a), following the completion of the base course,
the binder course shall be placed without excessive delay. Base
course shall not be permitted to remain in place longer than 30
days without placement of the binder course.
(5) Surface preparation and tack coat.
(a) Tack coat shall be provided between all paving sections,
according to PennDOT Publication 408, Specifications.
(b) Prior to the placement of tack coat, the pavement surface shall
be swept and cleaned in order to remove all stones, dirt and
other accumulated debris as necessary.
(6) HMA binder and wearing courses.
(a) Prior to the placement of the binder and/or wearing courses,
the base course shall be prepared and tested in accordance
with § 180-903B(4)(a). A final inspection shall be conducted
under the observation of the Township immediately prior to the
placement of the binder and/or wearing courses. All defects in
the base course or binder course, to include cracking, wheel
ruts, soft patches and other deficiencies or deviations, shall be
fully corrected to the satisfaction of the Township. Prior to the
placement of the final wearing course, an inspection by the
Township of all curbing, inlets, manholes, valve boxes, and the
like shall also occur in order to confirm the ability of these
structures to accept the placement of the final paving section.
Binder or wearing courses placed without fully complying with
these requirements shall be considered defective and shall be
removed and replaced at the applicant's sole expense.
(b) PennDOT Publication 408, Sections 408 and 409, shall be
strictly enforced for binder and wearing course placement,
§ 180-803 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-803
1:470
except as amended by applicable Township ordinances, and
shall include all testing requirements to be performed by the
applicant under the supervision of the Township or Township
Engineer at the applicant's sole expense. All binder and
wearing course placement and compaction shall be observed
by the Township or Township Engineer.
(c) PG 64-22 sealant shall be neatly placed to a width of 12 inches
wherever the final wearing surface abuts curb, inlets,
manholes or other structures. Sealed pavement notches, in
accordance with PennDOT Publication 72M, RC-28M, shall be
installed wherever proposed pavement ties into existing
pavement. Sealant shall be neatly placed such that it is uniform
in appearance and, is not applied to manhole frames and
grates, inlets, curbing or other structures.
(d) Longitudinal pavement joints for the proposed HMA wearing
course that fall within an existing travel lane are not permitted.
The applicant shall extend the wearing course by milling the
travel lane to a minimum depth of 1 1/2 inches and installing
the wearing course to the edge of the existing travel lane or
center line as required. All longitudinal pavement joints shall
be sealed with PG 64-22.
(7) Weather limitations.
(a) The placing of HMA base course or HMA binder course shall
terminate after October 31 of each year, and shall not be
resumed until April 1 of the following year.
(b) When the air temperature falls below 50° F., extra cold
weather precautions shall be taken in drying the aggregate,
controlling the temperature of the delivered material and
compacting the mixture. HMA base course or HMA binder
course shall not be placed on wet surfaces, or when the air
temperature is 40° F. or lower.
(c) The placing of HMA wearing course or surface course shall
terminate after October 15 of each year, and shall not be
resumed until April 1 of the following year.
(d) When the air temperature falls below 50° F., extra cold
weather precautions shall be taken in drying the aggregate,
controlling the temperature of the delivered material and
compacting the mixture. HMA wearing course or surface
course shall not be placed on wet surfaces, or when the air
temperature is 45° F. or lower.
(8) Construction limitations on wearing course placement.
(a) Within any phase of a single-family or multifamily residential
development, the placement of HMA wearing course on streets
§ 180-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-803
1:471
intended to be offered for dedication to the Township shall not
occur until at least 70% of the dwelling units are constructed.
For commercial and/or industrial developments which contain
streets intended to be offered for dedication to the Township,
the placement of HMA wearing course shall not occur until the
improvements on the lot or lots are substantially completed.
(9) Pavement base drain.
(a) Pavement base drain shall be constructed in accordance with
the specifications as set forth in the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation, Publication 408, as amended, and as
detailed on the Roadway Construction Standard Drawings
(RC-3).
(b) Combination storm sewer and underdrain shall be constructed
in accordance with the specifications as set forth in the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Publication 408,
as amended, and as detailed on the Roadway Construction
Standard Drawings (RC- 30).
(c) Base drain shall be six-inch perforated polyethylene pipe
unless otherwise specified and approved by the Township.
(d) Pavement base drain shall be provided on both sides of new
roadways and existing roadways being widened or
reconstructed based upon the following criteria:
[1] In all locations where the pavement subgrade is in a cut
condition as it relates to the existing ground elevations.
[2] On each side of the roadway at all low points for a
minimum distance of 100 feet in each direction.
[3] At all other wet areas, springs, seeps, or spongy soil
materials or at other locations as directed by the Township
Engineer based upon good engineering practice.
(e) Base drains shall be properly connected to inlet boxes or other
approved drainage structures but shall not be permitted to
discharge by overland means.
(10) Utility construction in existing streets.
(a) Utility excavations within the legal right-of-way of existing
streets shall be constructed and backfilled, in accordance with
the following standards:
[1] Backfilling shall be done as promptly as possible. Trenches
shall not be left open where they could create a hazard or
unsafe condition.
§ 180-803 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-803
1:472
[2] Trenches for utilities shall be a minimum width of the
largest conduit diameter plus 12 inches unless otherwise
regulated herein.
[3] The trench shall be filled with hand-placed stone
(PennDOT No. IB or 2A material) acceptable to the
Township, to a height of at least one foot above the top of
the conduit, pipe or pipe bell.
[4] All utility trenches shall be provided with metallic
identification tape placed above the utility line and within
18 inches of the surface of the trench.
[5] The remainder of the trench shall be backfilled with
PennDOT No. 2A stone and properly compacted. The
backfill material shall be mechanically tamped in six-inch
layers.
[6] Trenches within existing streets shall be restored with a
pavement section as outlined in Article V, Table 503.1, for
the street classification. Trench lines shall be cut back one
foot on each side of the maximum trench width and sealed
with PG 64-22 for a width of 12 inches.
[7] Where openings are made behind the curbline, work shall
be performed as required in these specifications, and the
opening covered with good topsoil to a depth of six inches,
and seeded or sodded to the satisfaction of the Township.
[8] Whenever the trenches have not been properly filled, or if
settlement occurs, they shall be re-excavated, refilled,
recompacted, smoothed off, and finally made to conform to
the surface of the ground. Under no circumstances will the
addition of bituminous material patched over existing
settled bituminous material be permitted.
[9] Frozen material shall not be used for backfill, nor shall any
backfilling be done when materials already in the trench
are frozen.
[10] All utility trenches shall be either perpendicular or parallel
to the cartway. No skewed trenches across roadways shall
be permitted.
[11] When an existing roadway is trenched or open cut at more
than four perpendicular trenches within a 100-foot section
of roadway, the roadway shall be milled and overlaid as
specified herein.
[12] Longitudinal trenching within the cartway of existing
streets shall be prohibited unless the entire lane width is
milled for a minimum of 1 1/2 inches and overlaid.
§ 180-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-803
1:473
§ 180-804. Curb construction.
[13] Alternate trenching and backfilling techniques such as
directional drilling, boring, narrow trenching with
flowable backfill, etc., will be entertained on a case by case
basis by the Township only to the extent that the technique
results in less disturbance to the Township's roadways.
A. Curbs shall be installed on each side of the all new roadways and along
widened or reconstructed roadways in accordance with the
requirements of the Township.
B. Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications as set
forth in the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Publication
408, as amended, and as detailed on the PennDOT RC Drawings
(RC-64).
C. Curb construction shall be either vertical concrete curbing or slant
curbing. Rolled curbs shall not be permitted.
D. Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the cross section details
shown on approved drawings and as referenced herein.
E. Curbs shall be set and finished to the line and grade as shown on
approved drawings.
F. Backfill shall be placed as soon as the concrete is cured; surface
finished and joints are sawn. The backfill shall be compacted in place
along the rear face of the curb to within six inches of the top of the
curb.
G. When curbing is to be removed to construct a driveway, the removal
shall be done on the complete curb section. The length of curbing to be
removed shall be carried to the nearest expansion joint or saw-cut if the
joint is located more than five feet from the end of the curb removal.
Two No. 5 rebar dowels, each having a length of 18 inches, shall be
provided between the existing curb and the replaced curb section. Curb
replacement shall be formed and shaped to the required driveway
width. The driveway shall be depressed to a height of 1 1/2 inches
above the finished paving grade.
H. No grinding or partial sawcutting or breaking out of the curb shall be
permitted for the creation of driveway cut areas.
I. Curb joints shall be caulked prior to backfilling.
J. Curbs shall be inspected by the Township, Township Engineer or
designee just prior to the placing of concrete and after completion of all
work.
§ 180-803 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-805
1:474
§ 180-805. Sidewalk construction.
Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of new streets or along one
side of widened or reconstructed streets in accordance with Township
requirements and in accordance with the following specifications:
§ 180-806. Traffic signal construction.
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed of four inches of plain cement concrete
in accordance with the specifications as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Publication 408, Specifications, as
amended.
B. Four inches of AASHTO Number 57 coarse aggregate shall be placed
under all sidewalks.
C. Sidewalks shall be located within the right-of-way of the street and shall
extend in width from a point no closer than four inches from the rightof-
way line toward the curbline.
D. Sidewalks shall be four feet wide for residential developments and five
feet wide for commercial, industrial or all other types of developments
unless the Township determines; based upon a special need that the
width should be greater. These cases shall be areas which are used for
recreation, in proximity to schools or as called for in the Township's
Greenway plan.
E. Where a sidewalk abuts a curb, wall, building or any other structure, a
pre-molded expansion joint 1/4 inch in thickness, shall be placed
between the sidewalk and said structure for the full length of said
structure.
F. Sidewalks shall be boxed out around light standards, fire hydrants, etc.,
with a pre-molded expansion joint 1/4 inch in thickness.
G. Sidewalks shall be inspected by the Township, Township Engineer or
designee after the forms have been placed, just prior to the placing of
the concrete and after the completion of all work.
A. Technical specifications.
(1) Controller.
(a) In accordance with PennDOT Publication 408, Section 952.
(b) Traffic signal controller assembly shall at minimum meet
NEMA TS-2, Type 2 standards and shall accommodate, at
minimum, the installation of a NEMA TS-2, Type 2 controller
unit.
(c) The traffic signal controller shall be manufactured by Econolite
with features enabling the controller to operate within the
Township's closed loop system.
§ 180-805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-806
1:475
(d) The traffic signal controller assembly shall be NEMA 2-8 phase
Type M pole mounted or Type P ground-mounted. Groundmounted
controllers are preferred.
(e) The traffic signal controller assembly shall also include all load
switches and relays for operation, at minimum the controller
shall be equipped with a RS-485 serial bus, RS-232C port and
fiber optic telemetry port plus the standard A, B, C and D
connectors for compatibility with existing NEMA TS-2
equipment.
(f) The controller cabinet shall have adequate shelf space for all
control units, with all control units clearly visible through the
provided door opening.
(g) The AC power line to the microprocessor traffic signal
controller shall have a surge and transient arrestor. This unit
shall be in addition to the standard lightning arrestor required
on the power panel within the controller cabinet. The surge
arrestor shall be 120 VAC single phase and shall be rated for
10 amps. It shall have a peak surge current of 20KA and a
maximum clamp voltage of 280 volts at 20KA.
(h) The contractor shall provide the Township with a certification
for the controller that the conflict monitor was inspected and
bench tested and that all potential conflicts were simulated
and that in all cases, the monitors detected the conflict and
initiated flashing signal operation.
(i) Traffic signal controller assembly shall include:
[1] Fluorescent light with in-door on/off switch.
[2] Shelf-mounted NEMA PLUS conflict monitor units.
[3] Detector harnesses and amplifiers, as noted.
[4] MUTCD flash operation controlled by TBC.
[5] Diagnostic load switches with input and output displays.
[6] The cabinet wiring shall facilitate the location of all
switches, including the controller flash switch and Auto/
Manual switch within the police-access portion of the
cabinet.
[7] The cabinet shall be wired with a six-foot auto-hand cord
for manual control.
(j) Amplifiers shall be of digital design, self-tuning, and shall,
where specified, have a built-in digital delay feature with a
time range of zero seconds to 20 seconds. The amplifiers and
§ 180-806 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-806
1:476
harnesses shall utilize MS-type connectors, and where delay is
specified, the delay override shall be enabled.
(k) Provide isolation or surge protection for all pedestrian
pushbutton circuits.
(l) Load switches shall be the solid state cube type meeting NEMA
specifications.
(m) Cabinet shall be natural aluminum.
(n) The controller assembly shall display a drawing showing the
intersection, north arrow, and identifying all loops, signal
heads, and phase assignments. Drawing shall be 8 1/2 inches
by 11 inches mounted with plastic cover on the inside door.
Drawing material shall be permanent and nonfading.
(o) A four-inch LB will be installed into the base of the controller
cabinet for pole mounted installations and connected to the
pole via a short threaded nipple. The LB will be made of
aluminum or steel.
(p) Master controller shall be an Econolite model and shall be
compatible with NEMA TS-2 controller units at minimum. All
construction shall be in accordance with PennDOT Publication
408, Sections 950.2 and 1104.01.
(q) A backup generator outlet shall be provided.
(r) An uninterrupted power supply (battery backup) system shall
be provided., equipped with an automatic transfer switch and
capable of running the intersection for a minimum of eight
hours. The system shall automatically regenerate upon
reactivation of the main power supply and shall automatically
return to standby mode once fully charged. Locate the battery
system so that it will not come in contact with water from rain
or melted snow and provide barrier protection so that any
faulty battery will not leak or corrode and affect the integrity of
adjacent batterie, equipment, or components.
(2) Traffic signal poles.
(a) In accordance with PennDOT Publication 408, Section 951.
(b) The traffic signal poles shall be hot dip galvanized tapered
steel.
(c) Only mast arm installations shall be provided.
(d) Poles with luminaire attachments shall have shafts with
sufficient height to provide for a thirty-foot luminaire mounting
height. Luminaires shall have a twelve-foot arm. A minimum of
two luminaires shall be provided for each intersection.
§ 180-806 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-806
1:477
(e) Should a pole-mounted cabinet installation be required, the
traffic signal pole used to mount controller cabinet will have a
four-inch coupler welded into the pole to mount LB for wire
runs into traffic signal cabinet.
(3) Electrical distribution.
(a) In accordance with PennDOT Publication 408, Section 954, and
as follows: Service shall be PennDOT Type "C," mounted on
back of controller assembly. Coordinate installation of
electrical service with the Township and PPL Utilities, Inc.
(PPL). A three-foot clear work area shall be provided in and
around the electrical service.
(b) All conflicting utility poles, lines and other facilities shall be
adjusted or relocated to allow for the installation of the traffic
signal in accordance with utility company requirements.
(c) Provide two electrical disconnect boxes, one for the traffic
signal service (metered) and one for service to the streetlight
circuits (unmetered). Conform to all electric company (PPL)
standards for the service drop installation.
(d) All signal field wiring shall be done in accordance with
PennDOT Publication 408, Section 954, and PPL specifications.
(e) The conduit and wiring providing electrical service to the
luminaries shall be contained in a separate conduit system
from the traffic signal wiring. Conduit and wiring for the
luminaries shall not enter the controller cabinet.
(f) All conduit crossings in Township streets shall be installed
without open cutting or damaging the roadway.
(g) All junction boxes shall conform to PennDOT Specifications and
be installed as located on the approved construction plans. All
conduits shall terminate within the junction boxes utilizing
ninety-degree sweeps up.
(4) Telemetry.
(a) Communications between the central computer and the system
master shall be via leased telephone lines. The applicant shall
coordinate connection of leased telephone lines with the
telephone company. All signal interconnect communications
cable shall be fiber optic in accordance with PennDOT
Specifications, Section 957, and installed from intersection to
intersection without splices.
(b) The applicant shall supply a telephone service drop at the pole
where the controller will be located. It shall consist of a
weather head, conduit, and a communications cabinet keyed
with police door key and a separate conduit to the controller
§ 180-806 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-806
1:478
cabinet. The communications cabinet shall be a size as
directed by the telephone company and the Township.
(5) Traffic signals.
(a) All pedestrian signals, where applicable, shall be HAND/MAN
LED with polycarbonate housing. Signals shall be mounted
using stainless steel banding.
(b) All vehicle signal heads will be polycarbonate housings,
containing red, yellow and green Gel-Core LED modules or
approved equal. All vehicular heads shall be twelve-inch
sections. Signals shall be mounted using stainless steel
banding.
(c) All overhead vehicle signal heads shall include back plates.
(d) Signal pole foundations shall be sized and installed in
accordance with PennDOT TC-7800 specifications.
(6) Miscellaneous.
(a) All push buttons and signs that are pole-mounted will be drilled
and tapped and be mounted with 5/16 inch stainless steel bolts.
Push buttons and associated pedestrian signs shall not be
mounted using steel banding.
(b) All banding material used will be at least 3/4 inch wide and
0.030 inch in thickness and be stainless steel.
(c) Each outermost vehicle signal head on each approach shall be
wired independently with a seven-conductor wire.
(d) All signage and pavement markings indicated on the drawing
be installed by the contractor in accordance with PennDOT and
Township requirements.
(e) All directional pavement arrows, crosswalks, stop bars, and
wording shall be of a thermoplastic design and installed as
indicated on the approved PennDOT Traffic Signal Permit Plan.
(f) Removal of existing pavement markings and legends shall
conform to current PennDOT Specifications.
(g) Traffic signal to be equipped with Econolite Autoscope video
detection system for vehicle detection along all approaches to
the intersection.
(h) Emergency vehicle preemption shall be provided on all
approaches at all new signals or signal upgrades where
preemption does not exist. The manufacturer and type shall be
Opticom, as manufactured by Global Traffic Technologies. The
applicant shall provide three emitters to the Township for each
signal installed or modified by the applicant.
§ 180-806 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-807
1:479
§ 180-807. Changes following plan approval.
§ 180-808. As-built plans.
A. In the event that changes to approved plans are required prior to or
during the construction phase of the work due to unforeseen field
conditions, final utility design, or other similar changes or conflicts
encountered during construction, the Township shall be immediately
notified in order to review the proposed changes prior to
implementation. Depending upon the severity of the situation
encountered, the Township may require the applicant to submit
engineering design information for review and approval prior to
construction of the proposed modification. Design changes made
without review and approval by the Township shall be considered
defective work and shall be subject to removal and reconstruction.
B. When discrepancies or plan errors are discovered during construction
or any time thereafter that relate to property line closure;
encroachments; easements; subdivision or other geometric type errors;
or similar conditions which affect the conveyance of land or title
thereto, the applicant shall be required to correct the errors to the
satisfaction of the Township which may include filing a corrective
subdivision or land development plan or other similar efforts.
Regarding the dedication of public facilities, the Township will not
accept any facilities which knowingly contain defects in closure, title or
otherwise.
A. Following the completion of all required public improvements and prior
to final inspections and the offering of facilities for dedication to the
Township, the applicant shall prepare and submit an as-built plan
prepared to a minimum scale of one inch equals 60 feet and on no
larger than 24 inches by 36 inches plan sheets showing the actual
location, dimension, elevation, and related features for all existing
improvements as constructed. In addition, the plan shall demonstrate
that the existing grading, drainage, and utility improvements are in
substantial conformance with the previously approved drawings and
specifications and that all facilities are properly located within planned
rights-of-way, easements or property lines. The plan shall specifically
identify, graphically and by note, any and all deviations from the
approved drawings. Where as-built plans are required by another
Township entity or other governmental agency having jurisdiction, the
Township may require confirmation by said entity or other
governmental agency that the constructed improvements are
acceptable and are in conformance with the approved plans and/or
permits for the project.
B. As-built plans shall, at a minimum include all facilities and
infrastructure located within rights-of-way or easements to be offered
for dedication to the Township and all drainage, stormwater and related
facilities as proposed on the approved plan. The as-built plan shall
§ 180-807 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-808
1:480
include, where applicable, profiles and details to adequately depict the
as-constructed condition of said facilities.
C. The applicant's professional land surveyor shall sign and seal said plan
certifying that the plan reflect all existing conditions as performed by a
field survey following the actual construction of said improvements and
that the plan as submitted is in strict conformance with the approved
plans unless otherwise specifically noted as referenced above.
D. Prior to the acceptance of dedicated public facilities, the Township may
require the applicant to remedy any material changes discovered
during the preparation of the as-built plan which are not in strict
conformance with the approved plans and specifications.
E. The applicant shall file three paper copies, one reproducible Mylar
copy, one electronic file copy in (.pdf) format, and one electronic data
file on a compact disk (CD) in the format and to the specifications
outlined in Article IV, § 180-404E(16).
§ 180-808 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-808
1:481

ARTICLE IX
Mobile Home Park Regulations
§ 180-901. Grant of power.
The governing body of each municipality may regulate subdivision and
land development within the municipality by enacting a subdivision and
land development ordinance. Provisions regulating mobile home parks shall
be set forth in separate and distinct articles of any subdivision and land
development ordinance adopted pursuant to the "Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code," Act 247, as amended, Article V, Section 501.
§ 180-902. Purpose, authority and application.
The purpose, authority and application of regulations for a mobile home
park as a land development are the same as those contained in Article I of
this chapter.
§ 180-903. Plan requirements and processing procedure.
The plan requirements and processing procedure for a mobile home park as
a land development shall be in accordance with the requirements contained
in Articles III and IV of this chapter in addition to the following plan
requirements:
§ 180-904. Design standards.
The arrangement and other design standards for streets, easements, blocks,
lots, stormwater management, drainage and erosion and sedimentation
control, sidewalks, water and sewer service and other design features shall
be in accordance with the requirements as contained in Article V herein.
The following additional design standards shall also apply to mobile home
parks.
A. Number and location of each mobile home lot, dimensions for each and
proposed location of each mobile home.
B. Location and number of off-street parking spaces.
C. Location of all plantings and landscaping.
D. Location, dimensions and proposed use of all service and accessory
structures.
E. Location and type of all fire extinguishers and waste containers.
F. Location of both sewer riser pipes and water riser pipes.
G. Plans and specifications for refuse disposal facilities.
A. All mobile homes shall be properly placed on a mobile home stand and
securely fastened to the foundation. An enclosure of compatible design
and material shall be erected around the entire base of each mobile
§ 180-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-904
1:483
home. Such enclosure shall provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit
decay and deterioration of the structure.
B. Mobile home parks located adjacent to any industrial or commercial
land use shall be required to provide a screen planting along the
property line separating the park and the adjacent use. The screen
planting shall be located within a thirty-foot buffer yard around all sides
of the park.
C. A minimum of one visitor parking space shall be provided for every
three mobile home spaces which shall be located within 200 feet of the
mobile home spaces which are to be served.
D. In order to ensure that recreational vehicles are not parked on the
streets or mobile home lots, a landscaped recreation vehicle parking
area shall be provided. At a minimum, one such space shall be provided
for each five mobile home lots and shall have an area of 250 square feet
for each space required.
E. All parks shall be furnished with streetlighting fixtures so spaced and
equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will
provide average levels of illumination for the safe movement of
pedestrians and vehicles at night.
F. All mobile home parks shall be provided with pedestrian walks on both
sides of the street. Such walks shall be at least four feet in width. All
sites shall be connected to the pedestrian walk with an individual walk
at least 36 inches in width. All walks shall be constructed in accordance
with Township specifications.
G. All streets within a mobile home park shall be privately owned.
H. No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes, except
for such uses that are required for recreation, direct servicing,
management or maintenance of the park and its residents.
I. All power distribution lines, telephone or cable servicing the park shall
be installed underground and maintained in accordance with the
respective utility company regulating such systems.
J. Every mobile home park shall have a structure clearly designated as the
office of the mobile home park manager. Service and accessory
buildings should be used only by the residents of the park.
K. Refuse handling. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the
mobile home park shall be the responsibility of the mobile home park
owner or manager and shall be so conducted as to create no health
hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire
hazards or air pollution and shall comply with all applicable Township
and state regulations.
§ 180-904 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-905
1:484
§ 180-905. Improvement and construction requirements.
All improvements, construction requirements, and engineering
specifications for the improvements required shall be provided in
accordance with Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 180-906. Standards for mobile home parks in floodplain areas.
Where permitted within any identified fioodplain area, all mobile home
parks and additions thereto shall be in accordance with Article V of this
chapter and all applicable provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance.
A. Permits and removal.
(1) Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or
extend any mobile home park within the limits of Lower Paxton
Township unless a valid permit has been issued in the name of such
person for the specific construction, alteration or extension
proposed. In addition, the owner of the mobile home park shall
make certain that individual building permits are obtained prior to
the construction or placement of all structures on the premises.
(2) Removal. No mobile home in a mobile home park shall be removed
from the Township without first obtaining a permit from the
Township Tax Collector as required by Act No. 54, 1969, of the
Pennsylvania General Assembly. Such permit shall be issued upon
payment of a fee to be established from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors and real estate taxes assessed against
the home and unpaid at the time the permit is requested.
B. Notices, hearings, and orders.
(1) Notice. Whenever the Township Building Inspector or other
authorized Township representatives determine that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this article, or of any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, the Township shall give notice of such alleged violation to
the person to whom the permit or license was issued. Such notice
shall:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(c) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires;
(d) Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require,
provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have
been properly served when a copy has been served by any
method authorized or required by the laws of the state;
§ 180-905 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-906
1:485
(e) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Hearing. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued
in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this article
may request a hearing on the matter before the Board of
Supervisors, provided that such person shall file with the Township
Secretary a written petition requesting such hearing and setting
forth a brief statement of the grounds thereof within 10 days after
the notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall
operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension. Upon receipt
of such petition, the Township Secretary shall set a time and place
for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice. At
such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be
heard and to show why such notice should be modified or
withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days
after the day on which the petition was filed; provided that upon
application of the petitioner, the Township Secretary may postpone
the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day
period when, in his judgment, the petitioner has submitted good
and sufficient reasons for such postponement.
(3) Findings and orders. After such hearing, the Board of Supervisors
shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this
article and shall issue an order, in writing, sustaining, modifying or
withdrawing the notice which shall be served as provided above.
Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a
notice, the permit of the mobile home park affected by the order
shall be revoked.
(4) Record. The proceedings of such a hearing, including the findings
and decision of the Board of Supervisors together with a copy of
every notice and order related thereto, shall be entered as a matter
of public record in the office of the Township, but the transcript of
the proceedings need not be transcribed unless judicial review of
the decision is sought. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Board may seek relief in any court of competent jurisdiction, as
provided by the laws of this commonwealth.
C. Mobile homes not located in a mobile home park.
(1) Where a mobile home is used for human habitation and is not
located in a mobile home park, the lot on which the mobile home is
situated shall comply with the requirements of the Lower Paxton
Township Zoning Ordinance and the requirements of this chapter
as applicable. The mobile home is subject to the same requirements
of a single-family detached dwelling.
§ 180-906 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-906
1:486
ARTICLE X
Traffic Calming
§ 180-1001. Intent.
The purpose of traffic calming is to encourage the design of streets and
roadside appurtenances to be pedestrian-friendly and aesthetically
pleasing, with the goal to reduce vehicle operating speeds, promote
adherence to the speed limit within a development, and negate the need for
future traffic calming retrofits. Traffic calming shall enhance the livability
of a street and shall produce a roadway network that naturally disperses
and slows traffic. Traffic calming shall be implemented in a comprehensive
approach utilizing both noninvasive and invasive techniques as differing
situations apply. Noninvasive traffic calming, such as traffic calming
through geometric design elements, shall be considered first. Invasive
traffic calming shall be applied where dictated by this chapter.
§ 180-1002. General provisions.
A. A traffic calming plan shall be submitted for review by the Township
Engineer, Public Safety Committee, and Planning Commission. This
plan shall depict specific design elements that have been utilized to
calm traffic.
B. A traffic calming plan shall be required for all proposed developments
that meet the requirement to prepare a traffic study. The traffic calming
plan shall include the following:
(1) All features required on the site plan.
(2) The location and type of speed control points.
(3) All proposed traffic markings, regulatory signs and warning signs.
(4) All noninvasive traffic calming features.
(5) All invasive traffic calming features.
C. The plan shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional
engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with
sufficient prior traffic engineering experience to qualify the engineer to
develop the plan and render any opinions and recommendations set
forth therein.
D. Traffic calming shall be required on all minor roads.
E. Traffic calming shall be required on collector roads within 600 feet of
areas of concentrated pedestrian traffic (i.e.: town squares,
intersections of two collector roads in a business district, parks,
schools, churches, planned Greenway Plan and Comprehensive Plan
improvements) and within all developments required to install
sidewalks.
§ 180-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-1002
1:487
F. Design speeds. As per Chapter 180, Article V, roads shall be designed to
encourage the adherence to the respective design speeds.
G. All traffic calming elements shall be designed in accordance with
Pennsylvania's Traffic Calming Handbook. All features shall also be
designed to facilitate a forty-two-foot minimum turning radius and
eleven-foot minimum travel lane to facilitate emergency vehicles and
snow clearing apparatus.
H. Noninvasive traffic calming elements are design elements relating to
street geometry and are the preferred method of traffic calming, such
as:
(1) Curvilinear roadway design.
(2) Decreased street width.
(3) "T" intersections.
(4) Alternating parking.
(5) Roundabouts.
(6) Boulevard entrances.
(7) Boulevard roadways.
I. Invasive traffic calming elements involve the physical change of the
street or roadside appurtenances that limit vehicle operating speeds.
Invasive traffic calming elements shall be considered at locations of
concentrated pedestrian movements, as previously defined where noninvasive
design elements cannot be employed. Refer to Subsection
J(3)(a) for preferred examples of invasive traffic calming devices.
J. Speed control points are points at which speed is limited by either
invasive or noninvasive traffic calming elements. The maximum road
length between speed control points shall be 600 feet. Types of speed
control points are:
(1) Warranted stop sign:
(a) Stop signs shall not be used as speed control points unless the
stop sign meets warrants for installation as set forth in the
current edition of PennDOT Publication 212 and the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices as published by the Federal
Highway Administration.
(2) Horizontal curve:
(a) Curvilinear street form is a preferred method of noninvasive
traffic calming that not only reduces vehicle speed but also
enhances aesthetics. The "600 feet" measurements shall be
measured from the point of curvature (PC) of the curve.
§ 180-1002 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-1002
1:488
(3) Traffic calming device:
(a) A traffic calming device is an invasive physical alteration of the
roadway, or roadside appurtenance that has the tendency to
limit vehicle operating speeds. Refer to PennDOT Publication
383, "Pennsylvania Traffic Calming Handbook," for
background information regarding traffic calming techniques
and devices. Preferred examples are:
[1] Curb extensions.
[2] Intersection bulb-outs.
[3] Gateways.
[4] Textured crosswalks.
[5] Speed humps.
[6] Raised crosswalks.
[7] Raised intersection.
§ 180-1002 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-1002
1:489

ARTICLE XI
Administration
§ 180-1101. Intent.
§ 180-1102. Administration and enforcement.
§ 180-1103. Modification of requirements.
A. This chapter shall be considered to set forth the minimum requirements
for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, property or
general welfare, pursuant to the authority of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended, or such statutes hereinafter in effect, and shall
be construed most favorably to the Township as encouraging standards
of planning and development exceeding these basic and minimum
regulations.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have the duty and authority for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. As
directed by the Board, officials of the Township having regulatory
duties shall have the duty and authority for the controlling enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Permits required by the Township for the erection or alteration of
buildings, the installation of streets, stormwater drainage systems, or
for other appurtenant improvements to or use of the land, shall not be
issued by any Township official responsible for such issuance until it has
been ascertained that the site for such building, alteration,
improvement, or use is contained in a subdivision or land development
plan approved and publicly recorded in accordance with the provisions
of this and other applicable Township Codes and Ordinances.
A. The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the residents
and inhabitants of Lower Paxton Township. The Board of Supervisors
may grant a modification of the requirements of one or more provisions
of this chapter if the Board concludes that literal enforcement will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar or unique conditions pertaining to
the land in question, provided that such modifications will not be
contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this
chapter is observed.
B. All requests for a modification of requirements shall be in writing to the
Board and shall accompany and be part of the application for
subdivision or land development. The request shall state in full the
grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship upon which the
request is based; the provision or provisions of the Ordinance involved;
and the minimum modification necessary to afford relief. The request
for a modification of requirements shall also be referred to the
Township Planning Commission for advisory comments.
§ 180-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-1103
1:491
§ 180-1104. Appeals.
§ 180-1105. Schedule of fees.
C. All such modification requests shall be approved or disapproved by the
Board of Supervisors. A written record of the action shall be kept for all
modification requests.
D. A listing of all modifications granted by the Board of Supervisors shall
be clearly identified on the preliminary and/or final plan for ease of
future reference.
A. An applicant, subdivider, landowner or developer aggrieved by any
action of the Board of Supervisors regarding refusal to approve a
subdivision or land development plan may, within 30 days of such
refusal, appeal to the Common Pleas Court of Dauphin County. Any
other appeals by aggrieved parties or other landowners shall be subject
to the appeal procedures outlined in Article X of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended.
A. Annually, the Board of Supervisors shall establish, by resolution, a
schedule of fees, charges and expenses pertaining to application filing
fees, plan review fees, engineering and legal fees, inspection fees and
other matters necessary for the administration of this chapter. The
schedule of fees shall be made available in the Township municipal
building during normal business hours.
B. At the time of filing, all plans shall be accompanied by a check payable
to Lower Paxton Township, in the amount specified herein, to cover the
required initial application fees to help defray the cost of reviewing the
proposed plans and required data. Also at the time of filing, all plans
shall be accompanied by a check payable to the Dauphin County
Planning Commission, in the amount specified by the county, to cover
the costs of the County Planning Commission review and report.
C. Any additional fees incurred due to review during the review process
shall be promptly billed by Lower Paxton Township to the applicant, and
the same shall be paid by the applicant within 30 days. Until all fees,
charges and expenses have been paid in full by the applicant, the
subdivision or land development plan shall not be placed on public
record, nor shall any permits related to the project be issued.
D. Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by the
Township's Engineer, Solicitor or other professional consultant for
review and report to the Township related to the application as duly
filed. Such review fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the
ordinary and customary charges by the Township Engineer, Solicitor or
professional consultant for similar service in the community, but in no
event shall the fees exceed the rate or fees charged by the engineer,
§ 180-1103 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-1105
1:492
§ 180-1106. Enforcement and penalties.
solicitor or consultant to the Township when fees are not reimbursed or
otherwise imposed on applicants.
E. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fees,
the applicant shall, within 15 days of the billing date, notify the
Township in writing that such fees are disputed, in which case the
Township shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land
development application due to the applicant's request over disputed
fees. In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on
the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the
fees shall be recalculated and recertified by another professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually
by the Township and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified
by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen,
fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the
Township and the applicant or developer.
F. Whenever an application is disapproved by the Township, withdrawn by
the applicant or subject to other similar action, and subsequently
resubmitted by the applicant, the Township shall require the payment
of new fees as any resubmission shall be considered as a new
submission.
A. Preventive remedies.
(1) In addition to other remedies that the Township may institute, the
Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property in
violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a permit or
approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of the record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(2) As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting
of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee
§ 180-1105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-1106
1:493
§ 180-1107. Effect of changes in this chapter.
Changes in this chapter shall affect plans as follows:
for the development of any such real property, the Township may
require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an
interest in such real property.
B. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable thereof
in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay
a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
Magisterial District Judge, determining that there has been a
violation, further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, corporation violating this chapter to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed
to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
Judge, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
(2) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per-diem judgment pending a
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this article shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this chapter.
(4) The Magisterial District Judge shall have initial jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under this chapter.
A. From the time an application for approval of a plan, whether
preliminary or final, is duly filed as provided in this chapter, and while
such application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of this chapter, zoning or other governing ordinance or
plan shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the
applicant, and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in
accordance with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as
they stood at the time the application was duly filed. The applicant shall
be entitled to final approval in accordance with the terms of the
§ 180-1106 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-1107
1:494
approved preliminary application as hereinafter provided. However,
if an application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent
application shall be subject to the intervening change in governing
regulations.
B. When an application for approval of a plan, whether preliminary or
final, has been approved without conditions or approved by the
applicant's acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or
amendment in this chapter, zoning or other governing ordinance or
plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right of the applicant to
commence and to complete any aspect of the approved development in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five years from such
approval.
C. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid
five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary
approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of
this chapter or the governing ordinance or plans as they stood at the
time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
D. Where the landowner has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plan within the aforesaid fiveyear
limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the Board of
Supervisors, no change of any ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to
the date of filing of the preliminary plan shall modify or revoke any
aspect of the approved final plan pertaining to zoning classification or
density, lot, building, street or utility location.
E. In the case of a preliminary plan calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by
the landowner with the preliminary plan delineating all proposed
sections as well as deadlines within which applications for final plan
approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be
updated annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of the
preliminary plan approval, until final plan approval of the final section
has been granted and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall
be subject to approval of the Board of Supervisors in its discretion.
F. Each section in any residential subdivision or land development, except
for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number
of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser
percentage is approved by the Board of Supervisors in its discretion.
Provided the landowner has not defaulted with regard to or violated any
of the conditions of the preliminary plan approval, including compliance
with landowner's aforesaid schedule of submission of final plans for the
various sections, then the aforesaid protections afforded by
substantially completing the improvements depicted upon the final plan
within five years shall apply and for any section or sections, beyond the
initial section, in which the required improvements have not been
substantially completed within said five-year period the aforesaid
§ 180-1107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-1107
1:495
§ 180-1108. Validity and severability.
Should any section, subsection or provision of this chapter be declared by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of this chapter as a whole or any other part thereof.
§ 180-1109. Effect of plan approval on Official Map.
After a plan has been approved and recorded as provided herein, all streets
and public grounds on such plan shall be and become a part of the Official
Map of Lower Paxton Township without public hearing.
protections shall apply for an additional term or terms of three years
from the date of final plan approval for each section.
G. Failure of landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of submission
of final plans for the various sections shall subject any such section to
any and all changes in this chapter, zoning, and other governing
ordinance enacted by the Township subsequent to the date of the initial
preliminary plan submission.
§ 180-1107 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 180-1109
1:496
Chapter 185
TAXATION
§ 180-1109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-1109
1:497

ARTICLE I
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 2-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-2 (Art. 343 of the 1960 Code)]
§ 185-1. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within Lower
Paxton Township, regardless of where the documents making the transfer
are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate Transfer
Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 185-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments or like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 185-7C of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-2
1:499
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP — A partnership of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of
the interests in the partnership are continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Township, including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
§ 185-2 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-2
1:500
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and activity traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio of assessed values
to market values of the taxing district as established by the State Tax
Equalization Board or a commensurate part of the assessment where
the assessment includes other real estate;
B.
§ 185-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-2
1:501
§ 185-3. Imposition of tax; interest.
§ 185-4. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 185-5. Excluded transactions.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determined under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1/2 of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 185-3 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
§ 185-2 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-5
1:502
(2) A document which the Township is prohibited from taxing under
the constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at Sheriff's sale or
Tax Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or wife prior to the
granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and child or
the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or spouse of a
brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a brother or
sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of
such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee
within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were
making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
§ 185-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:503
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the benefit of
his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the property is
the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee
claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Township reasonably determines that the primary
intent for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the
tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transfer or for
commercial purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities or a transfer from such a
conservancy to the United States, commonwealth or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions.
§ 185-5 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-5
1:504
§ 185-6. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 185-5, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purpose of this article, corporations and
associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 185-7. Acquired company.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership.
(21) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate.
(22) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(23) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and, of itself or together
with prior changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
§ 185-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:505
§ 185-8. Credits against tax.
§ 185-9. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 185-10. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the Sheriff or other
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied, residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 185-7 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-10
1:506
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 185-11. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 185-12. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 185-13. Civil penalties.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Lower Paxton
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from Lower Paxton Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
Lower Paxton Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2%
for use of the county, together with a report containing the information
as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission
shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 185-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-13
1:507
§ 185-14. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying or being situated
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Township, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable and continue until discharge by
payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to file
a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Dauphin County,
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 185-15. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 185-16. Regulations.
The Treasurer of Lower Paxton Township is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 185-13 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-16
1:508
ARTICLE II
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 5-16-1994 by Ord. No. 94-09 (Art. 341 of the 1960 Code)]
§ 185-17. Title; effective date.
This article is enacted by Lower Paxton Township pursuant to the authority
granted by Act No. 511 of 1965, approved December 31, 1965 (known
as "The Local Tax Enabling Act"), as amended, and shall be known as
the "Earned Income Tax Ordinance." The provisions hereof shall become
effective on January 1, 1995.
§ 185-18. Incorporation of statute.
The provisions of Section 13 of The Local Tax Enabling Act (Act No. 511
of 1965) are incorporated herein by reference, as required by law. Where
options are provided in said Section 13, this article designates the option
selected, except that Lower Paxton Township reserves the right to change
the options regarding filing of returns and times of payment by action duly
taken by Board of Supervisors by regulation, resolution or ordinance, as the
case may require.
§ 185-19. Imposition of tax.
A. A tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed at the rate of 1%
of the following:
(1) Earned income received or earned on and after January 1, 1995, by
residents of Lower Paxton Township.
(2) Earned income received or earned on and after January 1, 1995, by
nonresidents of Lower Paxton Township within Lower Paxton
Township.
(3) Net profits received or earned on and after January 1, 1995, by
residents of Lower Paxton Township.
(4) Net profits received or earned on or after January 1, 1995, in Lower
Paxton Township by nonresidents of Lower Paxton Township from
businesses, professions or other activities conducted in Lower
Paxton Township.
B. The tax levied upon earned income shall relate to and be imposed upon
that earned income paid by an employer or on his behalf to a taxpayer
who is employed by or renders service to him. The tax levied upon net
profits herein shall relate to and be imposed on the net profits of any
business, profession or other activity carried on by any taxpayer.
C. The tax hereby levied and assessed shall be applicable to earned
income received and to net profits earned on and after January 1, 1995,
through December 31, 1995, and shall continue in force and effect for
each calendar year thereafter, as provided in The Local Tax Enabling
§ 185-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-19
1:509
§ 185-20. Declaration, return and payment of tax.
§ 185-21. Collection at source.
Act, Act No. 511 of the Session of 1965 of the General Assembly, as
amended.
A. Net profits. Every taxpayer making net profits in any year beginning
with the year 1995 shall file on or before April 15 a declaration of his
estimated net profits for the current year; shall pay the tax due thereon
in quarterly installments, on or before April 15, June 15, September 15
of the current year and January 15 of the succeeding year; and shall file
a final return and pay to the officer or Bureau the balance of the tax due
on April 15 of the succeeding year, all as provided in Section 13, III,
A(3), of The Local Tax Enabling Act.
B. Earned income. For each year beginning with the year 1995, every
taxpayer shall make and file a final return on or before April 15 and pay
the tax due, all as provided in Section 13, III, B, first paragraph, of The
Local Tax Enabling Act.
C. Earned income not subject to withholding. Every taxpayer who is
employed for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation and
who received any earned income not subject to the provisions relating
to collection at source shall, beginning with the year 1995, make and
file with the officer on a form prescribed or approved by the officer, a
quarterly return on or before April 30 of the current year, and January
31 of the succeeding year, setting forth the aggregate amount of earned
income not subject to withholding by him during the three-month
periods ending March 31, of the current year, June 30 of the current
year, September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the current
year, respectively, and subject to the tax, together such other
information as the officer may require. Every taxpayer making such
return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay to the officer the amount of
tax shown as due thereon, all as provided in Section 13, III, B(2), of The
Local Tax Enabling Act.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the geographical area of Lower Paxton
Township shall deduct the tax imposed by this article on the earned
income payable by him to his employee or employees. Said employers
shall file quarterly returns and final returns and pay quarterly to the
officer the amount of taxes deducted, all as set forth in Section 13,
IV(b), of the Local Tax Enabling Act. The returns shall be for calendar
quarters and shall be returned and the tax paid on or before April 30,
July 31, and October 31 of the current year, and January 31 of the
succeeding year.
(1) On or before February 28, 1996, and on each February 28
thereafter, every employer shall file with the officer:
§ 185-19 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-21
1:510
§ 185-22. Administration.
The Income Tax Officer or Bureau shall be selected from time to time by
action of Lower Paxton Township. Such Officer or Bureau shall have the
powers and duties and be subject to the penalties provided in The Local
Tax Enabling Act, Act 511 of the 1965 Session of the General Assembly, as
amended.
§ 185-23. Applicability.
The tax imposed in § 185-19 of this article shall not be levied on the net
profits of any person, institution or organization as to whom it is beyond the
power of Lower Paxton Township to impose said tax under existing law, the
Constitution of the United States of America or the Constitution and laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 185-24. Effective date; construal of provisions.
The provisions of this article shall take effect January 1, 1995. Nothing
contained herein shall be considered to be a repealer by implication or
otherwise of the provisions of the Earned Income Tax Resolution, enacted
December 29, 1969, as reenacted thereafter, as it may apply to earned
income and net profits of taxpayers in calendar years ending December
31, 1994, or in fiscal years commencing prior thereto and ending prior
to December 31, 1995, which shall remain in full force and effect with
respect to such earned income and net profits. Subject to valid enactment
of this article without appeal effective January 1, 1995, all prior ordinances
and resolutions or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby modified,
(a) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income
paid, the total amount of tax deducted and the total amount of
tax paid to the officer for the period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31 of the prior year.
(b) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
prior year and ending December 31 of the prior year, setting
forth the employee's name, address and social security
number, the amount of earned income paid to the employee
during said period, the amount of tax deducted, the political
subdivisions imposing the tax upon such employee and the
amount of tax paid to the officer. Every employer shall furnish
two copies of the individual return to the employee for whom it
is filed.
B. Every employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of any
year shall, within 30 days after discontinuance of business, file returns
and withholding statements hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
C. No employer shall be required to register, deduct taxes, file return or
pay taxes in the case of domestic servants.
§ 185-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-24
1:511
amended and repealed by the provisions of this article which shall
thereafter govern the taxation of such earned income or net profits.
§ 185-25. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who or which has violated
the provisions of provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found
liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership, firm or corporation violating the
ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 185-24 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-25
1:512
ARTICLE III
Collection of Fees
[Adopted 2-3-1998 by Ord. No. 98-01]
§ 185-26. Fees authorized.
The Real Estate Tax Collector is authorized to charge the following fees
for services rendered in the performance of the duties and responsibilities
associated with the collection of real estate taxes for Lower Paxton
Township:
A. Fee to supply a copy of tax bill, per bill: as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
B. Fee to comply a lien certificate, per certificate: as set forth from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
C. Fee for a check returned by bank due to insufficient funds: as set forth
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 185-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-26
1:513

ARTICLE IV
Volunteer Service Tax Credit Program
[Adopted 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-15]
§ 185-27. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
ACTIVE VOLUNTEER — A volunteer for a volunteer fire company or
nonprofit emergency medical service agency listed under § 185-28C who
has complied with, and is certified under, the Volunteer Service Tax Credit
Program.
EARNED INCOME TAX — A tax on earned income and net profits levied
under Chapter 3 of the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511),
known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act."
ELIGIBILITY PERIOD — The time frame when volunteers may earn credit
under the Volunteer Service Credit Program.
EMERGENCY RESPONDER — A volunteer who responds to an emergency
call with one of the entities listed under § 185-28C.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE CALL — Any emergency call to which a volunteer
responds, including travel directly from and to a volunteer's home, place
of business or other place where he/she shall have been when the call was
received.
QUALIFIED REAL PROPERTY — A residential real property owned and
occupied as the domicile of an active volunteer. Any nonresidential use of
said property, except for a legally existing major or minor home occupation
for a no-impact home based business as regulated by the Lower Paxton
Township Zoning Ordinance, shall disqualify said property from eligibility
in the Volunteer Service Credit Program.[Amended 8-8-2018 by Ord. No.
18-02]
VOLUNTEER — A member of a volunteer fire company or a nonprofit
emergency medical service agency.
§ 185-28. Volunteer Service Credit Program.
A. Establishment. Lower Paxton Township hereby establishes a Volunteer
Service Credit Program. The goal of the program is to encourage
membership and service in the community's volunteer fire companies.
B. Program criteria. The Board of Supervisors shall establish, by
resolution, the annual criteria that must be met to qualify for credits
under the program based on the following:
(1) The number of emergency response calls to which a volunteer
responds.
§ 185-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-28
1:515
(2) The level of training and participation in formal training and drills
for a volunteer.
(3) The total amount of time expended by a volunteer on administrative
and other support services, including, but not limited to:
(a) Fundraising.
(b) Providing facility or equipment maintenance.
(c) Financial bookkeeping.
(4) The involvement in other events or projects that aid the financial
viability, emergency response or operational readiness of a
volunteer fire company or a nonprofit emergency medical service
agency.
(5) The total number of years the volunteer has served.
C. Eligible entities. The Volunteer Service Credit Program is available to
residents of Lower Paxton Township who are volunteers of the Colonial
Park Fire Company, the Paxtonia Fire Company, and the Linglestown
Fire Company.
D. Eligibility period. A volunteer must meet the minimum criteria
established in the Length of Service Awards Program for volunteer
firefighters and fire police officers, as set forth in Chapter 128 of the
Codified Ordinances, § 128-3, except that § 128-3C, Points earned in
fire and rescue response, shall not be applicable to the Volunteer
Service Tax Credit Program. For 2018, and each subsequent year
thereafter, the eligibility period shall run from January 1 until
December 31.
E. Recordkeeping. The Chief of each volunteer fire company listed under
Subsection C of this section shall keep specific records of each
volunteer's activities in a service log to establish credits under the
Volunteer Service Credit Program. Service logs shall be subject to
review by the Township's Director of Public Safety, Manager or Board of
Supervisors; and the State Fire Commissioner and the State Auditor
General. The Chief shall annually transmit to Lower Paxton Township a
notarized eligibility list of all volunteers that have met the minimum
criteria for the Volunteer Service Credit Program. The notarized
eligibility list shall be transmitted to Lower Paxton Township no later
than January 15 of each year. The Chief shall post the notarized
eligibility list in an accessible area of the volunteer agency's facilities.
F. Application. Volunteers that have met the minimum criteria of the
Volunteer Service Credit Program shall sign and submit an application
for certification to their Chief. The Chief shall sign the application if the
volunteer has met the minimum criteria of the Volunteer Service Credit
Program and forward it to the Township Manager and Director of Public
Safety. Applications shall not be accepted by the Manager or Director
§ 185-28 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-28
1:516
§ 185-29. Earned income tax credit.
after December 31 of each year. Failure to submit an application by the
December 31 deadline shall disqualify the volunteer and his property
from participation in the program for only the eligibility period ending
on said date. [Amended 8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 18-02]
G. Municipal review. The Township Manager or his designee shall review
the applications for credit under the Volunteer Service Credit Program
and shall cross-reference them with the notarized eligibility list. The
Board of Supervisors shall approve all applicants that are on the
notarized eligibility list. All applicants approved by the Board of
Supervisors shall be issued a tax credit certificate by the Township
Manager.
H. Official Tax Credit Register. Lower Paxton Township shall keep an
Official Tax Credit Register of all active volunteers that were issued tax
credit certificates. The Township Manager shall issue updates, as
needed, of the Official Tax Credit Register to the following:
(1) Board of Supervisors;
(2) Chief of the volunteer fire companies;
(3) Director of Public Safety;
(4) Lower Paxton Township Real Estate Tax Collector;
(5) Lower Paxton Township Earned Income Tax Collector.
I. Injured volunteers.
(1) An emergency responder that is injured during an emergency
response call may be eligible for future tax credits. The injury must
have occurred while responding to, participating in, or returning
from an emergency response call with one of the entities listed
under Subsection C of this section.
(2) An injured emergency responder shall provide documentation from
a licensed physician with the application required under this
section stating that their injury prevents them from performing
duties to qualify as an active volunteer. In such a case, the injured
emergency responder shall be deemed an active volunteer for that
tax year.
(3) An injured emergency responder shall annually submit the
application required under this section, along with updated
documentation from a licensed physician stating that the injury still
exists and prevents them from qualifying as an active volunteer.
The injured emergency responder shall again be deemed an active
volunteer for that tax year. An injured emergency responder shall
only be deemed an active volunteer for a maximum of five
consecutive tax years.
§ 185-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-29
1:517
§ 185-30. Real property tax credit.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Lower Paxton Township Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be
eligible to receive a tax credit of up to $500 of the earned income tax
levied by Lower Paxton Township. When an active volunteer's earned
income tax liability is less than the amount of the tax credit, the tax
credit shall equal the individual's tax liability.
B. Claim. An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may file a claim
for the tax credit on their municipality's earned income tax liability
when filing a final return for the preceding calendar year with the tax
officer for Lower Paxton Township.
C. Rejection of tax credit claim.
(1) The tax officer shall reject a claim for a tax credit if the taxpayer is
not on the Official Tax Credit Register issued by the Township
Manager.
(2) If the tax officer rejects the claim, the taxpayer shall be notified in
writing of the decision. The notice shall include the reasons for the
rejection and provide the method of appealing the decision
pursuant to § 185-31.
(3) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the tax
officer.
A. Tax credit. Each active volunteer who has been certified under the
Lower Paxton Township Volunteer Service Credit Program shall be
eligible to receive a real property tax credit of 20% of the municipal tax
liability on qualified real property. If the tax is paid in the discount
period, the tax credit shall only apply to the amount actually paid. If the
tax is paid in the penalty period, the tax credit shall only apply to the
base tax year liability. Under no circumstances shall a tax credit be paid
if the tax is paid in delinquency. [Amended 8-8-2018 by Ord. No.
18-02]
B. Claim.
(1) An active volunteer with a tax credit certificate may file a claim for
the tax credit on their qualified real property tax liability for the
municipality's real estate tax levy. The tax credit shall be
administered as a refund by Lower Paxton Township. An active
volunteer shall file the following with the Township Manager or his
designee:
(a) A true and correct receipt from the municipal real estate tax
collector of the paid municipal real property taxes for the tax
year which the claim is being filed.
(b) The tax credit certificate.
§ 185-29 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-30
1:518
§ 185-31. Appeals.
(c) Photo identification.
(d) Documentation that the tax paid was for qualified real property
as defined in this article.
(2) If the active volunteer provides all documents required under this
subsection, the Lower Paxton Township treasurer shall issue the
tax refund to the active volunteer.
C. Rejection of the tax credit claim.
(1) The Township Manager or his designee shall reject the claim for a
municipal real property tax credit if the taxpayer fails to provide
the documents required under Subsection B(1).
(2) If the Township Manager or his designee rejects the claim, the
taxpayer shall be notified in writing of the decision. The notice shall
include the reasons for the rejection and provide the method of
appealing the decision pursuant to § 185-31.
(3) Taxpayers shall have 30 days to appeal the decision of the Township
Manager or his designee.
A. Earned income tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 185-29 shall have a
right to appeal said decision.
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim.
(3) All appeals of decisions under § 185-29 shall follow the provisions
of the Act of May 5, 1998, P.L. 301, No. 50, known as the "Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights," as set forth in the Township's Taxpayer
Bill of Rights policy statement.
B. Real property tax credit appeals.
(1) Any taxpayer aggrieved by a decision under § 185-30 shall have a
right to appeal said decision.
(2) A taxpayer shall have 30 days to appeal a decision or rejection of
claim.
(3) All appeals under § 185-30 shall follow the provisions of 2 Pa.C.S.A.,
Chapter 5, Subchapter B (relating to practice and procedure of
local agencies), and 2 Pa.C.S.A., Chapter 7, Subchapter B (relating
to judicial review of local agency action), also known as the "Local
Agency Law."
§ 185-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-32
1:519
§ 185-32. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section, sentence, clause, or part of this
article is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect or impair any
remaining provision, section, sentence, clause or part of the article, it being
the intent of the Lower Paxton Township that such remainder shall be and
shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of
this article are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 185-32 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-32
1:520
ARTICLE V
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-17]
§ 185-33. Authority for enactment.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act,
Act No. 511 of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257), as amended (53 P.S. § 6901
et seq.).
§ 185-34. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, Act No. 511 of December 31, 1965 (P.L.
1257), as amended (53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.).
COLLECTOR — The entity under whose direction the tax shall be collected,
administered and enforced.
EARNED INCOME — Shall have the same meaning as earned income under
Section 13, Division I, of the Act. (53 P.S. § 6913(I)).
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
on salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a selfemployed
person.
FISCAL YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning January 1, and ending
December 31.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number as well as male,
female and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Township.
NET PROFITS — Shall have the same meaning as net profits under Section
13, Division I, of the Act. (53 P.S. § 6913(I)).
NONPRINCIPAL EMPLOYER — An employer in a concurrent employment
situation who does not pay the largest amount of salary, wage, commission
or other compensation to an employee.
NONPRINCIPAL OCCUPATION — The occupation of a self-employed person
in a concurrent occupation situation from which he does not derives the
largest net profit.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or performed within the corporate limits of the Township for which
compensation is charged or received whether by means of salary, wages,
commissions or fees for services rendered.
§ 185-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-34
1:521
PRINCIPAL EMPLOYER — An employer in a concurrent employment
situation who pays the largest amount of salary, wage, commission or other
compensation to an employee.
PRINCIPAL OCCUPATION — The occupation of a self-employed person in
a concurrent occupation situation from which he derives the largest net
profit.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force
Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
TAX — The local service tax in the amount of $52 levied by this article
pursuant to the Act.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lower Paxton and the area within the
corporate limits of the Township of Lower Paxton.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the Township.
§ 185-35. Levy of tax.
The Township hereby levies and imposes on each occupation engaged in
by individuals within the Township during the fiscal year of 2008 and each
fiscal year thereafter a local service tax. This tax is in addition to all other
taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the Township. Such a tax
shall continue in force on a fiscal year basis without annual reenactment
unless the rate of the tax is subsequently changed.
§ 185-36. Amount of tax.
§ 185-37. Withholding and other duties of employers.
A. Each occupation as hereinbefore defined, engaged in within the
Township, shall be subject to a tax in the amount of $52 per annum,
such tax to be paid by the individual so engaged.
B. An employee shall pay a pro-rata share of the tax for each payroll period
in which the person is engaging in his occupation. The pro-rata share
shall be determined by dividing the tax levied pursuant to Subsection A
of this section by the number of payroll periods established by his
employer for the fiscal year as provided in § 185-37.
C. An individual who is self-employed shall pay the tax in its entirety as
provided in §§ 185-39 and 185-40.
A. Each employer within the Township as well as those employers situated
outside the Township, but who engage in business within the Township,
is hereby charged with the duty of withholding from each of his
employees engaged by him and performing for him within the Township
the pro-rata share of the tax, described in Subsection B of § 185-36, and
§ 185-34 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-37
1:522
making a return and payment of the withheld tax to the collector within
30 days of the end of each quarter of a fiscal year as described in
§ 185-38. Further, each employer is hereby authorized to withhold the
pro-rata share of the tax from each employee in his employ, whether
such employee is paid by salary, wages or commission and whether or
not part or all such services are performed within the Township unless
the employee is engaging in concurrent employment with a principal
employer or other nonprincipal employers located in higher priority
political subdivisions as described in Subsection E of this section or has
an exemption certificate on file with the employer and the collector as
describe in Subsections B or C of § 185-42.
B. Withholding of the tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for each
payroll period during the fiscal year in which an employee is engaging
in an occupation unless the employee is engaging in concurrent
employment. For purposes of determining the pro-rata share, the
employer shall round down the amount of the tax collected each payroll
period to the nearest one-hundredth of a dollar. If employment of an
employee subject to withholding is subsequently terminated, the
terminated employee shall be liable for the outstanding balance of the
tax due.
C. If a person who claimed an exemption for a fiscal year and filed an
exemption certificate pursuant to Subsection B of § 185-42 becomes
subject to the tax for that year, the employer shall withhold the tax for
the first payroll period after receipt of notification that the employee is
subject to the tax in a lump sum equal to the amount of the tax which
was not withheld due to the exemption plus the per payroll amount due
for that first period. The amount of the tax withheld for the remaining
payroll periods in the fiscal year shall be as calculated in accordance
with Subsection B of this section.
D. Employers shall ensure that certificate forms, supplied by the collector,
for requesting an exemption, as describe in Subsections B or C of
§ 185-42, are readily available to employees at all times and shall
furnish each new employee with the form at the time of hiring.
E. If a principal or other nonprincipal employer is a higher priority
employer because it is located in higher priority political subdivisions,
as described in § 185-39, withholds the tax for the fiscal year in any
amount and if the employee provides a recent pay statement from the
withholding higher priority employer that includes the name of the
employer, the length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax
collected, an employer shall refrain from withholding the tax if the
employee provides a pay statement. If the employee is also self
employed and engaging in a concurrent principal occupation or
nonprincipal occupation which is a higher priority occupation because
it is located in a higher priority political subdivisions, as described in
§ 185-39, and pays the tax for the fiscal year in any amount, an
employer shall refrain from withholding the tax if the employee
provides proof of payment of the tax to the political subdivision where
§ 185-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-37
1:523
§ 185-38. Dates for determining tax liability, filing returns and
making payment by employers.
§ 185-39. Priority of claims to collect the tax when an individual is
engaged in more than one occupation.
the employee's higher priority occupation is taxed. In order for the
employer to refrain from withholding, it shall also be necessary for the
employee to affirm in writing to the employer that the pay statement
provided is from the higher priority employer or that the proof of
payment of the tax was on account of a higher priority occupation, and
that the employee will notify other employers of a change in higher
priority employer or occupation within two weeks of the occurrence.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for
payment of the withheld tax money to the collector if the failure to
withhold the tax arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. No employer shall be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates or monitoring eligibility or exempting an
employee from withholding except where a person with an exemption
certificate issued under Subsection B of § 185-42 becomes subject to
the tax as described in Subsection C of this section.
A. Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of
the tax on forms to be supplied to him by the collector. It is further
provided that if the employer fails to file such return and pay the tax
within the time required, whether or not he makes collection thereof
from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him to such employee,
the employer shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as
though the tax had originally been levied against him.
B. Each employer shall use his employment records from January 1 to
March 31 for determining the number of employees from whom the tax
shall be deducted and paid over to the Treasurer on or before April 30.
Supplemental reports shall be made by each employer on July 30,
October 30 and January 30 of new employees and additional tax
withholdings and any new exemptions on continued employees as
reflected on his employment records from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to
September 30, and October 1 to December 31. Payments on these
supplemental reports shall be made on July 30, October 30 and January
30, respectively.
C. If an employer has employees for whom he is not withholding the tax
pursuant to Subsection A of § 185-37, the employer shall include such
employee on his return by setting forth his name, address, social
security number, and the name and account number of the employer(s)
who withheld the tax(es) and/or the name of the taxing jurisdiction(s) to
whom an employee paid a tax on a self-employed occupation.
§ 185-37 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-39
1:524
A. Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the
Township shall be subject to the payment of the tax on his principal
occupation by the individual if he is self-employed or to withholding of
the tax by his principal employer if he is employed. If one of his
occupations is a self-employed one, he shall pay the tax in its entirety to
the collector and receive a receipt of payment as described in
Subsection E of § 185-40. When the receipt of payment is presented to
an employer that employer will not withhold the tax or part of the tax by
authority of Subsections A and E of § 185-37. If an individual is
employed in all of his occupations within the Township, his principal
employer shall withhold the tax and deliver to him evidence of
withholding on a form meeting the requirements of Subsection E of
§ 185-37 to be furnished to the employer by the collector, which form
shall be evidence of withholding having been made. When the
completed form is presented to a nonprincipal employer, that employer
will not withhold the tax or part of the tax by authority of Subsections A
and E of § 185-37.
B. In the event a person is engaged in occupations which require his
working in more than one political subdivision, the first priority political
subdivision to collect the tax shall be the political subdivision in which
his principal employer is located or, if self-employed, the political
subdivision in which his principal occupation is located. If the political
subdivision where the principal employer or principal occupation is
located does not collect the tax, the second priority political subdivision
to collect the tax shall be the political subdivision in which the person
resides and works to the extent a tax is not levied by the first priority
political subdivision. The third priority political subdivision to collect
the tax shall be the political subdivision in which a person is working
and which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home to the
extent a tax is not levied by the first and second priority political
subdivisions. The place where a person works and the priority of
collection shall be determined as of the day the taxpayer first becomes
subject to the tax during the fiscal year.
C. It is the intent of this provision that no person shall pay more than $52
in any fiscal year as a tax, irrespective of the number of political
subdivisions within which such person may be employed within any
given fiscal year. In case of dispute, the sum of tax receipts which are
not duplications from taxing jurisdictions, any other appropriate
evidence of payment, and/or the most recent pay statements from an
employer indicating accumulated and prospective withholding of tax
actually due to higher priority taxing political subdivisions for that
fiscal year, equaling at least $52 shall constitute prima-facie
certification of payment to all other political subdivisions. Any tax paid,
withheld, or prospectively to be withheld, that is not to a higher priority
taxing jurisdiction should not be included in determining this $52
amount. An employee should apply for refund for such amounts paid to
taxing jurisdictions of lesser priority.
§ 185-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-40
1:525
§ 185-40. Dates for determining tax liability, filing returns and
making payment by self-employed individuals.
§ 185-41. Responsibilities of nonresident employers, their
employees and self-employed individuals.
§ 185-42. Exemptions.
A. All self-employed individuals, who perform services of any type or kind,
engaged in any occupation or profession within the Township shall be
required to comply with this article and pay the tax to the collector on
April 30, or as soon thereafter as he engages in an occupation. The
Collector, as the agent of Township, shall provide a taxpayer a receipt of
payment upon request by the taxpayer.
B. In the event a self-employed person is engaged in more than one
occupation within or without the Township or an occupation which
requires his working in more than one political subdivision during the
year, reporting priority of claims and prima-facie certification of
payment shall be in accordance with Subsection B of § 185-39.
C. Individuals employed with in the Township who are not exempt from the
tax pursuant to § 185-42 and whose employer is not legally required to
withhold the tax shall be considered self-employed persons for purposes
of this article.
A. All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their
place of business outside of the Township, but who perform services of
any type or kind, or engage in any occupation or profession within the
Township, do by virtue thereof agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated
under this article with the same force and effect as though they were
residents of the Township.
B. Any individual engaged in an occupation within the Township and an
employee of a nonresident employer may, for the purpose of this article
be considered a self-employed person, and in the event the tax is not
paid, the Township shall have the option of proceeding against either
the employer or employee for the collection of the tax as hereinafter
provided.
A. Whenever it occurs that an individual is engaged in a business or
occupation or businesses or occupations within the corporate limits of
the Township from which he derives in the aggregate less than $12,000
per year earned income and net profits from all sources within the
corporate limits of the Township and a tax was withheld, such individual
may file a "claim for refund," as described in Subsection D of § 185-43.
B. Whenever it occurs that an individual is engaged in a business or
occupation or businesses or occupations within the corporate limits of
the Township from which he reasonably expects to derive in the
§ 185-40 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-42
1:526
§ 185-43. Administration of tax.
aggregate less than $12,000 per fiscal year earned income and net
profits from all sources within the corporate limits of the Township,
such individual may file a certificate with the collector, as the agent
of the Township and his employer in the Township, directing that
employer not to withhold the tax. The certificate shall be in a form
approved by the collector and have attached to it a copy of all the
individual's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment and any net
profits from businesses within the Township for the fiscal year prior to
the fiscal year for which the individual is requesting an exemption.
C. Whenever it occurs that an individual who served in any war or armed
conflict in which the United States was engaged and is honorably
discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active
service if, as a result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic,
or a double or triple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its successor
to be a total 100% permanent disability, such individual may, on proof of
such disability filed with the collector, file an exemption certificate with
the collector, as the agent of the Township and his employer in the
Township directing that employer not to withhold the tax or file a "claim
for refund," as described in Subsection D of § 185-43.
D. Whenever it occurs that an individual is serving as a member of a
reserve or component of the armed forces and is called to active duty at
any time during a fiscal year, such individual may file a "claim for
refund," as described in Subsection D of § 185-43.
A. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and receive payment of this
tax, penalties, interest thereon and costs of collection and to keep a
record thereof showing the amount received by him from each
employer or self employed person together with the date the tax,
penalties, interest thereon and costs of collection were received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby, as the agent of the Township,
charged and empowered to, prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article; examine and correct any return made in
compliance with this article and any payment alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, or any payment made by a taxpayer who is engaged in a
business or occupation or businesses or occupations within the
corporate limits of the Township. Any person aggrieved by any decision
of the collector shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common
Pleas of Dauphin County as in other cases provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer, or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
§ 185-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-43
1:527
§ 185-44. Collection of unpaid taxes and enforcement actions for
violation of the ordinance.
§ 185-45. Restricted use of revenue.
Funds derived from the tax may only be used for the following purposes:
Not less than 25% of the funds derived from the tax shall be used for
emergency services, which shall include emergency medical services, police
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
D. The Collector, as the agent of the Township, is hereby authorized to
make refunds for overpayments of the tax or payments or withholding
of the tax from exempt persons within three years of the due date for
filing a return as extended or one-year after payment of the tax,
whichever is later, consistent with 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 8425 and 8426.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day an employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the fiscal year pursuant to § 185-39 shall not be subject to interest
imposed under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426. The collector shall only provide
refunds for amounts overpaid in a fiscal year that exceed $1.
A. In the event that the tax imposed under this article remains due or
unpaid 30 days after the due dates above set forth, the collector may
sue for the recovery of the tax due or unpaid under this article together
with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 6% shall be added to the flat rate of the
tax for nonpayment thereof.
C. The collector may impose on and collect from delinquent taxpayers and
retain all reasonable costs of collection incurred by the collector in its
enforcement and collection of delinquent tax payments provided such
collection and enforcement action occurs within five years after the last
day of the year in which the tax was first due and provided Collector
reports the total of such cost collections to the Township at least
annually.
D. The chief executive officer of the collector, or his designee, by reason of
his duties under Subsections A, B and C of this section, is hereby
appointed the Deputy Tax Collector of the Township for collection of its
delinquent tax.
E. Any individual or employer who or which shall fail, neglect or refuse to
pay the tax after it becomes due and payable, or otherwise violates any
part of this article shall face conviction before any Magisterial District
Judge and be subject to a fine or not more than $600 for each offense
and costs of court proceedings.
§ 185-43 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 185-45
1:528
services and/or fire services, road construction and/or maintenance,
reduction of property taxes and property tax relief through implementation
of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa. C.S.A.
Ch. 85, Subch. F.
§ 185-46. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable and if any of its provisions shall
be held invalid or unconstitutional, the decision of the court shall not affect
or invalidate any of the remaining provisions. It is hereby declared to be the
legislative intent that this article would have been adopted if such illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional provision had not been included herein.
§ 185-47. Saving clause.
§ 185-48. Repealer.
Any ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 185-49. Effective date.
This article shall become effective January 1, 2008.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation
not within the taxing power of the Township under the Constitution of
the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect such tax, or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 185-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-49
1:529
Chapter 189
TIMBER HARVESTING
§ 189-1. Purpose.
§ 189-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate timber harvesting practices
and to allow for and encourage proper forest management within
Lower Paxton Township to ensure that:
(1) Long-term production of timber crops is encouraged;
(2) The right to harvest trees is exercised with due regard for the
protection of the physical property of adjacent landowners; and
(3) The potential for negative environmental impacts resulting from
improper tree harvesting is minimized.
B. This chapter is not intended to prevent or hinder any landowner from
realizing financial return from the sale of trees or to prevent or hinder
tree harvesting or forest industry operators from pursuing their
business within this jurisdiction.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural include the singular and words in the
singular include the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory and not
merely directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVANCED REGENERATION — The presence of new trees of desirable
commercial species at least four feet in height.
BASAL AREA — The cross-sectional area of trees calculated in square
feet per acre as measured at the DBH using a calibrated prism or angle
gauge.
CLEAR CUT — The felling of substantially all trees on a tract of land, or
portion thereof.
CORD — One hundred twenty-eight cubic feet of wood, bark and space.
DBH — The diameter of a tree at breast height, measured 4.5 feet from
the ground surface.
DIAMETER LIMIT HARVESTING — The harvesting of trees greater
than a given diameter. Trees below a given diameter are not cut
regardless of quality.
§ 185-49 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 189-2
1:530
§ 189-3. Permitted use.
Timber harvesting is a permitted use in all zoning districts within the
Township.
§ 189-4. Applicability.
FELLING — The act of cutting a standing tree so that it falls to the
ground.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream whose water flow normally
occurs in the wetter parts of the year (October through April) or
following major storm events.
LANDING — Place where logs are assembled for transportation in
loads.
LOGGING PLAN — A written description with a map of specific logging
operation prepared before the operation commences.
LOPPING — To cut tops and slash into smaller pieces to allow material
to settle close to the ground.
OPERATOR — The individual, partnership, company, firm, association
or corporation engaged in the harvest of timber, including his agents or
subcontractors or employees.
OWNER — The individual, partnership, company, firm, association or
corporation which holds title to standing timber and to the land on
which it is situated, including his agents or subcontractor or employees.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A stream whose water flow normally occurs
year round.
SAW TIMBER — Trees that are 12 inches or larger DBH.
SELECTIVE HARVESTING — The harvesting of individual preselected
trees of a certain age or species within a forest composed of many
species and ages.
SKIDDING — Dragging trees on the ground, by any means, from the
stump to the landing.
SLASH — Debris left after logging, including logs, chunks, bark,
branches, stumps and broken understory trees or brush.
STREAM — Any channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
TOPS — The upper portion of a felled tree not merchantable because of
small size, taper or defect.
TOWNSHIP — Lower Paxton Township.
TREE HARVESTING (also TIMBER HARVESTING/LOGGING) — The
cutting down and removal of trees and logs to be converted to any
forest product or for sale to others.
§ 189-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-4
1:531
§ 189-5. Responsibility.
It shall be the responsibility of each landowner on whose land tree
harvesting is to be carried out to develop or have developed the logging
plan and to submit notification as required in this chapter. It shall be
the joint responsibility of the landowner and the operator to see that the
provisions of the logging plan are implemented.
§ 189-6. Plan requirements.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all timber harvesting
operations within the Township except as provided in Subsection B.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the harvesting of wood
for personal use by the property owner and his or her family.
C. Notification, submission of plans and requirements for plan approval
shall apply only as outlined in § 189-6E and F.
A. A logging plan shall be prepared for each tree harvesting operation
within the Township.
B. Such plan will address all applicable erosion and sedimentation control
and stream crossing regulations under Chapter 102, Erosion Control
Rules and Regulations, issued under Act of June 22, 1937, P.L. 1987
(Clean Streams Law), and Chapter 105, Dam and Waterway
Management Rules and Regulations, issued under Act of 1978, P.L.
1375, No. 325 (Dam Safety and Encroachments Act).
C. Points that shall be addressed by the logging plan include the following
as a minimum:
(1) Design of the road system.
(2) Water control structures.
(3) Stream crossings.
(4) Log landings.
(5) Haul roads, skid roads and skid trails.
(6) Maintenance.
(7) Road use.
(8) Road and log landing retirement.
(9) The general location of the anticipated operation in relation to
municipal and state highways, including ingress and egress.
(10) The location of property boundaries for the tract on which the
logging will take place and the boundaries of the proposed harvest
area.
§ 189-4 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 189-6
1:532
§ 189-7. Operational requirements.
The following requirements shall govern all timber harvesting activity:
(11) The harvesting method to be employed.
(12) The total existing basal area.
D. The plan shall be available at the timber harvesting site.
E. For all tree harvesting operations that are expected to exceed five
acres, the Township Planning and Zoning Officer shall be notified at
least five working days before the beginning of the operation and within
five days before or after the date of completion.
F. A copy of the tree harvesting plan shall be submitted to the Township
not less than 30 days before any operation commences that will exceed
25 acres.
(1) The plan shall be reviewed by the Township Planning and Zoning
Officer and the Township Shade Tree Commission, which review
may include an inspection of the site of the proposed operation.
(2) Within 30 days of the date the Township receives a plan, the
Planning and Zoning Officer shall provide the landowner a written
approval of the logging plan as submitted, or a written disapproval.
A disapproval shall include a list of the additions or corrections that
are necessary to have the plan approved.
(3) No harvesting operation expected to exceed 25 acres shall
commence unless or until a tree harvesting plan has been
completed and approved.
G. The erosion and sediment control and stream crossing requirements
addressed in the logging plan shall be followed at all times during the
operation.
A. The boundaries of the area to be harvested shall be clearly marked by
attaching posters to the boundary trees prior to the harvest in order to
avoid the inadvertent harvest of off-site trees.
B. Felling or skidding on or across any public thoroughfare is prohibited
without the express written consent of the Township or the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, whichever is responsible
for maintenance of said thoroughfare.
C. No tops or slash shall be left within 50 feet of any public thoroughfare
or adjacent property boundary where the adjacent property is
developed.
D. If the tract to be harvested borders a public thoroughfare or developed
land, there shall be established a harvesting setback of 50 feet along
said public thoroughfare and developed land. Harvesting within the
§ 189-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-7
1:533
§ 189-8. Harvesting methods.
§ 189-9. Hauling permit.
All operators must comply with the rules and regulations of Chapter 189,
Hauling in Excess of Posted Weight Limit, issued under the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81, Sections 4902(f) and 6103 (Vehicle Code), if they are
operating vehicles on highways or streets in excess of posted weight limits.
§ 189-10. Street occupation.
All operators shall comply with Chapter 176, Article III, entitled "Street
Excavating and Tunneling," including obtaining a permit, when undertaking
any work within a Township right-of-way.
§ 189-11. Enforcement.
setback shall be limited to 1/3 of the basal area of the saw timber in a
ten-year period.
E. No tops or slash shall be left on or across a property boundary without
the consent of the adjoining landowner.
F. Litter resulting from any logging operation shall be cleaned up and
removed from the site before it is vacated by the operator.
G. All hauling roads, skid roads, skid trails and log landings shall be
retired properly, including seeding of herbaceous species as
recommended by the Dauphin County Conservation District or the
Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Forestry.
A. Clear-cut harvesting is permitted, provided that advanced regeneration
is present and no more than 25 acres or 25% of a tract of real estate,
whichever is less, may be clear cut during a ten-year period. This
provision does not apply to salvage operations undertaken after natural
disasters.
B. Selective harvesting is permitted, provided that the basal area of trees
in the area harvested is not reduced below 50% of the basal area
present before cutting or below 65 square feet per acre, whichever is
higher.
C. Diameter limit harvesting is prohibited.
A. The Planning and Zoning Officer of the Township may go upon the site
of any tree harvesting operation before, during and after the active
logging to review plans and other required documents to ensure that
such plans and documents are in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and to ensure that the actual operation is proceeding in
compliance with these plans.
§ 189-7 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 189-11
1:534
§ 189-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates or permits a violation
of this chapter, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding, shall pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in the
enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of
the determination of the violation by the District Justice and/or Court. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Township are hereby authorized to
seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
Chapter 196
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
B. Any logging operation found to be proceeding without a logging plan as
described in this chapter shall immediately cease operations and shall
not resume until a plan is prepared and submitted to the Township
Planning and Zoning Officer for his approval.
C. When any operator is found to be violating any provision of this chapter,
the Planning and Zoning Officer shall provide the operator with a
written statement describing each violation and specifying a date by
which corrective action must be taken. Normally, such corrective work
shall be completed within seven calendar days of such written
notification.
D. When the Planning and Zoning Officer finds a condition in a logging
operation to be causing an immediate environmental risk, he shall
immediately order operations to cease and contact the Dauphin County
Conservation District and request enforcement of the rules and
regulations referred to under § 189-6B of this chapter.
§ 189-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-12
1:535

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 196-1. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for
the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this article, except when the context requires other meanings:
CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of people or
materials.
FIRE LANE — An unobstructed area immediately adjacent to and
surrounding all buildings for public use and the entrance, exit,
passageways and main vehicular accessways for all apartment
complexes that comprise eight or more units. In the case of shopping
centers and other commercial establishments for public use, such fire
lanes shall be reserved for use by emergency vehicles.39[Amended
12-18-1978 by Ord. No. 78-19]
NONRESIDENTIAL — All uses of land, except single-family residential
as identified in the Low Density Residential (R-l) and Medium Density
Residential (R-2) Zoning Districts, within the Lower Paxton Township
Zoning Ordinance.[Added 10-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-19]
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer of the Lower Paxton Township Police
Department.
RESEDENTIAL AREA — An area zoned for Low Density Residential (R-l)
and Medium Density Residential (R-2) development in accordance with
the Lower Paxton Township Zoning Ordinance.[Added 10-20-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-19]
RESIDENT — A person who owns or leases real property within a
residential area and who maintains a bona fide occupancy at said
property, including members of said person's family and other such
persons who may reside with the owner/lessee.[Added 10-20-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-19]
RESTRICTED PARKING ZONE — An area where parking is restricted
through the use of signs that designate such restricted parking and its
limitations.
SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS — Persons authorized by the Board of
Supervisors of Lower Paxton Township to direct and regulate traffic
and pedestrians at designated school crossings of the Central Dauphin
School District within Lower Paxton Township.
SPECIAL FIRE POLICE — Persons authorized by the Board of
Supervisors of Lower Paxton Township to direct and regulate traffic at
39.Editor's Note: Original Sections 501.04, Pedalcycle, and 501.05, Play highway, which
immediately followed this definition, were deleted 8-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-08.
§ 196-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-1
1:537
§ 196-2. Directional standards.
For the purpose of this chapter, U.S. Route 22 and all streets parallel to it
shall be deemed to travel east and west, while all streets perpendicular to
U.S. Route 22 shall be deemed to travel north and south.
§ 196-3. Signage; amendments.
The Township Manager, after receiving an affirmative recommendation
from the Lower Paxton Township Police Department, shall be authorized
to erect regulatory signs in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation standards and to add those regulations onto Schedules I, II,
III and IV of this chapter. This provision shall not apply to the erection of
traffic signals.
§ 196-4. Temporary and emergency regulations. [Amended
12-18-1978 by Ord. No. 78-19]
§ 196-5. Markings, signs, lanes and parking spaces. [Amended
12-18-1978 by Ord. No. 78-19]
The Township Manager shall further have the power and authority to
establish, change and abolish, and to designate by appropriate markings or
signs, crosswalks, traffic lanes and parking spaces which are authorized by
state law or other ordinances.
fire scenes, firehouse functions or other emergencies, as directed by
the Lower Paxton Township Police Department.
B. Whenever any words or phrases are not defined in this article but are
defined in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code40 in effect at the time of the
violation or incident, those definitions shall be accepted.
A. The Township Manager shall have the following powers to regulate
traffic and parking temporarily and in times of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works or in the case
of the conduct of processions and public events, to restrict or
prohibit parking or traffic in limited areas for periods of not more
than 24 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department of the Township in the same manner as permanent
regulations.41
40.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
41.Editor's Note: Former Section 502.03, Designating play highways, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 8-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-08.
§ 196-1 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 196-6
1:538
§ 196-6. Reporting accidents.
Any person operating a motor vehicle and involved in an accident within
the Township shall report it to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
the Lower Paxton Township Police Department as prescribed in the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code in effect at the time of the accident.
§ 196-7. Accident reports.
A copy of any accident report shall be made available to any person desiring
one for a fee through the business offices of the Township during normal
office hours.
§ 196-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-17-1999 by Ord. No.
99-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates or fails to comply with
any provision of this chapter or any regulation issued in conformity with
this chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall be fined not less
than $10 nor more than $50, together with costs of prosecution, which fine
and costs shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the recovery
of fines and penalties for the violation of ordinances, and in default thereof
shall be imprisoned in the county prison for a period not exceeding 10 days.
§ 196-9. Authority of police officers, fire police and school crossing
guards.
§ 196-10. Obedience to police officers, fire police and school
crossing guards.
No person shall willfully and knowingly refuse to comply with a lawful order
or direction of a police officer, fire police or school crossing guard.
§ 196-11. Compliance with state law.
All traffic arrests instituted by members of the Police Department shall be
made in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Procedure and under
A. It shall be the duty of police officers to enforce the traffic laws of the
Township and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Police officers are hereby authorized to direct and regulate traffic on all
streets and intersections within the Township as deemed necessary to
effectively move the traffic flow.
C. Fire police are hereby authorized to direct and regulate traffic at fire
scenes, firehouse functions or other emergencies as authorized by the
senior police officer on duty at the scene.
D. School crossing guards are hereby authorized to direct and regulate
traffic and pedestrians at assigned school crossing locations.
§ 196-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-11
1:539
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code in effect at the time of the violation unless
brought under a section of this chapter when no other law supersedes it.
§ 196-11 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 196-11
1:540
ARTICLE II
One-Way Streets and Alleys
§ 196-12. Signs.
Whenever any approval has been given to establish a one-way street or
alley, adequate and sufficient signs shall be erected giving such notice.
These signs shall indicate the direction of traffic flow on the street.
§ 196-13. One-way traffic only.
Upon those streets and parts of streets or alleys as designated in Schedule
I of this chapter, vehicular traffic shall move in only one direction as
indicated by official signs, and traffic moving in the opposite direction shall
be prohibited.
§ 196-14. Barrier at Scenery-Lakewood intersection. [Added
5-2-1977 by Ord. No. 77-8]
A. In order to promote the public health and safety, the Township Highway
Department is hereby directed to erect and construct a permanent
barrier so as to cross the intersection of Scenery Drive and Lakewood
Drive on a diagonal extending from the southwest corner to the
northwest corner of the intersection to create a looped roadway system,
with the northern half carrying traffic from Londonderry Road on
Scenery Drive in a southwest direction and back to Londonderry Road
on Lakewood Drive in a northwest direction, and with the southern loop
carrying traffic from Union Deposit Road on Scenery Drive in a
northeast direction and back to Union Deposit Road on Lakewood Drive
in a southeast direction.
B. Scenery Drive is hereby designated as a minor street as defined by the
Subdivision Regulations in Chapter 203, Zoning.
C. The barrier to be erected and the land upon which the barrier is located
shall be the property of the Township, and this section shall not be
construed as the intent of the Township to vacate any portion of
Scenery Drive or Lakewood Drive.
§ 196-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-14
1:541

ARTICLE III
Traffic Control Devices
§ 196-15. Installation.
The Board of Supervisors may erect and maintain official traffic control
devices, warning signs and information signs as it deems necessary to
effectively control traffic within the Township.
§ 196-16. Conformance with state law.
All traffic control devices, warning signs or information signs shall be
erected in conformance with current Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation regulations.
§ 196-17. Investigation prior to change.
Prior to the erection of any traffic control devices that alter or change an
established traffic flow pattern, an extensive and complete investigation
shall be performed to determine the validity and need of such change.
§ 196-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-17
1:543

ARTICLE IV
Stop Intersections and Through Streets
§ 196-18. Designation and vehicle operation.
Stop intersections are hereby established as described in Schedule II of this
chapter, and all traffic shall be required to stop at such stop signs and yield
to traffic on the through street perpendicular or adjacent thereto.
§ 196-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-18
1:545

ARTICLE V
Speed Zones
§ 196-19. Restricted zones designated. [Amended 8-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-08]
Restricted speed zones are hereby established as described in Schedule III
of this chapter, and all traffic shall travel at a speed equal to or less than
the maximum speed limit. Such restrictions shall be posted on official speed
limit signs and in accordance with posting requirements of the Pennsylvania
Vehicle Code in effect at the time of erection and its future amendments.
§ 196-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-19
1:547

ARTICLE VI
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 196-20. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAILER — A vehicle without motive power, designed to carry property or
passengers and to be drawn by a motor vehicle.
TRUCK TRACTOR — A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than
a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
§ 196-21. Parking in restricted zones.
No person shall park or let stand any vehicle in any area where official signs
or parking regulations prohibit such parking. No-parking zones are hereby
established as outlined in Schedule IV of this chapter, and any person found
parking in these restricted parking zones shall be issued a parking ticket.
§ 196-22. Allowing another to park in restricted zones.
No owner shall allow any person to park or let stand a vehicle in any
area where official signs or parking regulations prohibit such parking. Noparking
zones are hereby established as outlined in Schedule IV of this
chapter, and any owner who delivers possession of his vehicle to any person
found parking in these restricted parking zones shall be issued a parking
ticket.
§ 196-23. Fire lanes. [Amended 12-18-1978 by Ord. No. 78-19;
1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-01]
A. No person, firm or corporation shall barricade, stop a vehicle, park or
otherwise block any driveway, passage, entrance, main access routes or
exitways to, in, through, about or out of any public building or any place
occupied for public use or accommodation, whether upon public or
private property, to include the entrance, exit, main accessways and
passageways of apartment complexes having eight or more units, so as
to interfere with or obstruct the free and unimpeded passage of persons
and fire and emergency vehicles into and around such buildings and
complexes.
B. On private property which is devoted to public use, there shall be
maintained one or more unobstructed lanes to provide for the ingress
and egress of Fire Department or Emergency Services vehicles,
equipment and personnel, such lanes to be a minimum of 20 feet in
width and laid out for convenient access from the public thoroughfares
and water supplied to the building or buildings. The marking of such
lanes shall be performed and maintained by and at the expense of the
property owner or occupier.
§ 196-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-23
1:549
C. All fire lanes serving any building open for public use and all entrance,
exit, driveways, accessways and passageways of private apartment
complexes having eight or more units shall be designated by official
signs approved by the Township. The marking of such fire lanes and the
erection and maintenance of such official signs prohibiting or limiting
parking or standing in a fire lane shall be at the expense of the property
owner.
D. All fire lanes on private property shall be kept clear of snow, ice and
other matter to allow for the free movement of emergency vehicles.
Such removal of snow, ice and other matter shall be at the expense of
the property owner and will be completed within 24 hours after snow
has ceased falling.
E. Establishment of fire lanes.
(1) The Public Safety Director, or his designee, is authorized to
establish fire lanes on either public or private property within
Lower Paxton Township upon finding that either of the following
conditions exist:
(a) That a fire lane is necessary for safeguarding life and property
from the hazards of fire and explosion and for the use and
occupancy of buildings, structures and adjacent property.
(b) That the fire lane is incident to a school, an apartment complex
having eight or more units, a retail, commercial or
manufacturing use, or other use where it can reasonably be
expected that the public will assemble in sufficient numbers so
that the presence of the public and their motor vehicles, if not
controlled, will interfere with the operation of firefighting
equipment and personnel and the egress of occupants in case
of fire.
(2) The Public Safety Director, or his designee, is hereby granted the
power to designate as a fire lane any area of such property devoted
to public or private use or to which the public is invited, including:
(a) Any driveway or other area which, in the judgment of the
Public Safety Director, or his designee, should be available for
use by firefighting equipment or other emergency vehicles or
in order to reach the building or buildings on the property in
the event of fire.
(b) Any area adjacent to or providing access to a fire hydrant,
water standpipe, fire department connection or other source of
water to be used in the event of fire.
(c) Any area adjacent to an exit from a building on the premises or
any area which must remain vacant and unoccupied in order to
permit free use of such exits.
§ 196-23 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 196-23
1:550
(d) Any other area where the parking of vehicles or placement of
any structure or other impediment to free movement of
persons and vehicles would interfere with the fighting of a fire
on the premises or impede the movement of persons away from
the premises in the event of a fire or emergency.
(3) The Public Safety Director, or his designee, shall confer with the
Traffic Operations Unit of the Lower Paxton Township Police
Department when designating any fire lanes in accordance with
this chapter.
F. Fire lanes; definitions; markings.
(1) For the purposes of fire lane enforcement, the following terms are
defined:
(a) "Fire lane" means an area necessary to provide safety for the
public or to provide property access for Fire Department
operations in the event of an emergency.
(b) "No parking anytime" means that a vehicle may not be parked
within the designated area.
(c) "No stopping or standing" means that no vehicle may be
stopped or standing within the designated zone whether or not
attended or unattended, with or without the motor running or
brakes set, unless actively loading or unloading passengers or
materials.
(2) Any and all fire lanes created by prior ordinances are hereby
continued in effect. Where repairs or modifications shall be made to
any preexisting fire lane, if it is the judgment of the Public Safety
Director, or his designee, that such fire lanes are not in conformity
with this section and it is further the judgment of the Public Safety
Director, or his designee, that it is practical to bring such fire lane
into conformity, the Public Safety Director, or his designee, shall
require such modifications as deemed necessary. In no case shall
modifications be permitted which create a lesser standard than the
original approval of said fire lane.
(3) Within 30 days of being given notice by the Public Safety Director,
or his designee, the owner of the property upon which a fire lane(s)
has been designated shall mark the fire lane(s) as follows:
(a) Signs 12 inches by 18 inches constructed of metal and with
raised red letters a minimum of two inches in size on a white
background shall be posted at a level of at least seven feet
above grade, indicating "NO PARKING ANYTIME" or "NO
STOPPING OR STANDING," at the Public Safety Director, or
his designee's, discretion, after giving due consideration to the
needs of the fire service and the public. Immediately under
these signs shall be another sign 12 inches by six inches
§ 196-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-23
1:551
indicating "FIRE LANE." Spacing of signs shall be even with
a minimum of one sign for every 100 feet of fire lane or part
thereof, or as ordered by the Public Safety Director, or his
designee, All signs and markings must be unobstructed and
visible for a distance of at least 100 feet when viewed from a
position approximately five feet above the ground while in the
fire lane.
(b) Fire lanes immediately adjacent to buildings shall be
delineated along their entire length or circumference with two
red parallel lines four inches in width and 36 inches apart.
Within the area between the red lines shall be marked "FIRE
LANE" in red letters 18 inches in height. The number of times
this wording is to be repeated shall be at the discretion of the
Public Safety Director, or his designee, If the designated fire
lane abuts a curb, the curbing that abuts the fire lane shall be
marked red in color.
(c) Fire lanes for vehicle access shall be a minimum of 20 feet in
width or as approved by the Public Safety Director, or his
designee, Fire lanes for egress of occupants shall be a
minimum of at least the width of the exitway served.
(d) (Reserved)
(e) Restricted areas. Gates, chains or other methods utilized to
prevent unauthorized access to fire lanes must be approved by
the Public Safety Director, or his designee, prior to installation,
provided such restrictions will not impede access by
firefighting apparatus. The Public Safety Director, or his
designee, shall determine whether any changes or deviations
from the appropriate methods may be utilized.
(f) Installation and maintenance. Fire lane markings shall be
installed and maintained to ensure their legibility, by the owner
of the premises or designee in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter. Fire lanes must be accessible for fire apparatus
use at all times.
(4) It shall be unlawful to obstruct, damage, deface, or restrict the
access of any fire lane in Lower Paxton Township. Designated fire
lanes shall be maintained free of obstructions, including but not
limited to snow and vehicles, at all times.
(5) The Public Safety Director, or his designee, shall notify the Police
Department and Codes Department in writing of the existence and
location of all fire lanes properly designated under this Code.
G. Prohibition on parking or obstructing fire lanes.
(1) No person shall at any time, park, stop, stand or leave unattended a
motor vehicle in any area designated as a fire lane, or shall any
§ 196-23 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 196-23
1:552
person, firm or corporation place or construct any structure in
a designated fire lane nor place any obstruction thereon which
will impair the free passage and access of firefighting vehicles or
firefighters or impair the free use of any exit of any building.
(2) Attended motor vehicles found standing or parked in a fire lane
shall be immediately moved upon direction of any member of the
Police Department or Fire Department.
(3) In addition to any penalty to which a violator may be subject, the
Public Safety Director, or his designee, or a police officer of the
Township shall have the authority to remove or have removed such
vehicles as may violate this chapter, at the expense of the owner of
the vehicle.
H. Fire hydrants and Fire Department connections. [Amended
11-18-2003 by Ord. No. 03-12]
(1) It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct,
or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or Fire Department
connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, and
utility control locations, whether such hydrants or connections are
located on public or private property.
(2) There shall be a clear radius of three feet around a hydrant or fire
department connection to allow for the connection of hose and the
rotation of a hydrant wrench. Bumper posts or other protective
barriers may be installed outside this radius, but shall maintain a
clear path to all discharges.
(3) There shall be a ten-foot arc of unobstructed area of around the
front and two side discharges of the hydrant or fire department
connection to allow for clear visibility and the positioning of
apparatus.
(4) The Public Safety Director or his designee may approve exceptions
to the three-foot radius and ten-foot area around a hydrant or Fire
Department connection. Such exceptions shall not unduly affect the
operation of or access to fire hydrants or Fire Department
connections.
I. Notice to remove obstructions. Obstructions, other than motor vehicles,
found in fire lanes shall be removed by the owner, occupant or other
person in charge of the premises within three days after receipt of
written notice of removal issued by the Public Safety Director, or his
designee, Upon failure to comply with such notice, the Township may
cause the obstruction to be removed and the owner, occupant or other
person in charge of the premises shall pay the cost of such removal.
J. Notice of lane designation; appeal. Whenever the Public Safety
Director, or his designee, designates a fire lane, written notice thereof
shall be given to the owner, occupant or person in charge of the
§ 196-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-23
1:553
§ 196-24. Campers, trailers and boats. [Added 12-5-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-19]
No person shall park, store or let stand a camper, trailer, boat or any other
similar vehicle which is not self-propelled on any public street at any time.
§ 196-25. Truck tractors and trailers. [Added 6-3-1991 by Ord. No.
91-08]
§ 196-25.1. Resident permit parking program. [Added 10-20-1998
by Ord. No. 98-19]
premises. Such designation may be appealed within 10 days by filing a
written objection to such designation with the Public Safety Director, or
his designee. The appeal shall be heard by the members of the Board
of Supervisors, a majority of which may affirm, disaffirm or modify the
designation and whose decision shall be final.
A. The parking of truck tractors, truck tractors with trailers and trailers is
prohibited on any and all public streets in any residential district
according to the zoning classifications and regulations set forth in
Chapter 203, Zoning. [Amended 8-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-08]
B. Truck tractors with trailers may be temporarily parked on any public
street within a residential district for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading property in front of or making local
deliveries to premises situate on said street, provided that at least three
portable emergency warning devices are displayed upon the roadway at
the approach to the vehicle.
C. Notice of parking restrictions shall be provided by means of posted
traffic control devices, certified letter, personal service or placing a
notice on the windshield or other readily visible location on the vehicle.
In absence of a posted traffic control device, this section shall not be
enforced by citation unless a notice of violation has been issued to the
owner or operator of the vehicle by any means previously enumerated,
prior to the date and time enforcement is initiated.
A. Certain public streets in residential areas may be subject to vehicle
parking from nonresidential uses, therefore depriving the residents
whose properties abut said streets of on-street parking spaces in which
to park their vehicles. Those streets in residential areas affected by
parking from nonresidential uses may also be subjected to a high
degree of vehicle traffic, illegal parking, winter maintenance problems,
litter and loitering which negatively impacts public safety and welfare
within the residential area. The establishment of a resident permit
parking program for residential areas adversely affected by vehicle
parking from nonresidential uses may facilitate efficient movement of
traffic by providing a resident on-street parking preference during
certain hours of the day and days of the week.
§ 196-23 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 196-25.1
1:554
B. In determining that a specific residential area is eligible for the resident
permit parking program, the following factors shall be taken into
consideration in a study to be undertaken by the Township's Police
Department:
(1) The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in Lower
Paxton Township.
(2) The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal parking,
winter maintenance, litter, loitering and related safety and welfare
concerns.
(3) The availability and proximity of public transportation to the
nonresidential uses that generate on-street parking within the
residential area.
(4) The desire and need of residents of a residential area for the
resident permit parking program.
(5) The availability of off-street parking to serve the needs of the
nonresidential uses generating on-street parking within a
residential area.
(6) The zoning designation of the residential area as referenced in the
Lower Paxton Township Zoning Ordinance.42
(7) The ability of individuals going to or from nonresidential uses to
safely access vehicles, as pedestrians, parked in residential areas.
C. The public streets in a residential area designated for the resident
permit parking are those deemed "impacted" and hence eligible for the
residential permit parking program, on the basis of the following
warrants, as documented by a study undertaken by the Township's
Police Department:
(1) During any period of a calendar week, between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m., the number of vehicles parked (or standing),
legally or illegally, on public streets in a residential area shall be
equal to 50% or more of the legal, on-street parking capacity of the
area. For the purpose of this criterion, a legal parking space shall
be 20 linear feet.
(2) During the same period as specified in Subsection C(l) above, 10%
or more of the vehicles parking (or standing) on the streets in the
residential area are not registered in the name of a person residing
in the area. For the purpose of this criterion, the latest available
information from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles and Licensing of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regarding registration
of motor vehicles shall be used.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Zoning.
§ 196-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-25.1
1:555
(3) The warrants stated in Subsection C(l) and (2) above shall be met
on no less than one occasion per calendar week, for not less than
two successive weeks. Moreover, a reasonable expectation shall
exist that on-street parking in a residential area from
nonresidential uses will continue without the institution of the
resident permit parking program.
D. The public streets in a residential area designated for the resident
permit parking may also be those deemed "potentially impacted" and
hence eligible for the residential permit parking program, on the basis
of the following warrants, as documented by a study undertaken by the
Township's Police Department:
(1) Residential areas in which parking from nonresidential uses may be
reasonably expected to occur should the resident permit parking
program be instituted in an impacted area.
(2) Residential areas, in which parking from nonresidential uses
occurs due to the migration of vehicular parking upon institution of
the resident permit parking program in a neighboring residential
area.
(3) In the determination of a potentially impacted area, the warrants
stated in Subsection C above, regarding impacted areas, are not
applicable.
E. Application for a resident parking permit shall be made to the Police
Department by the person desiring the permit, who shall be only the
owner or the driver of a motor vehicle who resides on or immediately
adjacent to a street or other location designated for the resident permit
parking program. A separate application shall be required for each
motor vehicle. Each application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the owner or the driver, as the case may be, of the
motor vehicle.
(2) The address of the owner or driver, as the case may be.
(3) The make, model and registration number of the motor vehicle and
the driver number as taken from the applicant's current driver's
license. The applicant shall be required, at the time of making
application, to present his driver's license and the vehicle
registration card.
F. Upon receipt of the application and verification that the information
within which indicates that the applicant is entitled to participate in the
resident permit parking program, the Lower Paxton Township Police
Department shall issue a parking permit. Said permit shall be
permanently valid, as long as the recipient remains a qualified applicant
in possession of the motor vehicle referenced within said application. It
shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to display
other than the current and valid permit while standing or parking on a
§ 196-25.1 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 196-25.1
1:556
public street posted for resident permit parking at any time when
permits are to be displayed.
G. Temporary parking permits may be issued by the Lower Paxton
Township Police Department to bona fide visitors of residents located
within an area designated for the resident permit parking program. The
Police Department may also issue two temporary resident parking
permits to the owner(s) of each single-family dwelling unit located
within an area designated for the resident permit parking program.
H. Motor vehicles possessing appropriate handicapped designation, as
issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Transportation, indicating the handicapped status of the owner of the
vehicle shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.
I. The following provisions govern the use of resident parking permits:
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
holder of a resident parking permit shall be permitted to stand or
park a motor vehicle operated by him on public streets posted for
resident permit parking during those times when permit parking of
motor vehicles is permitted in that area. While a vehicle for which a
resident parking permit has been issued is so parked, the permit
shall be displayed so as to be clearly visible on the vehicle, as
directed by the Lower Paxton Township Police Department. A
resident parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the
holder a parking space within a designated resident permit parking
area.
(2) A resident parking permit shall not authorize its holder to stand or
park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time when
stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set
aside for other specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit
exempt its holder from the observance of any traffic or parking
regulation other than resident permit parking restrictions.
(3) No person other than the permit holder shall use a resident parking
permit or display it on a vehicle. Any such use or display by a
person other than the permit holder shall constitute a violation of
this article by the permit holder and by the person who so used or
displayed the parking permit.
(4) It shall constitute a violation of this article for any person to falsely
represent himself as eligible for a resident parking permit or to
furnish false information on an application to the Lower Paxton
Township Police Department in order to obtain a resident parking
permit.
J. The Lower Paxton Township Police Department shall have authority to
revoke a resident parking permit of any permit holder found to be in
violation of any provision of this ordinance. Upon written notification to
him of the revocation, the permit holder shall surrender the parking
§ 196-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-25.1
1:557
§ 196-26. Motorized recreational vehicle. [Amended 2-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-02]
§ 196-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-5-1978 by Ord. No.
78-4; 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 80-9; 12-5-1988 by Ord. No. 88-19;
10-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-19; 8-17-1999 by Ord. No. 99-08;
1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-01]
permit to the Police Department. Failure to do so, when so requested,
shall constitute a violation of this article.
A. For purposes of this section, a "motorized recreational vehicle" is a
motor vehicle equipped with living space and amenities found in a home
and often referred to as a "motor home" or "recreational vehicle (RV)."
B. The parking of a motorized recreational vehicle is prohibited on any and
all public streets in any residential district as set forth in the Zoning
Ordinance of Lower Paxton.
C. A motorized recreational vehicle may be temporarily parked on any
public street within a residential district for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading in front of the owner's
premises. The period of time during which a motorized recreational
vehicle is temporarily parked on a public street within a residential
district shall not exceed 72 hours. [Amended 6-20-2017 by Ord. No.
17-09]
D. While parked on any public street, it shall be unlawful to occupy a
motorized recreational vehicle as living space.
E. While parked on any public street, a motorized recreational vehicle may
be connected to water and electrical service for the purpose of charging
batteries and filling storage tanks. Connections to water and electrical
service shall not create a hazard to pedestrians nor shall they impede
the flow of travel across any public sidewalk. [Amended 6-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-09]
F. Notice of parking restrictions shall be provided by means of posted
traffic control devices, certified letter, personal service or placing a
notice on the windshield or other readily visible location on the vehicle.
In absence of- a posted traffic control device, this section shall not be
enforced by citation unless a notice of violation has been issued to the
owner or operator of the vehicle by any means previously enumerated,
prior to the date and time enforcement is initiated.
A. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article
dealing with fire lanes shall pay a fine as follows:
(1) The sum of $25 for parking in a fire lane, if the same is paid within
five days at the Township Building during the hours hereinafter set
forth, or upon failure to pay the sum of $25 within the time abovementioned,
then upon summary conviction before a District Justice,
§ 196-25.1 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 196-27
1:558
be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and the costs of prosecution, and
in default of the payment thereof shall undergo imprisonment for
not more than five days.
(2) Fines shall be payable at the Township Police Office between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays. The
hours listed above shall be either Eastern Standard Time or
Eastern Daylight Saving Time, whichever is in effect throughout
the Township.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article
relating to parking in restricted zones shall pay a fine as follows:
(1) Any person, firm, or corporation who or which causes, allows,
permits, or suffers any vehicle to be parked in any zone in which
parking is prohibited either by this article or otherwise by law shall
pay to the Township an unlawful parking charge in the amount of
$10. There shall be a separate unlawful parking charge of $5 for
each consecutive separate period of 1/2 hour during which such
unlawful parking continues. Failure to pay such unlawful parking
charge within five days after such violation will result in an
additional late charge of $2. [Amended 6-15-2004 by Ord. No.
04-10]
(2) Whoever parks unlawfully in a restricted zone as provided in this
article and fails to pay any unlawful parking charge, including any
late charge, shall be, upon conviction thereof, fined $25 and costs
and, in default of payment thereof, shall be imprisoned in the
Dauphin County Prison for not more than 10 days.
C. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article
relating to parking a camper, trailer, boat or other similar vehicle on a
public street shall pay a fine in the sum of $25 if paid within five days, or
upon failure to pay the sum of $25 within the aforementioned time
period, then upon summary conviction before a District Justice be
sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and the costs of prosecution, and in
default of the payment thereof shall be imprisoned in the Dauphin
County Prison for not more than five days.
D. Violation of any provision of this article other than a parking provision
shall be enforced by action brought before a District Justice in the same
manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. Any person who shall violate
or permit violation of the provisions of this article other than a parking
provision shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs of
prosecution, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each
day or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense. Each section of this article
that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
§ 196-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-27
1:559

ARTICLE VII
Snow Emergency43
[Added 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 94-22]
§ 196-28. Manager may declare snow emergency.
The Manager of the Township or his designated representative shall have
the power to declare an emergency that exists when any of the streets
or highways or parts thereof are covered by snow or ice which, in his
discretion, causes or will cause a condition of serious traffic congestion.
Such emergency shall be known as a "snow emergency."
§ 196-29. Other emergency powers not restricted.
This article shall not restrict the authority of the Township Supervisors
or the Township Manager to establish any temporary or emergency traffic
regulations in accordance with the Motor Vehicle Code.44
§ 196-30. Placing snow, ice or other articles on roadway.
During the process of snow removal from sidewalks, driveways or other
areas, no firm, person or corporation shall place, throw, block or by any
other means place snow, ice, slush or other matter onto or in a public street,
alley or other publicly maintained property.
§ 196-31. Snow removal from sidewalks.
It shall be the duty of any property owner, tenant, agent in charge or
occupier of any property within the Township to remove all snow, ice,
slush or other matter from the sidewalks in front of and along his property
within 24 hours after snow has ceased falling. Such removal shall provide
for the free passage of pedestrians for a width of at least 36 inches. The
provisions of this section shall toll during the period of time in which a snow
emergency has been declared.
§ 196-32. Maintenance of alleys.
During a declared snow emergency or after six inches of snow has
accumulated on the surface of the ground, the Township may, in its sole
discretion, perform winter maintenance activities, including but not limited
to snow plowing and spreading a antiskid materials on certain alleys and
other nonpublic thoroughfares as identified in Attachment A, which is made
a part hereof, incorporated herein by reference and attached hereto.45
43.Editor's Note: See Schedule V, Snow Emergency Routes.
44.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
45.Editor's Note: Said Attachment A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 196-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-33
1:561
§ 196-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
article shall, for each and every such violation, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 not more than $100, plus costs
of prosecution. Each day of continuous violation of any provision of this
article shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 196-33 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 196-33
1:562
ARTICLE VIII
Bicycle Licensing
§ 196-34. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — A pedalcycle having two wheels with tires 16 inches or more
in diameter connected by a frame of metal or wood and arranged to be
propelled by human power. This definition does not apply to toy bicycles or
velocipedes.
§ 196-35. Registration required.
No person residing in the Township shall ride or use a bicycle without first
obtaining from the Police Department a registration therefor as prescribed
in this article.
§ 196-36. Issuance of registration.
The Police Department is hereby authorized and directed to issue, upon
written application, to any resident of the Township a permanent bicycle
registration, which registration shall entitle the licensee to operate the
registered bicycle upon all the streets and public highways of the Township.
The Police Department shall keep a record of the date of issuance of each
registration.
§ 196-37. Registration sticker provided.
The Police Department shall provide each bicycle with a reflective
registration sticker with registration number, indicating that the
registration was issued by the Township. The reflective license sticker shall
be attached to the lower end of the rear fender by or under the direction
of the Police Department at a location where it will always be plainly
visible and in such manner as will prevent its removal. The issuance of the
registration shall be after the collection of the registration fee as provided
by this article. Registration fees shall be paid to the Township Treasurer by
the Police Department. The reflective license sticker shall remain attached
to the bicycle during the time of its use in the Township.
§ 196-38. Sticker fee; replacement.
The Police Department shall collect a fee as set forth from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors for each bicycle registered. Upon the
loss of a registration sticker, and upon evidence satisfactory of such loss, a
new registration sticker shall be issued upon payment of a fee as set forth
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 196-39. Report of sale or transfer required.
§ 196-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-39
1:563
§ 196-40. Altering serial or registration numbers.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall willfully or maliciously
remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the manufacturer's number of any bicycle
frame registered pursuant to this article or remove, destroy, mutilate or
alter any registration sticker, seal or registration card. However, nothing in
this article shall prohibit the Police Department from stamping a number on
the frame of bicycles on which no serial number can be found or on which
such number is illegible for identification purposes. The Police Department
may also stamp upon the frame of any bicycle registered a number which
shall be the secret number of the Police Department, if so required in
the administration of this article to prevent bicycle larceny and to recover
stolen bicycles.
§ 196-41. Inspection of bicycle.
The Police Department shall inspect each bicycle offered for registration,
and if the applicant's bicycle is not in good ridable condition and properly
equipped, the registration of the applicant's bicycle shall be withheld until
all requirements of the Motor Vehicle Code are met.
§ 196-42. Report by bicycle dealer to Police Department.
All persons, firms, partnerships or corporations engaged in the business of
buying used bicycles shall make regular reports to the Police Department,
on forms to be furnished by the Police Department, giving a list of all
purchases and sales made by such dealer, as well as the names and
addresses of all persons, firms, partnerships and corporations from whom
such bicycles are purchased and to whom sold, and the number thereof, and
in the case of a used bicycle bought from an individual or taken in trade
from a person buying a new bicycle or a used bicycle from the dealer's
stock, the number of the license plate thereon, if any.
§ 196-43. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-17-1999 by Ord. No.
99-08]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates § 196-39 herein shall,
upon summary conviction before a District Justice, be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $300, together with costs of prosecution. Upon default of
A. It shall be the duty of any person who sells or transfers ownership of
any bicycle to report such sale or transfer by returning to the Police
Department the registration card issued to such person, together with
the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or
transferred. Such report shall be made within five days of the date of
the sale or transfer thereof.
B. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or the transferee of such bicycle to
apply to the Police Department for registration thereof within five days
of the date of such sale or transfer.
§ 196-39 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 196-43
1:564
the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and costs, the defendant may be
sentenced and committed to the county prison for not more than 10 days.
§ 196-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-43
1:565

ARTICLE IX
Operation on Private Property
§ 196-44. Definitions.
As used in this article, certain terms are defined as follows:
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — The spouse, son, daughter, father, mother or other
blood relative residing with the owner or person in possession of private
property.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall have the meaning attributed to it under the
provisions of the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 196-45. Consent required; exceptions. [Amended 8-17-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-08]
No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle upon any private
property in Lower Paxton Township without the written consent of the
owner or other person in control or possession of such property. This
provision shall not apply to any delivery man or other person who is
temporarily upon private property for some legitimate purpose.
§ 196-46. Operation for sport or recreation.
Other than for use by an owner or person in possession of private property,
or their immediate family, no tract, trail, autocross or other area shall be set
aside for the operation of motor vehicles for sport or recreation on private
property without first complying with the zoning and subdivision ordinances
of Lower Paxton Township.
§ 196-47. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-17-1999 by Ord. No.
99-08]
Any person, firm or corporation charged with a violation of this article shall,
upon summary conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced for each
such violation to pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $300 and
the costs of prosecution and, in default of the payment thereof, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 196-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-47
1:567
Chapter 203
ZONING
§ 196-47 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 196-47
1:568
ARTICLE I
Administration
§ 203-101. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply throughout the Township of Lower Paxton. Any
activity regulated by this chapter shall only occur in such a way that
conforms with the regulations of this chapter. See § 203-103A.
§ 203-102. Purposes and community development objectives.
This chapter is hereby adopted:
A. In accordance with the requirements and purposes (including Sections
604 and 605 or their successor section(s), which are included by
reference) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended;
B. In accordance with goals and objectives of the Lower Paxton Township
Comprehensive Plan, which are hereby included by reference;
C. To carry out the following major objectives: [Amended 11-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-01]
(1) To make sure that development carefully relates to natural
features, and to avoid overly intense development of
environmentally sensitive land;
(2) To minimize disturbance of creek valleys and steep woodlands;
(3) To avoid overextending groundwater supplies, and to encourage
groundwater recharge;
(4) To protect the quality of groundwater and surface waters;
(5) To promote traditional styles of development;
(6) To promote compatibility between land uses;
(7) To seek coordinated development and roads across municipal
borders;
(8) To provide for a variety of residential densities and meet legal
obligations to provide opportunities for all housing types;
(9) To encourage rehabilitation and avoid demolition of historic
buildings;
(10) To direct higher density development to areas that are physically
suitable, accessible by major roads and that have the potential of
central water and sewage services;
(11) To coordinate development with future central water and sewage
service areas;
§ 203-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-102
1:569
§ 203-103. Permits and certificates.
(12) To direct industrial development to locations that will minimize
conflicts with homes;
(13) To direct commercial businesses to existing commercial areas,
while avoiding new strip commercial areas that would cause traffic
congestion and safety problems and conflicts with homes;
(14) To promote new business development in appropriate areas that
will provide additional tax revenue and job opportunities; and
(15) To promote public health, safety and general welfare.
A. Applicability.
(1) Any of the following activities or any other activity regulated by this
chapter shall only be carried out in conformity with this chapter:
(a) Erection, construction, movement, placement or extension of a
structure, building or sign;
(b) Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure
or area of land;
(c) Creation of a lot or alteration of lot lines; and/or
(d) Creation of a new use.
(2) Zoning permit. A zoning permit indicates that a zoning application
complies with this chapter to the best knowledge of the applicable
Township staff.
(a) A zoning permit is required to be issued prior to the start of
any of the following activities:
[1] Erection, construction, movement, placement, relocation
or expansion of a structure, building or sign;
[2] Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a
structure or area of land;
[3] Creation of a new use;
[4] Demolition of a building, or partial demolition of the
exterior of a building;
[5] Site alterations or mineral extraction as defined by
§ 203-202;
[6] Excavation or grading in preparation for the construction
of a building or a change in use of a property; and/or
§ 203-102 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-103
1:570
[7] Construction or installation of any animal waste
impoundment, lake, pond, dam or other water retention
basin.
(b) The Township may, at its option, issue combined or separate
building permits and zoning permits and/or may utilize single
or separate applications for the permits.
(3) Certificate of occupancy.
(a) It shall be unlawful to use and/or occupy any new principal
building or establish any new or replacement principal
nonresidential use until a certificate of occupancy for such
building or use has been issued by the Township staff. (Note - A
certificate of occupancy may also be required in additional
situations under the Construction Codes.)
(b) The Zoning Officer may require that the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy be delayed if the Zoning Officer
believes that the activity, structure or use is not in compliance
with this chapter and associated zoning approvals, until such
time as compliance is achieved.
(c) The applicant shall keep a copy of the certificate of occupancy
available for inspection.
(d) Upon the request of an applicant, the Zoning Officer may, in
writing, allow a temporary occupancy or activity to occur
before all zoning requirements have been met where the
following conditions are met:
[1] The applicant shall prove to the Township that the activity
or occupancy can occur safely without endangering public
health or safety.
[2] The temporary approval shall establish in writing a
maximum time period under which it is valid. A six-month
maximum time period shall apply if not otherwise
specified.
[3] Failure to receive a permanent certificate of occupancy
within such time period shall be a violation of this chapter.
[4] The temporary approval may be conditioned upon
compliance with certain specific requirements within
certain time periods.
[5] See § 203-103G.
B. Repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance to
existing structures that do not involve an expansion or change of a use
or structure shall not by itself be regulated by this chapter. Examples of
such work include replacement of a roof or porch that does not involve
§ 203-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-103
1:571
enclosure of space. (However, a construction permit under any
Township Building Code may be needed for such work.)
C. Types of uses.
(1) Permitted by right uses. The Zoning Officer shall issue a permit
under this chapter in response to an application for a use that is
"permitted by right" if it meets all of the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) Special exception use or application requiring a variance. A permit
under this chapter for a use requiring a special exception or
variance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only in response to a
written approval by the Zoning Hearing Board following a hearing.
(3) Conditional use. A use requiring zoning approval by the Board of
Supervisors under § 203-117.
D. Applications.
(1) Submittal. All applications for a zoning permit or a decision by the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be made in writing on a form provided
by the Township. Such completed application, with required fees,
shall be submitted to a designated Township staff person.
(2) Site plan. The applicant shall submit a minimum of two copies of a
site plan with the application if the application involves a new
building, expansion of a building or addition of three or more
parking spaces. The site plan shall be drawn to scale and show the
following:
(a) Locations, dimensions and uses of existing and proposed
structures, parking and loading areas, and locations of existing
and proposed uses of areas of land, with existing features
clearly distinguished from proposed features;
(b) Notes showing the dimensions of all buildings from lot lines
and street rights-of-way;
(c) Locations of any watercourses and any 100-year floodplain;
(d) Proposed lot areas, lot widths and other applicable
dimensional requirements;
(e) Locations and widths of existing and proposed sidewalks;
(f) A North arrow and scale; and
(g) Well and primary and alternate septic system locations, if
applicable. See § 203-309.
(3) Additional information. Any application under this chapter shall
include the following information, unless the Zoning Officer
§ 203-103 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-103
1:572
determines such information is unnecessary to determine
compliance with this chapter:
(a) The address of the lot;
(b) Name and address of the applicant, and of the owner of the
property if different from the applicant;
(c) If the applicant is not the landowner of record, information
shall be presented with the application, such as an agreement
of sale or lease, to demonstrate that the applicant has the legal
right to make the application;
(d) A current deed for the property;
(e) A description of the existing and proposed use(s) of the
property, with the proposed use described in sufficient detail
for the Zoning Officer to determine compliance with this
chapter;
(f) All other applicable information listed on the official Township
application form;
(g) If the applicant is incorporated, the legal names and day
telephone numbers of officers of the organization/corporation;
(h) Such additional information that the Zoning Officer may
determine is reasonably necessary to determine compliance
with this chapter; and
(i) A listing of all conditional uses, special exception approvals
and/or variances which the applicant is requesting and/or a
description with a date of any such approvals that were
previously granted for this property that relate to this
application.
(4) Submittals to the Board. In addition to the information listed in
Subsection D(3) above, an application requiring a site plan and
action by the Zoning Hearing Board shall also include the following
information, unless the Zoning Officer determines that such
information is unnecessary to determine compliance with this
chapter:
(a) The present zoning district and major applicable lot
requirements;
(b) For a nonresidential use:
[1] A description of the proposed nonresidential operations
and storage in sufficient detail to indicate potential
nuisances and hazards regarding noise, large truck traffic,
glare, odors, dust, fire or toxic or explosive hazards or
other significant public health and safety hazards,
§ 203-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-103
1:573
[2] A list of the maximum hours of operation;
(c) The existing directions of stormwater flow (and any proposed
revisions), and any proposed methods of stormwater
management;
(d) A listing of any sections of this chapter being appealed, with
the reasons for any appeal;
(e) Approximate locations of principal buildings and locations of
streets and alleys and zoning district boundaries within 100
feet of the boundaries of the tract, and description of uses of
adjoining properties (such as "drugstore" or "single-family
detached dwelling");
(f) Heights, locations, methods of illumination and intensity of
exterior lighting and sign lighting;
(g) Name and address of person who prepared the site plan;
(h) Signed acknowledgment of the application by the applicant;
and
(i) Such additional information required under applicable sections
of this chapter.
(5) Ownership. No person other than a landowner or their specifically
authorized agent or a tenant or lessee with written permission of
the landowner shall submit a zoning application. (See definition of
"landowner" in Article II.)
E. Issuance of permits.
(1) At least one copy of each permit application and any other zoning
approval shall be retained in Township files.
(2) PennDOT permit. Where necessary for access onto a state road, a
Township zoning or building permit shall be automatically
conditioned upon issuance of a PennDOT highway occupancy
permit.
F. Revocation of permits; appeal of permit or approval.
(1) Revocation. The Zoning Officer shall revoke, withhold or suspend a
permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in
case of one or more of the following:
(a) Any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the
application or on the plans on which the permit or approval
was based; (Note: The Pennsylvania Criminal Code provides
for penalties for providing false information to a municipal
employee in the carrying out of his/her duties.)
§ 203-103 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-103
1:574
(b) Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed by the Zoning
Hearing Board upon a special exception use or variance;
(c) Any work being accomplished or use of land or structures in
such a way that does not comply with this chapter or an
approved site plan or approved permit application; and/or
(d) For any other just cause set forth in this chapter.
(2) Appeals. A party with legitimate standing, or as otherwise provided
by State law, may appeal decisions under this chapter within the
provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code.46 Any such
appeal shall occur within the time period established in the State
Municipalities Planning Code (as of the adoption date of this
chapter, such provisions were in Sections 914.1 and 1002.A).
G. Zoning permit for temporary uses and structures.
(1) A zoning permit for a temporary use or structure may be issued by
the Zoning Officer for any of the following:
(a) A temporary permit may be issued for customary, routine and
accessory short-term special events, provided that:
[1] Only a well-established nonprofit organization or a
permitted place of worship proposing a temporary use to
clearly primarily serve a charitable, public service or
religious purpose shall be eligible to receive approval for
commercial-type activities in a district where a
commercial use would not otherwise be permitted;
[2] Such total events shall be limited to a maximum of 10 total
days per calendar year; and
[3] The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that
sufficient parking and traffic control will be available for
the special event, without obstructing parking that is
required to serve other uses on the site.
(b) A temporary permit may be issued for temporary storage and
office trailers that are necessary to serve on-site construction,
while such construction is actively underway under a valid
Township permit.
(c) In addition, Christmas tree sales shall be allowed by right in all
districts during the months of November and December.
(2) Time period. The Zoning Officer shall state a reasonable maximum
time period on the temporary permit. If no time limit is stated, then
a seven-day maximum period shall apply. A temporary permit may
be renewed for just cause.
46.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 203-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-103
1:575
(3) Temporary retail sales. Except as provided for in Subsection
G(1)(a) above, and except for agricultural sales allowed by
§ 203-306, a lot shall only be used for temporary retail sales if all of
the following conditions are met:
(a) The property shall be located within a zoning district that
allows retail sales.
(b) The operator shall have received any business permits
required by the Township.
(c) No off-street parking spaces shall be obstructed that are
required to serve permanent uses on the lot.
(d) Any signs visible from a public street shall comply with this
chapter.
(e) If food or beverages are sold that are not prepackaged, the
applicant shall prove compliance with state health regulations,
including having on-site facilities for workers to wash their
hands. Proper bathroom facilities shall also be available for
workers.
(f) Any structure shall meet applicable minimum setbacks.
(g) A permit under this chapter shall be required from the
Township, which shall be displayed while the activity is open
for business.
(h) The application may be rejected if the Zoning Officer has
reason to believe that the activity would obstruct safe sight
distances.
(i) Applicable state highway occupancy permit requirements shall
be met.
(j) A plan shall be submitted showing the location of the use on
the site.
(4) See also Chapter 137, Peddling and Soliciting, of the Code of Lower
Paxton Township. See also regulations on tents and membrane
structures in the International Fire Code that is in effect in Lower
Paxton Township.
H. Compliance with Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance. If a application under this chapter would also be regulated
by the Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
("SALDO"), then any permit or approval under this chapter shall
automatically be conditioned upon compliance with the SALDO. See the
definitions of "land development" and "subdivision" in the SALDO.
(1) For example, if an applicant applies for a single-family detached
dwelling on a proposed new lot, the construction permit for such
§ 203-103 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-103
1:576
§ 203-104. General procedure for permits.
§ 203-105. Interpretation and uses not regulated.
dwelling shall not be valid until after the lot is granted final
subdivision approval and the lot is officially recorded by the County
Recorder of Deeds.
A. After receiving a proper application, the Zoning Officer shall either:
(1) Issue the applicable permit(s); or
(2) Deny the application(s) as submitted, indicating one or more
reasons.
B. After the permit under this chapter has been issued, the applicant may
undertake the action specified by the permit, in compliance with other
Township ordinances. However, it is recommended that applicants wait
30 days to begin construction if there is a possibility of an appeal by
another party to have the permit revoked. Any commencement of
construction or a use within this thirty-day appeal period shall be at the
risk of the applicant.
A. Minimum requirements. Where more than one provision of this chapter
controls a particular matter, the provision that is more restrictive upon
uses and structures shall apply. The provisions of this chapter are in
addition to any other applicable Township ordinance.
B. Uses not specifically regulated. If a use clearly is not permitted by right,
as a conditional use, or as a special exception use by this chapter within
any zoning district, the use is prohibited, except that the Board of
Supervisors may permit such use as a conditional use if the applicant
specifically proves to the clear satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors
that all of the following conditions would be met:
(1) The proposed use would be no more intensive with respect to
external impacts and nuisances than uses that are permitted in the
district;
(2) The proposed use would be closely similar in impacts and character
to uses permitted in that district, considering the standards in
§ 203-805F;
(3) The use would meet the standards that would apply under
§ 203-117 to a conditional use; and
(4) The use is not specifically prohibited in that district.
C. Interpretation of ordinance text and boundaries.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall literally apply the wording of this chapter
and the location of all district boundaries to particular applications.
In any case, the Zoning Officer may also request an advisory
§ 203-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-105
1:577
§ 203-106. Enforcement, violations and penalties.
All of the enforcement, violations and penalty provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, are hereby incorporated into
this chapter by reference. (Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter,
these provisions were primarily in Sections 616.1, 617 and 617.2 of such
Act.)
opinion from the Township Solicitor to aid in the Zoning Officer's
determination.
(2) If an applicant disagrees with the Zoning Officer's determination
and believes that the Ordinance should be interpreted in the
applicant's favor, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning Hearing
Board. See § 203-111.
(3) See § 203-304.
D. Undefined terms/interpretation of definitions. See § 203-201.
A. Violations. Any person who shall commit or who shall permit any of the
following actions violates this chapter:
(1) Failure to secure a zoning permit prior to any of the following: a
change in use of land or structure, or the erection, construction or
alteration of any structure or portion thereof, or the placement of a
sign, or a change in the area of a use or the land coverage or
setback of a use, or the excavation or grading of land to prepare for
the erection, construction or alteration of any structure or portion
thereof;
(2) Placement of false statements on or omitting relevant information
from an application for a zoning permit;
(3) Undertaking any action in a manner which does not comply with a
zoning permit;
(4) Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the Zoning
Hearing Board in granting a variance or special exception or other
approval;
(5) Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the Board of
Supervisors in granting a conditional use or other approval; or
(6) Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of a court of
competent jurisdiction, where such court has granted zoning
approval with conditions.
B. Enforcement notice. If the Township has reason to believe that a
violation of a provision of this chapter has occurred, the Township shall
initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as
provided in Section 616.1 of the State Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 203-105 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-106
1:578
Prior to sending an official enforcement notice, the Zoning Officer may,
at his/her option, informally request compliance.
C. Time limits. An official enforcement notice shall state the deadline to
complete bringing the property into compliance with this chapter and
shall state that the applicant has 30 days from the receipt of the notice
to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. Enforcement, penalties and remedies. The causes of action and
enforcement remedies provisions of the State Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended, are hereby incorporated by reference. (Note: As of
the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were primarily in
Section 617 and 617.2 of such law.)
(1) Violations and penalties. Any person, partnership, corporation or
other entity who has violated or permitted the violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in
a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including the
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless a District
Justice, determining that there has been a violation, further
determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person
violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such
violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees
collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the
Township for the general use of the Township. Imprisonment is not
authorized under this chapter.
(2) Remedies. In case any building, structure, sign or landscaping is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted,
maintained or used or any land is used or activity conducted in
violation of this chapter or any of the permits issued under this
chapter or any conditions imposed upon the grant of a special
exception or variance by the Zoning Hearing Board or upon the
grant of a conditional use, then, in addition to any other remedies
provided by law, the Board of Supervisors may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or
abate such building, structure, landscaping, use or activity or to
prevent, in and about such premises, any act, conduct, business or
use constituting a violation.
§ 203-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-106
1:579
§ 203-107. Fees.
A Township fee schedule for permits and applications may be established
and amended by written resolution of the Board of Supervisors. No
application or appeal shall be considered filed until all fees are paid.
§ 203-108. Amendments.
Within the requirements of the State Municipalities Planning Code, the
Board of Supervisors may amend, or repeal any or all portions of this
chapter:
§ 203-109. Curative amendments.
The applicable provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code shall
apply. (Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, these provisions were
primarily in Sections 609.1, 609.2 and 916.1 of such Act.)
§ 203-110. Zoning Officer.
E. Enforcement evidence. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board, the Township shall have the responsibility of
presenting its evidence first.
A. On its own motion; or
B. After agreeing to hear a written request of any person, entity,
landowner or the Planning Commission.
A. Appointment. The Zoning Officer(s) shall be appointed by the Township
Manager. The Board of Supervisors may designate other Township staff
persons to serve as Assistant Zoning Officer(s). Assistant Zoning
Officers may serve with the same authority and duties as the Zoning
Officer. The Zoning Officer shall not hold any elective office within the
Township but may hold other appointed offices.
B. Duties and powers. The Zoning Officer's duties and powers shall
include the following:
(1) Administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms,
including to receive and examine all applications required under
the terms of this chapter, and issue or refuse permits within the
provisions of this chapter;
(2) Conduct inspections to determine compliance, and receive
complaints of violation of this chapter;
(3) Keep records of applications, permits, certificates, written
decisions, and variances granted by the Zoning Hearing Board, and
of enforcement orders, with all such records being the property of
the Township and being available for public inspection;
§ 203-106 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-110
1:580
§ 203-111. Zoning Hearing Board actions and variances.
(4) Review proposed subdivisions and land developments for
compliance with this chapter;
(5) Take enforcement actions as provided by the State Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended;
(6) Maintain available records concerning nonconformities, provided
that the Township is not required to document every
nonconformity; and
(7) Serve such other functions as are provided in this chapter.
A. Membership of Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of five
residents of the Township appointed by the Board of Supervisors. The
existing terms of office shall continue, with terms of office being three
years, and with the terms being so fixed that the term of office of at
least one member shall expire each year. Members of the Board shall
hold no other office in the Township.
(1) Alternate members. The Board of Supervisors may appoint
alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board within the
applicable provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code.
(Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were
in Section 903(b) of such Act.)
(2) Expenditures. Within the maximum amount of funds appropriated
by the Board of Supervisors, the Zoning Hearing Board may employ
or contract for secretaries, legal counsel, and other technical and
clerical services. Members and alternate members may receive
compensation, within limits established by the Board of
Supervisors, for the performance of their duties.
B. Vacancies. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired
portion of a term.
C. Organization. The applicable provisions of the State Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (As of the adoption date of this
chapter, these provisions were in Sections 906(a), (b) and (c) of such
Act.)
D. Zoning hearing board jurisdiction and functions. The Zoning Hearing
Board shall be responsible for the following:
(1) Appeal of a decision by the Zoning Officer.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by
an affected person, entity or the Board of Supervisors that the
Zoning Officer has improperly acted under the requirements
and procedures of this chapter.
(b) See time limitations for appeals in § 203-111F.
§ 203-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-111
1:581
(2) Challenge to the validity of the ordinance or map. The applicable
provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,
shall apply. (Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, these
provisions were primarily in Sections 909.1 and 916 of such Act.)
(3) Variance.
(a) The Board shall hear requests for variances filed with the
Township staff in writing.
(b) Standards. The Board may grant a variance only within the
limitations of state law.
(Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, the
Municipalities Planning Code provided that all of the following
findings must be made, where relevant:
i) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions
(including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot
size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property)
and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
ii) Because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed
in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance and a variance is therefore necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property;
iii) Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant;
iv) The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and
v) The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the
least modification possible of the regulation in issue.)
(c) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
(4) Special exception.
(a) The Board shall hear and decide requests for all special
exceptions filed with the Township staff in writing. The Board
shall only permit a special exception that is authorized by this
chapter. See § 203-116.
§ 203-111 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-111
1:582
(b) Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Zoning
Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes and intent of
this chapter.
(5) Persons with disabilities. After the Zoning Officer receives a
complete written application, the Zoning Hearing Board shall grant
a special exception allowing modifications to specific requirements
of this chapter that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Hearing Board are required under applicable federal law to
provide a "reasonable accommodation" to serve persons who the
applicant proves have "disabilities" as defined in and protected by
such laws.
(a) Such reasonable accommodations shall be requested in
accordance with the United States Fair Housing Act
Amendments and/or the Americans with Disabilities Act, as
amended.
(b) If the applicant is requesting a reasonable accommodation
under the United States Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988
or the Americans with Disabilities Act, the applicant shall
identify the disability which is protected by such statutes, the
extent of the modification of the provisions of this chapter
necessary for a reasonable accommodation, and the manner by
which the reasonable accommodation requested may be
removed when such person(s) with a protected disability no
longer will be present on the property.
(c) Any modification approved under this section may be limited to
the time period during which the persons with disabilities
occupy or utilize the premises.
(6) The Zoning Hearing Board shall also hear any other matters as set
forth in the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. (Note:
As of the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were
primarily within Section 909.1 of such law.) The Zoning Hearing
Board also may hear appeals of other matters if authorized under a
separate Township ordinance. (Note: As of the adoption date of this
chapter, the Zoning Hearing Board also heard appeals of the
Property Maintenance Code.)
E. Time limits for appeals. The applicable provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, these provisions were in Section 914.1 of
such Act.)
F. Stay of proceedings. The stay of proceedings provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were in Section 915.1 of
such Act.)
§ 203-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-111
1:583
§ 203-112. Zoning Hearing Board hearings and decisions.
The following requirements shall apply to procedures, hearings and
decisions of the Zoning Hearing Board.
G. Time limits on permits and approvals.
(1) After a variance is approved or other zoning approval (such as
special exception or conditional use approval) is officially
authorized, then any applicable zoning and building permits shall
be secured by the applicant within 12 months after the date of such
approval or authorization. The work authorized by zoning permits
shall then be completed within 12 months after the issuance of the
permits.
(a) However, if a variance is approved to address a violation of this
chapter, then the permit shall be acquired and the work
completed within six months after the variance is approved,
with no further time extension.
(2) Extension. In response to an applicant stating good cause in
writing, the Zoning Officer may extend in writing the time limit for
completion of work to a maximum total of 24 months after permits
are issued.
(3) If an applicant fails to obtain the necessary permits or begin
construction within the above time periods, or allows interruptions
in substantial construction of longer than 12 months, the Zoning
Officer shall conclusively presume that the applicant has waived,
withdrawn or abandoned approvals, variances and permits under
this chapter, and all such approvals, variances and permits shall be
deemed automatically rescinded by the Township.
H. Multiple applications. No more than one application for the same
property shall be pending before the Zoning Hearing Board for special
exception approval at any time.
A. Notice of hearings. Notice of all hearings of the Board shall be given as
follows:
(1) Ad. Public notice shall be published, as defined by Section 107 of
the State Municipalities Planning Code. The notice shall state the
time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the
matter to be considered.
(2) Posting. Notice of such hearing shall be conspicuously posted on
the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing. The
Township staff shall post the property. It is the responsibility of the
applicant to make sure that such notice remains posted until the
hearing.
§ 203-111 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-112
1:584
§ 203-113. Appeals to court.
The provisions for appeals to court that are stated in the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, shall apply. (Note: As of the
adoption date of this chapter, these provisions were in Sections 1001-A,
1002-A, 1003-A, 1004-A, 1005-A and 1006- A of such Act.)
§ 203-114. Limited public utility exemptions.
See the provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, such provisions were within
Section 619 of such Act.)
(3) Persons given notice. The Township shall provide written notice to
the applicant of the time and place of the hearing. The Township
should also provide notice to the Chairperson of the Board of
Supervisors. Also, such notice shall be given to any other person or
group (including civic or community organizations) who has made a
written timely request for such notice. Any such notices should be
mailed or delivered to the last known address.
B. Initiation of hearings. A hearing required under this chapter shall be
initiated within 60 days of the date of an applicant's request for a
hearing, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
C. Decision/findings.
(1) The Board shall render a written decision on each application
within 45 days after the last hearing on that application before the
Board, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
(2) Where the application is contested or denied, the decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons for such conclusions.
(3) References shall be provided to the most pertinent section(s) of this
chapter and/or the State Municipalities Planning Code.
D. Notice of decision. A copy of the final decision shall be delivered or
mailed to the applicant or his/her representative at their last known
address not later than the time limit established by the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. (Note: As of the adoption
date of this chapter, such provisions were within Sections 908(9) and
908(10) of such Act, including provisions regarding notice to other
parties.)
E. See also Section 908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 203-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-115
1:585
§ 203-115. Township and municipal authority exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to uses or structures owned by Lower Paxton
Township or by a municipal authority created solely by Lower Paxton
Township for uses and structures that are intended for a public utility,
stormwater, public works, recycling, municipal administrative, public
recreation or public health and safety purpose.
§ 203-116. Special exception use process.
A. Purpose. The special exception process is designed to allow careful
review of uses that have some potential of conflicts with adjacent uses
or areas.
B. Special exception procedure.
(1) A site plan shall be submitted, which shall contain the information
required in § 203-103D. If a fully engineered subdivision or land
development plan will be required, it may be submitted separately,
such as after a special exception is approved.
(2) The Zoning Officer should provide a review to the Zoning Hearing
Board regarding the compliance of the application with this
chapter.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board shall follow the procedures provided in
§ 203-112.
(4) The Township staff should offer a special exception application to
the Township Planning Commission for any advisory review that
the Commission may wish to provide. However, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall meet the time limits of state law for a decision,
regardless of whether the Township Planning Commission has
provided comments.
(5) Time limits. See Section 908 of the State Municipalities Planning
Code.
C. Consideration of special exception applications. When special
exceptions are allowed by this chapter, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
hear and decide requests for such special exceptions in accordance
with standards established by this chapter, including the following:
(1) Compliance with this chapter. The applicant shall establish by
credible evidence that the application complies with all applicable
requirements of this chapter. The applicant shall provide the Board
with sufficient plans, studies or other data to demonstrate this
compliance.
(2) Compliance with other laws. The approval may be conditioned
upon the applicant later showing proof of compliance with other
specific applicable Township, state and federal laws, regulations
and permits. Required permits or other proof of compliance may be
§ 203-115 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-116
1:586
§ 203-117. Conditional use process.
required to be presented to the Township prior to the issuance of
any zoning permit, building permit, certification of occupancy and/
or recording of an approved plan.
(3) Traffic. The applicant shall establish that the traffic from the
proposed use will be accommodated in a safe and efficient manner
that will minimize hazards and congestion, after considering any
improvements proposed to be made by the applicant as a condition
on approval.
(4) Site planning. The application shall include proper site layout,
internal circulation, parking, buffering, and all other elements of
proper design as specified in this chapter.
(5) Neighborhood. The proposed use shall not substantially change the
character of any surrounding residential neighborhood, after
considering any proposed conditions upon approval such as limits
upon hours of operation.
(6) Safety. The proposed use shall not create a significant hazard to the
public health and safety, such as fire, toxic or explosive hazards.
(7) Natural features. The proposed use shall be suitable for the site,
considering the disturbance of steep slopes, mature woodland,
wetlands, floodplains, springs and other important natural
features.
D. Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Board may require such
reasonable conditions and safeguards (in addition to those expressed in
this chapter) as it determines are necessary to implement the purposes
of this chapter. Conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board shall
automatically become conditions of the building permit issued pursuant
thereto, and any failure to comply with said conditions shall be a
violation of this chapter.
A. Purpose. The conditional use approval process is designed to allow the
Board of Supervisors to review and approve certain uses that could
have significant impacts upon the community and the environment.
B. Procedure. The Board of Supervisors shall consider the conditional use
application and render its decision in accordance with the requirements
of the State Municipalities Planning Code.
(1) Submittal. A site plan shall be submitted, which shall contain the
information listed in § 203-103D. Detailed site engineering (such as
stormwater calculations and profiles) are not required at the
conditional use stage. If a fully engineered subdivision or land
development plan will be required, it may be submitted separately,
such as after a conditional use is approved. Or, an applicant may
§ 203-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-117
1:587
§ 203-118. Liability.
voluntarily choose to submit a subdivision or land development
plan for review at the same time as a conditional use application.
(2) Reviews.
(a) The Zoning Officer should provide a review to the Board
regarding the compliance of the application with this chapter.
(b) The Township staff shall submit a conditional use application to
the Planning Commission for any review that the Commission
may wish to provide. However, the Board of Supervisors shall
meet the time limits for a decision, regardless of whether the
Planning Commission has provided comments.
(3) The only uses that shall be approved as conditional uses shall be
those listed as conditional uses in Article III.
(4) Time limit. See Section 913.2 of the State Municipalities Planning
Code.
C. Consideration of conditional use application. The Board of Supervisors
shall determine whether the proposed conditional use would meet the
applicable requirements of this chapter. The same standards shall apply
to a conditional use as are listed in § 203-116C for a special exception
use.
D. Conditions. In approving conditional use applications, the Board of
Supervisors may attach conditions they consider necessary to protect
the public welfare and meet the standards of this chapter. These
conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer and failure to
comply with such conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter
and be subject to the penalties described in this chapter.
A. Any review of activity within the floodplain, site plan review, subdivision
or land development approval, erosion control review, wetland
delineation review, stormwater runoff review, review of activity on
steep slopes, or any other review, approval or permit under this chapter
by an officer, employee, board, commission, solicitor, consultant or
agency of the Township shall not constitute a representation, guarantee
or warranty of any kind by the Township, or its employees, officials,
boards, solicitor(s), consultants or agencies, of the practicality or safety
of any structure, use or subdivision, and shall create no liability upon
nor a cause of action against such entity or person for any damage that
may result pursuant thereto.
B. If the Zoning Officer mistakenly issues a permit under this chapter, the
Township shall not be liable for any later lawful withdrawal of such
permit.
§ 203-117 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-118
1:588
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 203-201. General interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
§ 203-202. Terms defined.
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABUT or ABUTTING — Areas of contiguous lots that share a common lot
line, except not including lots entirely separated by a street, public alley
open to traffic, or a perennial waterway. See definition of "adjacent."
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — One dwelling unit that is created within part
of a principal dwelling or above a vehicle garage on a residential lot.
A. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
B. "Used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building include the
words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."
C. "Should" means that it is strongly encouraged but is not mandatory.
"Shall" is always mandatory.
D. "Sale" shall also include rental.
E. Unless stated otherwise, the singular shall also regulate the plural, and
the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice-versa.
F. If a word or term is not defined by this chapter, but is defined in
§ 180-201, Definitions, of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance of Lower Paxton Township, then the § 180-201 definition
shall apply. If a word or term is not defined in this chapter nor
§ 180-201, then the word or term shall have its plain and ordinary
meaning within the context of the section. In such case, in case of a
dispute, a standard reference dictionary shall be consulted. If a term is
defined in both this chapter and in § 180-201, then the definition in this
chapter shall apply to this Zoning Ordinance. [Amended 11-20-2007
by Ord. No. 07-01]
G. The words "such as," "includes," "including," and "specifically" shall
provide examples. These examples shall not, by themselves, limit a
provision to the examples specifically mentioned if other examples
would otherwise comply with the provision.
H. The word "person" includes a firm, company, corporation, partnership,
trust, organization or association, as well as an individual.
§ 203-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:589
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (includes ACCESSORY BUILDING) — A
structure serving a purpose customarily incidental to and subordinate to
the use of the principal use and located on the same lot as the principal
use. Accessory structures include but are not limited to a household garage,
household storage shed, detached carport, a household swimming pool, or
an accessory storage building to a business use. An "accessory building" is
any accessory structure that meets the definition of a "building." A portion
of a principal building used for an accessory use shall not be considered an
accessory building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal
use.
ADJACENT — Two or more lots that share a common lot line or that are
separated only by a street or waterway from each other.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — A use that has over 10% of the total floor area
occupied by items for sale or rent that are books, films, magazines, video
tapes, coin- or token-operated films or video tapes, paraphernalia, novelties
or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by a clear
emphasis on matter depicting, displaying, describing or relating to
uncovered male or female genitals or "specified sexual activities." This shall
include but not be limited to materials that would be illegal to sell to
persons under age 18 under state law. If such items are within a separate
room, then the 10% standard shall apply to the floor area of such room.
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — A use including live
entertainment involving persons (which may include, but not be limited
to, waiters, waitresses, dancers, clerks, bartenders, contractors or others)
displaying uncovered male or female genitals or nude or almost nude female
breasts or engaging in simulated or actual "specified sexual activities" to
three or more persons and which is related to monetary compensation paid
to the person or entity operating the use or to persons involved in such
activity.
ADULT MOVIE THEATER — A use involving the on-site presentation to
three or more persons at one time of moving images distinguished by an
emphasis on depiction of "specified sexual activities" and that is related to
monetary compensation paid by the persons viewing such matter.
ADULT USE — This term shall mean adult bookstore, adult movie theater,
adult live entertainment facility/use or massage parlor. These terms shall be
distinct types of uses and shall not be allowed as part of any other use.
AFTER-HOURS CLUB — A use that permits the consumption of alcoholic
beverages by five or more unrelated persons between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. and that involves some form of monetary compensation paid
by such persons for the alcohol or for the use of the premises.
AIRPORT — An area and related support facilities used for the landing and
take-off of motorized aircraft that carry people. A "public airport" shall be
an airport that does not meet the definition of a "private airport." A private
airport shall be limited to a maximum of 15 total landings and take-offs
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:590
in any seven-day period and shall not be available for use by the general
public.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — A use involving 15 or more token- or coinoperated
entertainment machines, and where the machines are the
principal use of the property. This term shall not include an adult use.
ANIMAL CEMETERY — A place used for the burial of the remains of five or
more noncremated animals, other than customary burial of farm animals as
accessory to a livestock use.
ANTENNA — An exterior device or apparatus designed for cellular, digital,
telephone, radio, pager, commercial mobile radio, wireless internet,
television, microwave or any other wireless communications through
sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, including, without
limitation, omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or panel
antennas. Unless otherwise stated, this term shall not include "standard
antenna."
ANTENNA HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the base of the antenna
support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure, including
any antennas attached thereto or forming a part thereof. If the support
structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and
lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
ANTENNA, STANDARD — A device, partially or wholly exterior to a
building, that is used for receiving television or radio signals for use onsite,
or for transmitting short-wave or citizens band radio signals. See
"commercial communications antenna."
APARTMENT — See "dwelling types."
APOTHECARY — A use that involves a druggist, a pharmacist, a pharmacy,
or drugstore, including a medical marijuana dispensary.[Amended
4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 17-05]
APPLICANT — The definition in the State Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, shall apply.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — Coordinated and centrally managed rental
housing including self-contained units designed to provide a supportive
environment and to accommodate a relatively independent lifestyle. Such a
development may contain a limited number of supportive services, such as
meals, transportation, housekeeping, linen and organized social activities
for residents and their invited guests. Such a use shall primarily serve
persons 55 and older, persons with physical handicaps and/or the
developmentally disabled. Assisted living facilities shall be licensed as
personal care centers by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
AUTO REPAIR GARAGE — An area where repairs, improvements and
installation of parts and accessories for motor vehicles and/or boats are
conducted that involves work that is more intense in character than work
permitted under the definition of "auto service station." An auto repair
garage shall include, but not be limited to, a use that involves any of
the following work: major mechanical or body work, straightening of body
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:591
parts, painting, welding or rebuilding of transmissions. Any use permitted
as part of an "auto service station" is also permitted as part of an "auto
repair garage." This use shall not include activity meeting the definition of
a "truck stop." See requirements in § 203-402.
AUTO SERVICE STATION — An area where gasoline is dispensed into motor
vehicles, and where no repairs are conducted, except work that may be
conducted that is closely similar in character to the following: sale and
installation of oil, lubricants, batteries and belts and similar accessories and
safety and emission inspections, and sale of pre-packaged propane. This use
may include a "convenience store," provided that all of the requirements
for such use are also met. A business that maintains an accessory use of
providing motor fuel only for use by vehicles operated by that business shall
not, by itself, be considered to be an auto service station. See storage limits
and other requirements in § 203-402.
AUTO, BOAT AND/OR MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME SALES — This
use is any area, other than a street, used for the outdoor or indoor display,
sale or rental of two or more of the following in operable condition: motor
vehicles, recreation vehicles, boat trailers, farm machinery, motorcycles,
trucks, utility trailers, construction vehicles, boats, or transportable mobile/
manufactured homes in a livable condition. This use may include an auto
repair garage as an accessory use provided that all requirements of such
use are complied with. This use shall not include a mobile/manufactured
home park (unless the requirements for that use are also met) or a junkyard.
See requirements in § 203-402.
BASEMENT — An enclosed level of a building that is not a "story" and that
is partly underground.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST, INN — A dwelling and/or its accessory structure
which includes the rental of overnight sleeping accommodations and
bathroom access for temporary overnight guests, and that meets the
maximum number of overnight guests specified in § 203-402 for this use,
and which does not provide any cooking facilities for actual use by guests,
and which only provides meals to overnight guests, employees and residents
of the dwelling. Overnight stays shall be restricted to transient visitors to
the area, employees and their family. See requirements in § 203-402.
BETTING USE — A place used for lawful gambling activities, including,
but not limited to, off-track pari-mutual betting and any use of electronic
gambling devices. This term shall not regulate state lottery sales or lawful
"small games of chance."
BILLBOARD — A type of off-premises sign. See Article VII.
BOARDINGHOUSE (includes ROOMING HOUSE) —
A residential use in which:
Room(s) that do not meet the definition of a lawful dwelling unit
are rented for habitation; or
(1)
A.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:592
BUFFER YARD —
BUILDING — Any structure having a permanent roof and walls and that
is intended for the shelter, work area, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals, vehicles, equipment or materials and that has a total area under
roof of greater than 50 cubic feet. "Building" is interpreted as including
"or part thereof." See the separate definition of "structure." Any structure
involving a permanent roof (such as a covered porch or a carport) that
is attached to a principal building shall be considered to be part of that
principal building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage obtained by dividing the total
horizontal area covered by all buildings on a lot by the total lot area of a
lot. For the purposes of this definition, building coverage shall include all
buildings that are under a roof.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average of the
finished ground level adjoining a building at all exterior walls to the average
height of the highest roof surface. The finished ground level shall not slope
away from a building wall in such a manner that it is not possible to position
a ladder for fire rescue.
BUILDING WIDTH — The horizontal measurement between two vertical
structural walls that are generally parallel of one building, measured in one
direction that is most closely parallel to the required lot width. For attached
A dwelling unit includes greater than the permitted maximum
number of unrelated persons.
(2)
A boardinghouse shall not include a use that meets the definition of a
hotel, dormitory, motel, life care center, personal care center, bed-andbreakfast
inn, group home or nursing home.
B.
A college fraternity or sorority house used as a residence shall be
considered a type of boardinghouse.
C.
A boardinghouse may either involve or not involve the providing of
meals to residents but shall not include a restaurant open to the public
unless the use also meets the requirements for a restaurant.
D.
A boardinghouse shall primarily serve persons residing on site for five
or more consecutive days.
E.
A strip of land that:
(1) Separates one use from another use or feature; and
Is not occupied by any building, parking, outdoor storage or any
use other than open space or approved pedestrian pathways.
(2)
A.
A buffer yard may be a part of the minimum setback distance, but land
within an existing or future street right-of-way shall not be used to meet
a buffer yard requirement.
B.
C. See § 203-803.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:593
housing, this width shall be the width of each dwelling unit, measured from
the center of each interior party wall and from the outside of any exterior
wall. For detached buildings, this width shall be measured from the outside
of exterior walls.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building used for the conduct of the principal
use of a lot, and which is not an accessory building.
BULK RECYCLING CENTER — A use involving the bulk commercial
collection, separation and/or processing of types of waste materials found
in the typical household or office for some productive reuse, but which
does not involve the actual processing or recycling of hazardous or toxic
substances, and which does not primarily involve the processing of nonrecycled
solid waste, unless the use also meets the applicable requirements
for a solid waste transfer facility. This definition shall not include a
"junkyard."
CAMP — An area that includes facilities and structures for primarily
outdoor recreational activities by organized groups, and/or that involves
overnight stays within seasonal cabins or temporary tents by organized
groups and/or transient visitors to the area. This term shall only include
facilities that are primarily used during warmer months, and which have
a maximum impervious coverage of 5%. This term shall not include a
recreational vehicle campground.
CAMPGROUND — A development under single ownership of the land with
sites being rented, leased or sold through time-share for use for tents or
recreational vehicle sites for transient visitors to the area, and which may
include associated recreational facilities.
CAMPGROUND, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A type of campground that
involves persons temporarily living within recreational vehicles.
CEMETERY — A place used for the burial of two or more noncremated
humans.
CENTRAL COMMONS — A landscaped recreation area that is open to the
public and meets the requirements for a central commons under § 203-314
and which serves as a visual focus for surrounding uses.
CHAPTER, THIS — The Lower Paxton Township Zoning Ordinance,
including the Official Zoning Map, as amended.
CHRISTMAS TREE FARM or TREE FARM — A type of crop farming
involving the raising and harvesting of evergreen trees for commercial
purposes. This may include the retail sale during November and December
of trees that were produced on the premises.
CHURCH — See "place of worship."
CLEAR CUTTING — A logging method that removes all trees or the vast
majority of trees from a mostly wooded area.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER OR ANTENNA — A structure,
partially or wholly exterior to a building, used for transmitting or
retransmitting electronic signals through the air, and that does not meet the
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:594
definition of a "standard antenna." Commercial communications antennas
shall include, but are not limited to, antennas used for transmitting
commercial radio or television signals, or to receive such signals for a
cable system, or to retransmit wireless telecommunications. A commercial
communications tower shall be a structure over 30 feet in height that
is primarily intended to support one or more antenna. See standards in
§ 203-402. This term shall not include a "standard antenna."
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — The V, CN, CG, BC, ON and IN Districts.
COMMERCIAL USE — This term includes but is not limited to: retail sales,
offices, personal services, auto sales, auto repair garages and other uses of
a similar profit-making nonindustrial nature. The sale of goods or services
from a vehicle on a lot shall also be considered to be a commercial use.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A use that exists solely to provide primarily
indoor leisure and educational activities and programs and meeting space
to members of the surrounding community and/or certain age groups, and
which does not involve substantial use of machinery or noise-producing
equipment. The use also may include the preparation and/or provision of
meals to low-income elderly persons, as accessory to leisure activities. This
shall not include residential uses or a "treatment center."
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The latest adopted Comprehensive Plan of
Lower Paxton Township, as amended.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use listed as a conditional use under § 203-306,
which is only allowed after review by the Township Planning Commission
and approval by the Board of Supervisors, under § 203-117.
CONDOMINIUM — A set of individual dwelling units or other areas of
buildings each owned by an individual person(s) in fee simple, with such
owners assigned a proportionate interest in the remainder of the real estate
which is designated for common ownership, and which is created under
the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980 or Uniform Planned
Community Act of 1996, as amended.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — A legal agreement granted by a property
owner that strictly limits the types and amounts of development that may
take place on such property. Such easement shall restrict the original and
all subsequent property-owners, lessees and all other users of the land.
CONTIGUOUS LOTS — Adjacent parcels of land, including parcels
separated by a stream or road.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A use that primarily sells routine household
goods, groceries, prepared ready-to-eat foods and similar miscellaneous
items to the general public, but that is not primarily a restaurant, and
that includes a building with a floor area of less than 7,000 square feet. A
LATTICE TOWER — A commercial communications tower that is guyed
or self-supporting with an open steel-frame structure.
A.
MONOPOLE TOWER — A commercial communications tower that
involves a single shaft as its structural support.
B.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:595
convenience store involving the sale of gasoline shall be regulated as an
"auto service station."
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development that is not approved
under the open space development provisions of this chapter. (Note: This
type of development typically does not involve the preservation of
significant open space.)
CRAFTS OR ARTISAN'S STUDIO — A use involving the creation, display
and sale of arts and crafts, such as paintings, sculpture and fabric crafts.
The creation of arts and crafts may also be permitted within a home
occupation, provided the requirements for such use are met.
CREEK OR WATERWAY, PERENNIAL — A stream that has water flow during
the majority of the year and is mapped as a perennial stream or perennial
watercourse on United States Geological Survey mapping.[Amended
11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
CROP FARMING — The raising of products of the soil and accessory storage
of these products. This term shall include orchards, tree farms, wineries,
plant nurseries, raising of fish, greenhouses and keeping of animals in
numbers that are routinely accessory and incidental to a principal crop
farming use. See "livestock, raising of."
CURATIVE AMENDMENT — A process provided in the State Municipalities
Planning Code that authorizes certain types of challenges to a zoning
ordinance.
DAY-CARE CENTER, ADULT — A use providing supervised care and
assistance to persons who need such daily assistance because of their old
age or disabilities. This use shall not include persons who need oversight
because of behavior that is criminal, violent or related to substance abuse.
This use may involve occasional overnight stays but shall not primarily be a
residential use. The use shall involve typical stays of less than a total of 60
hours per week per person.
DAY-CARE, CHILD — A use involving the supervised care of children under
age 16 outside of the children's own home(s) primarily for periods of less
than 18 hours per child during the average day. This use may also include
educational programs that are supplementary to state-required education,
including "nursery school" or "Head Start" programs. See also the definition
of "adult day-care center."
The following three types of day care are permitted without regulation
by this chapter:
(1) Care of children by their own "relatives;"
Care of children within a place of worship during regularly
scheduled religious services; and
(2)
Care of one to three children within any dwelling unit, in addition
to children who are "relatives" of the caregiver.
(3)
A.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:596
DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units proposed on a lot divided by
the "lot area," unless otherwise stated.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and its
relevant bureaus.
DISTRICT (or ZONING DISTRICT) — A land area within the Township
within which certain uniform regulations and requirements apply under the
provisions of this chapter.
DORMITORY — A building used as living quarters for the exclusive use of
bona-fide full-time faculty or students of an accredited college or university
or primary or secondary school, and which is owned by and on the same lot
as such college, university or school.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME (or CHILD DAY CARE AS AN ACCESSORY
USE) —
A type of "day care" use that:
(a) Is accessory to and occurs within a dwelling unit; and
Provides care for four to six children at one time who are not
"relatives" of the primary caregiver.
(b)
(1)
(2) See § 203-403.
B.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A type of "day care" use that:
Provides care for between seven and 12 children at one time who
are not "relatives" of the primary caregiver;
(1)
(2) Provides care within a dwelling unit; and
(3) Is registered with the applicable state agency.*
C.
CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER —
A type of "day care" use that:
Provides care for seven or more children at any one time who
are not "relatives" of the primary caregiver;
(a)
(b) Does not occur within a dwelling unit;
(c) Does not meet the definition of a group day-care home; and
(d) Is registered with the applicable state agency.*
(1)
See § 203-402.
* Note: As of the adoption date of this chapter, such agency was
the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare. See also child
day-care facility requirements in the Uniform Construction
Code.
(2)
D.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:597
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE — An establishment where at least a portion of
patrons are served while the patrons remain in their motor vehicles.
DWELLING — A building used as non-transient living quarters, but not
including a boardinghouse, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home or
dormitory. A dwelling may include a use that meets the definition of a
"sectional home."
DWELLING TYPES — This chapter categorizes dwellings into the following
types:
CONVERSION APARTMENT — A new dwelling unit created within an
existing building within the standards of Article IV and where permitted
by Article III and meeting the floor area requirements of § 203-801.
A.
DUPLEX — A building that includes two apartment dwellings and which
is not a twin dwelling.
B.
APARTMENTS OR MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS — Two or more
dwelling units within a building that do not meet the definition of a
single-family detached dwelling, twin dwelling or townhouse/rowhouse.
The individual dwelling units may be leased or sold for condominium
ownership. If a building only includes two apartments, it shall be
considered to be a duplex.
C.
SECTIONAL OR "MODULAR" HOME — A type of dwelling that meets a
definition of any dwelling type and which was manufactured off site and
then assembled and completed on the site, and that was constructed
under the Township Construction Codes and not the federal
requirements for manufactured housing.
D.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — One dwelling unit in one
building accommodating only one family and having open yard areas on
all sides.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME —
For a dwelling constructed after 1977, this term shall mean a
dwelling that was constructed under the federal construction
requirements for manufactured housing under regulations of
the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
(a)
For a dwelling constructed before 1977, this term shall mean
a type of single-family detached dwelling that meets all of the
following requirements:
Is transportable in a single piece, or two substantial pieces
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of
again being separated for towing;
[1]
[2] Is designed for permanent occupancy;
(b)
(1)
E.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:598
DWELLING UNIT —
Arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except
for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations;
[3]
Is constructed so that it may be used with or without a
permanent foundation; and
[4]
[5] Is not a "recreation vehicle."
The terms "mobile home" and "manufactured home" have the
same meaning. This term is different from a "sectional home,"
which is defined above.
(c)
(d) See standards for "mobile/manufactured home" in § 203-402.
TWIN DWELLING UNIT — One dwelling unit accommodating one
family that is attached to and completely separated by a vertical
unpierced fire resistant wall to only one additional dwelling unit. One
side yard shall be adjacent to each dwelling unit. Each unit may or may
not be on a separate lot from the attached dwelling unit.
F.
TOWNHOUSE or ROWHOUSE — One dwelling unit that is attached
to two or more dwelling units, and with each dwelling unit being
completely separated from and attached to each other by unpierced
vertical fire resistant walls. Each dwelling unit shall have its own
outside access. Side yards shall be adjacent to each end unit. See
standards in § 203-402.
G.
A single habitable living unit occupied by only one "family." See
definition of "family."
A.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:599
EMERGENCY SERVICES STATION — A building for the housing of fire,
emergency medical or police equipment and for related activities. This use
may include housing for emergency personnel while on-call. See provisions
for this use in § 203-402.
EMPLOYEES — The highest number of workers (including both part-time
and full-time, both compensated and volunteer, and both employees and
contractors) present on a lot at any one time, other than clearly temporary
and occasional persons working on physical improvements to the site.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES or ESSENTIAL PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES —
Utility or municipal uses that are necessary for the preservation of the
public health and safety and that are routine, customary and appropriate
to the character of the area in which they are to be located. Essential
services shall include the following and closely similar facilities: sanitary
sewage lines, streets, water lines, electric distribution lines, stormwater
management facilities, cable television lines, natural gas distribution lines,
fire hydrants, streetlights and traffic signals. Essential services shall not
include a central sewage treatment plant, a solid waste disposal area or
facility, commercial communications towers, a power generating station,
septic or sludge disposal, offices, storage of trucks or equipment or bulk
storage of materials.[Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
FAMILY — One or more individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption
(including persons receiving formal foster care) or up to four unrelated
individuals who maintain a common household and live within one dwelling
unit. A family shall also expressly include numbers of unrelated persons
provided by the group home provision of § 203-402 residing within a
licensed group home, as defined herein. Through those provisions and
§ 203-111D(5), the Township's intent is to comply with the Federal Fair
Housing Act, as amended.
FARM — A lot used for the raising of agricultural or dairy products and/or
the raising of livestock or poultry for commercial purposes. This term may
include one dwelling unit, buildings used for the agricultural activities and
the storage of equipment used for the agricultural activities.
FENCE — A man-made barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation,
an enclosure or a visual barrier that is constructed of wood, chain-link
metal, vinyl or aluminum and/or plastic inserts. Man-made barriers
Each dwelling unit shall have:
Its own toilet, bath or shower, sink, sleeping and cooking facilities;
and
(1)
Separate access to the outside or to a common hallway or balcony
that connects to outside access at ground level.
(2)
B.
A dwelling unit shall not include two or more separate living areas
that are completely separated by interior walls so as to prevent interior
access from one living area to another, unless approved as "unit for care
of relative."
C.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:600
constructed principally of masonry, concrete, cinder block or similar
materials shall be considered a "wall." See § 203-403.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — An establishment primarily involved with
loans and monetary, not material, transactions and that has routine
interactions with the public.
FLOODPLAIN — See definitions of this term and related terms in the
Township Floodplain Regulations.
FLOOR AREA, TOTAL —
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes, and which does not involve any land development. See "timber
harvesting" in this section and § 203-402.
GARAGE SALE — The accessory use of any lot for the occasional sale
or auction of only common household goods and furniture and items of a
closely similar character. See § 203-403.
GLARE — A sensation of brightness within the visual field which causes
annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance, visibility and/or ability
to focus. See § 203-507.
GOVERNMENT FACILITY, OTHER THAN TOWNSHIP-OWNED — A use
owned by a government, government agency or government authority for
valid public health, public safety, or similar governmental purpose, and
which is not owned by Lower Paxton Township or an authority created
solely by Lower Paxton Township. This term shall not include uses listed
separately in the table of uses in Article III, such as "publicly owned
recreation." This term shall not include a prison.[Amended 6-7-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-01]
GROUP HOME — A dwelling unit operated by a responsible individual,
family or organization with a program to provide a supportive living
arrangement for individuals where special care is needed by the persons
served due to age, emotional, mental, developmental or physical disability.
This definition shall expressly include facilities for the supervised care
of persons with disabilities subject to protection under the Federal Fair
Housing Act, as amended. Group homes must be licensed where required by
The total floor space within a building(s) measured from the exterior
faces of exterior walls or from the center lines of walls separating
buildings.
A.
Floor area shall specifically include, but not be limited to:
(1) Fully enclosed porches; and
Basement or cellar or attic space that is potentially habitable and
has a minimum head clearance of at least 6.5 feet.
(2)
B.
C. Floor area shall not include unenclosed structures.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:601
any appropriate government agencies, and a copy of any such license must
be delivered to the Zoning Officer prior to the initiation of the use. A group
home typically involves an individual residing on the premises for more than
30 days at a time.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — A product or waste, or combination of
substances that because of the quantity, concentration, physical or
infectious characteristics, if not properly treated, stored, transported, used
or disposed of, or otherwise managed, would create a potential threat to
public health through direct or indirect introduction into ground water
resources and the subsurface environment which includes the soil and all
subsequent materials located below. Such hazardous material includes, but
is not limited to materials which are included on the latest edition of one or
more of the following lists:
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES, EXTREMELY — Hazardous substances
included on the list of "Extremely Hazardous Substances" in 29 Code of
Federal Regulations, Part 355, or its successor provisions and that are
stored or used in quantities above the threshold reportable limits in such
regulations.
HEIGHT — See "building height." To measure the height of any structure
that is not a building, it shall be the total vertical distance from the average
Group homes shall be subject to the same limitations and regulations
by the Township as the type of dwelling unit they occupy.
A.
It is the express intent of the Township to comply with all provisions
of the Federal Fair Housing Act, as amended, and regulations
promulgated thereunder, in the construction of this term.
B.
C. A group home shall not include a "treatment center."
See standards in § 203-402.
* NOTE: The Federal Fair Housing Act Amendments defined
"handicap" as follows: "1) a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more of such person's major life
activities, 2) a record of having such an impairment, or 3) being
regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not
include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled
substance as defined in Section 802 of Title 21." This definition
was subsequently adjusted by Section 512 of the Americans with
Disabilities Act to address certain situations related to substance
abuse treatment.
D.
"Hazardous substances" as defined pursuant to Section 311 of the
Federal Clean Water Act, or its successor provisions.
A.
"Hazardous substances" as defined pursuant to the Federal
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act, or its successor provisions.
B.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:602
elevation of the proposed ground level to the highest point of a structure.
For height of signs, see Article VII, entitled "Signs."
HELIPORT — An area used for the take-off and landing of helicopters, and
related support facilities. A private heliport shall be limited to 15 total takeoffs
and landings in any seven-day period, and which is not open to the
general public. A public heliport is one that does not meet the definition of
a private heliport.
HOME OCCUPATION — A routine, accessory and customary nonresidential
use conducted within or administered from a portion of a dwelling or its
permitted accessory building and that meets all of the home occupation
requirements of § 203-403. A minor home occupation shall be a home
occupation that meets the additional requirements for a minor home
occupation, as stated in § 203-403. The term minor home occupation
includes but is not limited to, the term "no-impact home occupation," as
defined in the State Municipalities Planning Code. A major home occupation
shall be a home occupation that does not meet the requirements for a minor
home occupation.
Note: In most cases, under § 203-306, a minor home occupation is
permitted by right, while a major home occupation typically needs special
exception approval from the Zoning Hearing Board.
HOSPITAL — A use involving the diagnosis, treatment or other medical
care of humans that includes, but is not limited to, care requiring stays
overnight. A medical care use that does not involve any stays overnight shall
be considered an "office." A hospital may involve care and rehabilitation for
medical, dental or mental health, but shall not primarily include housing
or treatment of the criminally insane or persons actively serving an official
sentence after being convicted of a felony. A hospital may also involve
medical research and training for health care professionals.
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or buildings including rooms rented out
to persons as clearly transient and temporary living quarters. Any such
use that customarily involves the housing of persons for periods of time
longer than 90 days shall be considered a "boardinghouse" and shall meet
the requirements of that use. See "bed-and-breakfast" use. A hotel or motel
may also include a restaurant, meeting rooms, nightclub, newsstand,
amusement arcade, gift shop, swim club, exercise facilities, tavern and
similar customary accessory amenities, and provided any such use shall
only be allowed as a principal use of the property if such use is allowed by
the applicable district regulations.
HUNTING AND FISHING CLUB — Land owned by an organized group of
persons formed as a club that is used for hunting, fishing, and similar types
of passive recreation, and which involves no buildings except those for the
recreational, lodging, eating and sanitary facilities for members and invited
guests and routinely accessory storage buildings.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The percentage that results from dividing
the land area on a lot covered by all "impervious surfaces" by the total
land area of the lot. Impervious surfaces shall be defined as areas covered
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:603
by buildings, paving or concrete, or other man-made surfaces that have
a runoff coefficient of 0.85 or greater. Areas of stone regularly used for
vehicle parking and movement shall be considered impervious for the
purposes of restricting impervious coverage under this chapter.
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT — The LI and GI Zoning Districts.
JUNK —
JUNK VEHICLE —
For a townhouse development, the maximum impervious coverage may
be measured as a maximum for the entire development after
completion, after the deletion of street rights-of-way (or cartway where
a street right-of-way where not exist), as opposed to regulating each
individual townhouse lot.
A.
Any discarded, unusable, scrap or abandoned man-made or manprocessed
material or articles stored outside of a completely enclosed
building and which covers over 200 square feet of land area.
A.
Examples of junk include: scrap metal, used furniture, used appliances,
used motor vehicle parts, worn-out machinery and equipment, used
containers, and scrap building materials.
B.
Junk shall not include:
Solid waste temporarily stored in an appropriate container that is
routinely awaiting imminent collection and proper disposal;
(1)
(2) Toxic substances;
(3) Yard waste or tree trunks;
Items clearly awaiting imminent recycling at an appropriate
location;
(4)
Building materials awaiting imminent use at an on-going building;
or
(5)
(6) "Clean fill" as defined by state environmental regulations.
C.
Includes any vehicle or trailer that meets any of the following
conditions:
Cannot be moved under its own power, in regards to a vehicle
designed to move under its own power, other than a vehicle clearly
needing only minor repairs;
(1)
(2) Cannot be towed, in regards to a trailer designed to be towed;
(3) Has been demolished beyond repair;
(4) Has been separated from its axles, engine, body or chassis; and/or
A.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:604
JUNKYARD —
KENNEL — The keeping of a greater number of dogs and/or cats than are
permitted under the "pets, keeping of" provisions of this chapter, and which
may also include temporary keeping of other household pets. In addition, in
any case, if more than 10 dogs age six months or older are kept, it shall be
considered a kennel.
LANDOWNER — The owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of a written, signed and active option or contract to
purchase or a person leasing the property (if authorized under the lease to
exercise the right of the landowner) or authorized officers of a partnership
or corporation that is a "landowner."
LIGHTING, DIFFUSED — Illumination that passes from the source through
a translucent cover or shade.
LIVESTOCK OR POULTRY, INTENSIVE RAISING OF —
Includes only the axle, engine, body parts and/or chassis, separated
from the remainder of the vehicle.
(5)
See the definition of "unlicensed vehicle" and the regulations for such
in the Property Maintenance Code.
B.
Land or a structure used for the collection, storage, dismantling,
processing and/or sale, other than within a completely enclosed
building, of material of one or more of the following types:
(1) "Junk." (see definition) covering more than 1% of the lot area.
Two or more "junk vehicles" that are partly or fully visible from an
exterior lot line, dwelling and/or public street. This shall not apply
to such vehicles stored as part of an auto repair garage or auto
service station within the requirements of § 203-402.
(2)
One or more mobile/manufactured homes that are not in a
habitable condition.
(3)
A.
Junk stored within a completely enclosed building for business
purposes shall be considered a warehouse.
B.
A junkyard specifically shall include but not be limited to a metal scrap
yard or auto salvage yard. See Chapter 119 of the Codified Ordinances
of Lower Paxton Township. See the Township Property Maintenance
Code that regulates unlicensed and inoperable vehicles on lots and the
State Vehicle Code for unlicensed vehicles parked on a street.
C.
This term shall mean a raising of livestock or poultry use involving an
average of two or more "animal equivalent units" (see definition below)
of live weight per acre of livestock or poultry, on an annualized basis.
A.
An animal equivalent unit (AEU) is 1,000 pounds live weight of livestock
or poultry animals, regardless of the actual number of individual
animals comprising the unit. This weight is calculated on an annualized
B.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:605
LIVESTOCK OR POULTRY, RAISING OF — The raising and keeping of
livestock, poultry or insects beyond the number and type allowed under
the "keeping of pets" section of § 203-403 and beyond what is customarily
incidental to a principal "crop farming" use. Raising of livestock or poultry
shall not include a slaughterhouse nor a stockyard used for the housing of
animals awaiting slaughter.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit. The term "lot" shall mean a lot of record according to official county
records. If lands are separated by a street, then each side of the street shall
be considered a separate lot. The area and depth of a lot shall be measured
to the legal right-of-way line of the street, and all lots shall front on public
or private streets.
LOT AREA — The horizontal land area contained within the lot lines of a
lot (measured in acres or square feet). For the purposes of determining
compliance with the minimum lot area, the following shall be excluded:
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot. Wherever a property line
borders a public street, for the purposes of determining setbacks, the lot
line shall be considered to be the street right-of-way line that will exist at
the time of completion of a subdivision or development.
basis. These units shall be calculated as provided under the State
Nutrient Management Act and accompanying regulations. Note: the
provisions of this chapter are based upon acreage of a lot, and not
acreage that is available for disposal of wastes. (Note: Two animal
equivalent units per acre would be roughly equal to 1.7 dairy cattle, 6.7
swine, 10 sheep, 500 poultry or 400 rabbits per acre.)
Areas within the "existing" legal rights-of-way of: 1) any proposed
or existing public streets or alleys; or 2) any proposed or existing
commonly maintained private streets that serve more than one lot.
(Note: Other sections of this chapter, such as townhouse development,
may specifically permit proposed streets to be included in determining
density for a specific use.)
A.
Areas that are currently or will be required to be dedicated as common
or preserved open space on a separate lot. (Note: Other sections of
this chapter, such as open space development, may specifically permit
proposed common open spaces to be included in determining density
for a specific use.)
B.
Features required to be excluded from "lot area" under Article III of this
chapter.
C.
FRONT LOT LINE (STREET LINE) — A lot line separating the lot
from the existing or proposed street right-of-way. For a corner lot, see
§ 203-803B.
A.
REAR LOT LINE — Any lot line which is parallel to or within 45° of
being parallel to a front street right-of-way line. In the case of a lot
B.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:606
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
at the minimum prescribed front yard setback line, unless otherwise stated.
In the event of a curved lot line, such lot width at the minimum prescribed
front yard setback line shall be measured along the curve. Where buildings
are permitted to be attached, the lot width shall be measured from the
center of the party wall. Where a pie-shaped lot fronts upon a cul-de-sac,
the minimum lot width may be reduced to 75% of the width that would
otherwise be required.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more intersecting streets which
has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection of right-of-way
lines of two streets.
MASSAGE PARLOR — A type of "adult use" that is an establishment that
meets all of the following criteria:
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — An area of land or building routinely used by
a recreational, civic, social, fraternal, religious, political or labor union
association of persons for meetings and routine socializing and recreation
that is limited to members and their occasional guests, and persons
specifically invited to special celebrations, but which is not routinely open
to members of the general public and which is not primarily operated as a
for-profit business.
having no street frontage, or a lot of an odd shape, or a flag lot, only the
one lot line furthest from any street shall be considered a rear lot line.
Every lot shall have a rear yard.
C. SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
Massages are conducted involving one person using their hands and/or
a mechanical device on another person below the waist, in return for
monetary compensation, and which does not involve persons who are
related to each other.
A.
The use does not involve a person licensed or certified by the State
as a health care professional or a massage therapist certified by a
recognized professional organization that requires a minimum of 80
hours of professional training. Massage therapy by a certified
professional shall be considered "personal service."
B.
The massages are not conducted within a licensed hospital or nursing
home or an office of a medical doctor or chiropractor or as an incidental
accessory use to a permitted exercise club or high school or college
athletic program.
C.
D. The massages are conducted within private or semi-private rooms.
This use shall not include a target range for outdoor shooting of
firearms, boardinghouse, tavern, restaurant or retail sales unless that
particular use is permitted in that district and the requirements of that
use are met.
A.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:607
MINERAL EXTRACTION — The removal from the surface or beneath the
surface of the land of bulk mineral resources using significant machinery.
This use also includes accessory stockpiling and processing of mineral
resources. "Mineral extraction" includes but is not limited to the extraction
of sand, gravel, topsoil, limestone, sandstone, oil, coal, clay, shale, and
iron ore. The routine movement of and replacement of topsoil during
construction shall not by itself be considered to be mineral extraction.
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME — See under "dwelling types."
MOBILE/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A lot under single ownership
which includes two or more mobile/manufactured homes for residential
use. The individual manufactured homes may be individually owned. A
development of mobile/manufactured homes that is subdivided into
individual lots shall be regulated in the same manner as a subdivision of
site-built homes and shall not be considered to be a "mobile home park."
See § 203-402.
MOTOR VEHICLE — An automobile, recreational vehicle, truck, bus,
motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle or similar means of transportation designed
to operate carry persons or cargo on roads and that is powered by
mechanized means.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE or STATE PLANNING CODE — The
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as reenacted and amended.47
NIGHTCLUB — An establishment that offers amplified live music
performances or amplified music for dancing after 12:00 midnight, sells
alcoholic beverages primarily for on-site consumption, includes hours open
to patrons after 12:00 midnight, and has a building capacity of over 200
persons.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which does not conform with the minimum
lot width or area dimensions specified for the district where such lot is
situated, but was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter, or amendments hereinafter enacted.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
that does not comply with the applicable lot coverage, dimensional and
other provisions in this chapter, as amended, where such structure lawfully
existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or applicable
amendment(s). Such nonconforming structures include but are not limited
to signs. See § 203-805.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter
or amendment(s), where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the
enactment of this chapter or applicable amendment(s). A use granted by
variance is not a nonconforming use. See § 203-805.
See § 203-402. See also "after-hours club" and "hunting and fishing
clubs," which are distinct uses.
B.
47.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:608
NURSING HOME — A facility licensed by the State for the housing and
intermediate or fully skilled nursing care of three or more persons. See
§ 203-402.
OFFICE — A use that involves administrative, clerical, financial,
governmental or professional operations and operations of a similar
character. This use shall include neither retail nor industrial uses, but may
include business offices, medical offices, laboratories, photographic studios,
and/or television or radio broadcasting studios.
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT — An optional type of residential
development that involves the permanent preservation of preserved open
space, and that places dwellings on the most suitable portions of a tract,
on lots that are typically smaller than would otherwise be allowed with
conventional development. See § 203-311.
OPEN SPACE, PRESERVED OR COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land
within a tract which meets all of the following standards:
Is designed, intended and suitable for active or passive recreation by
residents of a development or the general public,
A.
Is covered by a system that ensures perpetual maintenance, if not
intended to be publicly owned,
B.
Will be deeded to the Township and/or preserved by a deed restriction
or conservation easement to permanently prevent uses of land other
than "preserved open space" and noncommercial recreation, and
C.
Does not use any of the following areas to meet minimum preserved
open space requirements:
(1) Existing street rights-of-way;
(2) Vehicle streets or driveways providing access to other lots;
Land beneath building(s) or land within 20 feet of a building (other
than accessory buildings and pools clearly intended for
noncommercial recreation and other than agricultural buildings
and a farmstead which are permitted within land approved by the
Township for agricultural preservation);
(3)
Off-street parking (other than that clearly intended for
noncommercial recreation);
(4)
(5) Area(s) needed to meet a requirement for an individual lot;
For land intended to be open to the public, that does not have
provisions for entry with a fifteen-foot minimum width by
pedestrians from a street open to the public or from adjacent
preserved open space that has access to such a street;
(6)
D.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:609
PA — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PARKING — Off-street parking and aisles for vehicle movement, unless
otherwise stated.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, or its
successor, and its subparts.
PERMITTED BY RIGHT USES — Allowed uses in which zoning matters
may be approved by the Zoning Officer, provided the application complies
with all requirements of this chapter. A "nonconforming use" shall not be
considered to be a permitted by right use, a special exception use or a
conditional use.
PERSONAL CARE HOME OR CENTER — "Assisted living facility."
PERSONAL SERVICE — An establishment that provides a service oriented
to personal needs of the general public and which does not involve primarily
retail or wholesale sales or services to businesses. Personal services include
barber and beauty shops, photography studios, travel agency, shoe repair
shops, household appliance repair shops, and other similar establishments,
but shall not include any "adult uses," as herein defined.
PETS, KEEPING OF — The keeping of domesticated animals of types that
are normally considered to be kept in conjunction with a dwelling for the
pleasures of the resident family. This shall include dogs, cats, small birds,
gerbils, rabbits and other animals commonly sold in retail pet shops. See
§ 203-403.
Land that includes a stormwater detention basin, except for a basin
or portions of a basin that the applicant proves to the satisfaction
of the Board of Supervisors would:
Be reasonably safe and useful for active or passive recreation
during the vast majority of weather conditions; or
(a)
(b) Serve as a scenic asset resembling a natural pond;
(7)
Portions of land that have a width of less than 50 feet, provided that
such restriction shall not apply to a developed park in a traditional
neighborhood development;
(8)
Areas that are under water during normal weather conditions,
except that ponds, lakes and streams may count as common open
space if they are improved for recreation purposes in a traditional
neighborhood development;
(9)
Areas that are under electric transmission lines that are designed
for a capacity of 35 kilovolts or greater.
(10)
Each square foot of preserved open space that is of 25% or greater
slopes and each square foot within the 100-year floodplain shall only
count as 1/2 square foot for the purposes of determining the amount of
preserved open space.
E.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:610
PICNIC GROVE, COMMERCIAL — An area of open space and pavilions that
is not publicly owned and is used for group picnics and related outdoor
recreation, and which is used on a commercial basis.
PLACES OF WORSHIP — Buildings, synagogues, churches, religious
retreats, monasteries, seminaries and shrines used primarily for religious
and/or spiritual worship for more than 10 persons at a time and that are
operated for nonprofit and noncommercial purposes. If a religious use is
primarily residential in nature, it shall be regulated under the appropriate
"dwelling type." See standards in § 203-402.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A "principal structure" which is also a "building."
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — The structure in which the principal use of a
lot is conducted. Any structure that is physically attached to a principal
structure shall be considered part of that principal structure.
PRINCIPAL USE — A dominant use(s) or main use on a lot, as opposed to an
accessory use.
PRISON — A correctional institution within which persons are required to
inhabit by criminal court actions or as the result of a criminal arrest.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. (See definition in Section 107 of such law.)
PUBLICLY OWNED RECREATION — Leisure facilities owned, operated or
maintained by governmental entities for use by the general public. "Publicly
owned recreation" is a distinct use from "indoor recreation" or "outdoor
recreation."
RECREATION — The offering of leisure-time activities to unrelated persons.
This term shall not include any "adult use." For the purposes of this chapter,
recreation facilities shall be permitted by right as an accessory use when
clearly limited to residents of a development and their occasional invited
guests.
RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER — A use for collection and temporary
storage of more than 500 pounds of common household materials for
recycling, but that does not involve processing or recycling other than
routine sorting, baling, and weighing of materials. This term shall not
include the indoor storage of less than 500 pounds of household recyclables
Indoor recreation. A type of "recreation" use that: 1) does not meet the
definition of Outdoor Recreation; and 2) is used principally for active or
passive recreation, such as a bowling alley, roller skating, ice skating,
commercial batting practice use, and similar uses. This term shall not
include any use listed separately as a distinct use by § 203-306.
A.
OUTDOOR RECREATION — A type of "recreation" use that: 1) has a
total building coverage of less than 15%; and 2) is used principally for
active or passive recreation, such as a golf driving range, miniature golf
course, amusement park and similar uses. This term shall not include
any use listed separately as a distinct use by § 203-306, such as a
firearms target range.
B.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:611
and their customary collection, which is a permitted by right accessory use
in all zoning districts, without additional regulations. A recycling collection
center is also a permitted by right accessory use to a public or private
primary or secondary school, a place of worship, a Township-owned use, or
an emergency services station.
RELATED or RELATIVE — Persons who are related by blood, marriage,
adoption or formal foster relationship to result in one of the following
relationships: spouse, brother, sister, parent, child, grandparent, greatgrandparent,
grandchild, great-grandchild, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew, first
cousin, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, or parent-in-law. This term specifically
shall not include relationships such as second, third, or more distant
cousins. See definition of "dwelling unit."[Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-01]
REPAIR SERVICE — Shops for the repair of appliances, watches, guns,
bicycles and other household items.
RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (includes "BUILDING") OR USE
— A use or structure that is clearly accessory, customary and incidental to a
principal residential use on a lot, including the following uses and uses that
are very similar in nature: garage (household), carport, tennis court, garage
sale, basketball backboard, household swimming pool, gazebo, storage
shed, greenhouse, children's playhouse or children's play equipment. No
business shall be conducted in a household garage or storage shed that is
accessory to a dwelling, except as may be allowed as a home occupation.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT(S) — The CO, AR, R-1, R-2 and R-3 and R-C Zoning
Districts. When the TND or OSR Overlay Districts are applied over one of
these residential districts, it shall also be defined as a residential district,
except for areas of the TND that were approved for business uses.
RESIDENTIAL LOT LINES — The lot line of a lot that:
RESTAURANT —
RETAIL STORE — A use in which merchandise is sold or rented to the
general public, but not including the following: sales of motor vehicles
or boats, adult movie theater, adult bookstore, manufacturing, tavern, car
Contains an existing primarily residential use on a lot of less than 10
acres; or
A.
B. Is undeveloped and zoned as a residential district.
An establishment that sells ready-to-consume food or drink and that
routinely involves the consumption of at least a portion of such food on
the premises.
A.
A restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic beverages.
However, if such sale is a primary or substantial portion of the total
trade, the requirements of a "tavern" or nightclub as applicable must
be met.
B.
C. See "drive-through service" in this section.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:612
wash, auto service station, auto repair garage, convenience store, or any
restaurant.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — An area or strip of land which is reserved for use by or as
a street or by one or more utilities or by the public or by others. The term
"right-of-way" by itself shall mean the street right-of-way, unless another
meaning is otherwise stated or clearly implied from the context in which it
is used.
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boardinghouse."
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PRIMARY OR SECONDARY SCHOOL — An
educational institution primarily for persons between the ages of five and 19
that primarily provides state-required or largely state-funded educational
programs. This term shall not include "trade schools."
SCREENING — Year-round plant material of substantial height and density
designed to provide a buffer. See requirements in § 203-803D.
SELF-STORAGE DEVELOPMENT — A building or group of buildings divided
into individual separate access units which are rented or leased for the
storage of personal and small business property.
SETBACK LINE — A line separating a "yard" from the area within which a
building or use is allowed.
SEWAGE SERVICE, CENTRAL — Sanitary sewage service to a building by a
Township-approved sewage collection and disposal system that serves five
or more lots, and which includes an appropriate mechanism to ensure longterm
professional operation and maintenance of the system.
SEWAGE SERVICE, ON-LOT — Sanitary sewage service to a building that
does not meet the definition of central sewage service, such as, but not
limited to, an individual on-lot septic system.
SEWAGE SERVICE, PUBLIC — Central sanitary sewage service by a system
owned and/or operated by a municipality or a municipal authority.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area required to be kept free of certain visual
obstructions to traffic. See § 203-803.
SIGN — The definition in § 203-704 shall apply.
SIGN AREA — The definition in § 203-704 shall apply.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — The definition in § 203-704 shall apply.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING OR LEGAL — The official
established street right-of-way that either the Township or the state
presently owns or holds another interest in the land, or will own after
the completion of any proposed subdivision, land development or
development of a use under this chapter, whether by dedication or
otherwise.
A.
See "right-of-way, future or ultimate" in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
B.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:613
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one or
more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is separate
and distinct from that of any abutting or adjoining lot.
SITE ALTERATIONS — This term shall include one or more of the following
activities:
SOLID WASTE LANDFILL — An area where municipal solid waste and
similar materials is deposited on land, compacted, covered with soil and
then compacted again, and which has a permit from DEP to operate as a
sanitary landfill.
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY — Land or structures where solid
waste is received and temporarily stored, at a location other than the
site where it was generated, and which facilitates the bulk transfer of
accumulated solid waste to a facility for further processing or disposal.
Such facility may or may not involve the separation of recyclables from solid
waste. Such facility shall not include a junkyard, leaf composting, clean fill,
or septage or sludge application.
SOLID WASTE-TO-ENERGY FACILITY — An area where municipal solid
waste and similar materials are incinerated or otherwise processed to result
in usable energy for off-site use.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use for which the Zoning Hearing Board may
grant permission following a public hearing and findings of fact consistent
with this chapter, provided the use complies with the conditions and
standards required by this chapter. See § 203-116.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — One or more of the following:
SQUARE — An area of landscaped common open space within a
neighborhood design option development that abuts streets on two or more
sides and that includes decorative lighting and may include non-commercial
recreation areas.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its agencies.
STORY — A level of a building routinely accessible to humans having an
average vertical clearance from floor to ceiling of 6.5 feet or greater shall
be considered a full story, except as follows: If the floor of a basement level
is more than six feet below the finished grade level for more than 50% of
the total building perimeter, it shall not be regulated as a story. Any level of
Filling of lakes, ponds, marshes or floodplains or alteration of
watercourses;
A.
Clearing and regrading of more than 1/2 acre, other than selective
thinning of existing vegetation or trees.
B.
A. Human male genitals in a visible state of sexual stimulation.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral sex or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals. See definition of
"adult use."
C.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:614
a building having an average vertical clearance from floor to ceiling of less
than 6.5 feet shall be considered a "half-story."
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which provides the principal
means of vehicle access to three or more lots or that is an expressway, but
not including an alley or a driveway. The terms "street," "highway," and
"road" have the same meaning and are used interchangeably.
STREET CLASSIFICATION — The functional classification of streets, roads,
and highways that is provided in the Township Comprehensive Plan shall
apply. For the purposes of this chapter, such classifications may be revised
by written resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having a stationary location on, below
or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land. Any structure shall be
subject to the principal or accessory setbacks of this chapter, as applicable,
unless specifically exempted or unless a specific setback is established for
that particular type of structure by this chapter. For the purposes of this
chapter, utility poles, stormwater basins, wells, paving, and septic systems
shall not be considered structures, and shall not be subject to minimum
zoning setback requirements unless stated otherwise.
SUBDIVISION — The definition in the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance shall apply.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OR SUBDIVISION AND LAND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE — The Lower Paxton Township Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, as amended.48
SWIMMING POOL, HOUSEHOLD OR PRIVATE — A man-made area with
walls of man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches
deep for bathing or swimming and that is intended to serve the residents of
only one dwelling unit and their occasional guests. See § 203-403.
SWIMMING POOL, NONHOUSEHOLD — A man-made area with walls of
man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches deep for
bathing or swimming and that does not meet the definition of a "household"
swimming pool.
TAVERN — A place where alcoholic beverages are served as a primary or
substantial portion of the total trade and which does not meet the definition
of an "after-hours club" or a "nightclub." The sale of food may also occur.
See the definition of "restaurant."
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
motion pictures or theatrical or performing arts productions as a principal
use, but not including an outdoor drive-in theater or adult movie theater.
TIMBER HARVESTING (includes LOGGING) — The process of cutting down
trees and removing logs from the forest for the primary purpose of sale
or commercial processing into wood products. See further definitions and
regulations in Chapter 189 of the Township's Codified Ordinances.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:615
TIRE STORAGE, BULK — The storage of more than 20 used tires on a lot,
except that a tire retail store may include the temporary storage of up to
100 used tires awaiting disposal on a lot without being regulated by this
term. See "outdoor storage" in § 203-403.
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling types."
TOWNSHIP — Lower Paxton Township, Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
TRADE/HOBBY SCHOOL OR TRADE SCHOOL —
TRADESPERSON — A person involved with building trades, such as, but
not limited to: plumbing, electrical work, building construction, building
remodeling, and roofing.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — An optional process, authorized
under § 203-313, that allows the residential density that would otherwise be
allowed on one tract to be transferred to increase the density on another
tract. The developer of the second tract compensates the owner of the first
tract for preserving their land, based upon an agreement negotiated and
accepted by both parties.
TREATMENT CENTER —
UNIT FOR CARE OF RELATIVE — A dwelling unit that:
A facility that:
Is primarily intended for education of a work-related skill or craft
or a hobby; and
(1)
Does not primarily provide state-required education to persons
under age 16.
(2)
A.
Examples include a dancing school, martial arts school, cosmetology
school, or ceramics school.
B.
A use (other than a prison or a hospital) providing housing for three or
more unrelated persons who need specialized housing, treatment and/
or counseling because of:
(1) Criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal halfway house;
Current addiction to a controlled substance that was used in an
illegal manner or alcohol; and/or
(2)
A type of mental illness or other behavior that causes a person to
be a threat to the physical safety of others.
(3)
A.
See standards in § 203-402. Also, a group home that exceeds the
number of residents allowed by this chapter within a Group Home shall
be regulated as a Treatment Center, unless approved otherwise under
§ 203-111D.
B.
Is especially created for and limited to occupancy by a close "relative"
of the permanent residents of the principal dwelling unit;
A.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:616
UNLICENSED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or trailer that does not
display a license plate with a current registration sticker or does not have a
valid State safety inspection sticker. The requirement for a safety inspection
sticker shall not apply to vehicles (such as licensed antique cars and trailers
of less than 3,000 pounds aggregate gross vehicle weight) for which state
regulations do not require such a sticker. The term shall not include a
motor vehicle displaying an inspection sticker that expired less than 30 days
previously. See the regulations of the Property Maintenance Code.
USE — The purpose, activity, occupation, business or operation for which
land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
Uses specifically include but are not limited to the following: activity within
a structure, activity outside of a structure, any structure, recreational
vehicle storage, or parking of commercial vehicles on a lot.
VARIANCE — The granting of specific permission by the Zoning Hearing
Board to use, construct, expand, or alter land or structures in such a way
that compliance is not required with a specific requirement of this chapter.
Any variance shall only be granted within the limitations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code. See § 203-111.
WALL — See "fence."
WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings primarily used for the
indoor storage, transfer, and distribution of products and materials, but not
including retail uses or a truck terminal, unless such uses are specifically
permitted in that zoning district.
WATER SERVICE, CENTRAL — Water supply service to a building by a
Township-approved water supply system that serves 20 or more lots, and
which includes an appropriate mechanism to ensure long-term professional
operation and maintenance of the system.
WATER SERVICE, ON-LOT — Water supply service to a building that does
not meet the definition of "central water service," such as, but not limited
to, an individual on-lot well.
WATER SERVICE, PUBLIC — Central water service by a system owned and/
or operated by a municipality or a municipal authority.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WETLANDS — An area of land and/or water meeting one or more definitions
of a "wetland" under federal and/or Pennsylvania law and/or regulations.
(Note: Wetlands are generally delineated by a specialist based upon an
on-site investigation of vegetation, soils and hydrologic conditions. Hydric
soils, as mapped by the United States Natural Resource Conservation
Is necessary to provide needed care and supervision to such relative;
and
B.
C. Meets the requirements for such use in § 203-403.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:617
Service, provide an initial indicator of whether wetlands may be
present.)[Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
YARD — An open area unobstructed from the ground to the sky that is
not permitted to be covered by buildings and principal structures and that
is on the same lot as the subject structure or use. A minimum yard is
also known as a minimum setback. Each required yard shall be measured
inward from the abutting "lot line" or existing street right-of-way (as exists
after completion of any subdivision or land development). Regulations of
each district prohibit principal and accessory structures within the specified
minimum yards. If the Township requires the delineation of a "future or
ultimate" right-of-way along a public street or highway, then the minimum
yards shall be measured from such future or ultimate right-of-way line, as
opposed to the existing right-of-way line.[Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-01]
YARD, FRONT or FRONT SETBACK — A "yard" measured a distance
measured from and running parallel to the front lot line or street rightof-
way line (as exists after the completion of any subdivision or land
development). Such yard shall extend the full width of the lot from side lot
line to side lot line. If the Township requires the delineation of a "future or
ultimate" right-of-way along a public street or highway, then the minimum
yards shall be measured from such future or ultimate right-of-way line, as
opposed to the existing right-of-way line.[Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-01]
YARD, REAR or REAR SETBACK —
A. See yard/setback exceptions in § 203-803B.
Private streets. For a building setback measured from a private street,
the setback shall be measured from the existing street right-of-way/
easement or 15 feet from the center of the cartway, whichever is more
restrictive.
B.
The front yard shall be on a side that faces towards a public street,
whenever one public street abuts the lot. If a lot abuts two streets, the
front yard shall be whichever side is the predominant front yard for
neighboring properties. If no side is predominant, then the applicant
may choose which is the front yard.
A.
B. See § 203-803 concerning yards along corner lots.
No accessory or principal structure shall extend into the required front
yard, except as provided in this chapter.
C.
D. Every lot shall include at least one front lot line.
A "yard" extending the full width of the lot and which is measured
from along the rear line and which establishes the minimum setback
for the subject structure, and which stretches between the side lot lines
parallel to the rear lot line.
A.
§ 203-202 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-202
1:618
YARD, SIDE or SIDE SETBACK —
YIELD PLAN — A Plan required to be submitted to the Township by the
applicant under certain provisions of this chapter. The yield plan shall
accurately show the maximum number of dwelling units that would be
possible under current Township ordinances if certain optional development
provisions would not be used, and instead the provisions for conventional
development under the current zoning district would be used. A yield plan
shall be completed to an accurate scale, including accurately showing the
existing feature map information. The yield plan shall show potential lots,
streets, and retention/detention pond locations.
ZONING MAP — The Official Zoning Map of Lower Paxton Township,
Dauphin County, Pennsylvania.
ZONING OFFICER — The person charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, and any officially designated assistant.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Lower Paxton Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.
A principal building shall not extend into the required rear yard setback
for a principal building, and an accessory structure shall not extend into
the required rear yard for an accessory structure, except as provided in
this chapter.
B.
C. Every lot shall include a rear lot line and a rear yard.
A "yard" which establishes the minimum setback for the closest portion
of the subject structure, and which is measured from along the entire
length of the side lot line, and which extends from the front setback line
to the rear lot line.
A.
A structure shall not extend into the applicable minimum side yard
setback, except as provided for in this chapter.
B.
C. See "corner lot" provisions in § 203-803B.
A triangular lot shall include one side yard. All other lots shall include
at least two side yards, except for a corner lot.
D.
§ 203-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-202
1:619

ARTICLE III
Districts
§ 203-301. Designation of districts and purposes.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, Lower Paxton Township is hereby
divided into the following zoning districts, with the following
abbreviations:
CO Conservation
AR Agricultural Residential
R-1 Residential - Low Density
R-2 Residential - Medium Density
R-3 Residential - Medium High Density
R-C Residential Cluster
V Village
CN Commercial - Neighborhood
CG Commercial - General
ON Office - Neighborhood
BC Business Campus
LI Light Industrial
GI General Industrial
IN Institutional
TND Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District
OSD Open Space Development Overlay District
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the zoning districts named in
§ 203-301A shall be of the number, size, shape and location shown on
the "Official Zoning Map."49
C. Overlay Districts. The Floodplain Area, as defined by Article V, shall
serve as an overlay district to the applicable underlying districts.
D. Purposes of each district. In addition to serving the overall purposes
and objectives of this chapter and the Comprehensive Plan, each zoning
district is intended to serve the following purposes:
(1) CO Conservation District. To conserve important natural features,
such as wetlands, creeks, flood-prone lands and steeply sloped
areas. To conserve the Blue Mountain. To vary density based upon
the natural features of the land. To protect the water quality and
habitats along creeks and around lakes, and promote groundwater
recharge. To provide incentives and a certain amount of flexibility
49.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 203-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-301
1:621
in lot layout through conservation-oriented development so that
development can be clustered on the most suitable portions of
a tract of land, while avoiding overly intense development.
[Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
(2) AR Agricultural Residential District. To provide for rural types of
development at a lower overall density, in a manner that protects
creeks and other natural features. To avoid conflicts with
agricultural uses. To promote use of the open space development
option.
(3) R-1 Low Density Residential District. To provide for low density
residential neighborhoods that are primarily composed of singlefamily
detached dwellings. To protect these areas from
incompatible uses. To provide incentives and a certain amount of
flexibility in lot layout through the open space development and
traditional neighborhood development options so that development
can be placed on the most suitable portions of a tract of land, while
still avoiding overly intense development.
(4) R-2 Medium Density Residential District. To provide for medium
density residential neighborhoods with a mix of housing types. To
protect these areas from incompatible uses. To meet requirements
of state law to provide opportunities for various housing types.
(5) R-3 Medium High Density Residential District. To provide
opportunities for a mix of housing types at a medium high density.
To protect these areas from incompatible uses.
(6) V Village District. To provide business opportunities while seeking
to develop a central community focus for the Township. To promote
a pedestrian-friendly and bicycle-friendly environment. To promote
an appropriate mix of retail, service, office, public, institutional and
residential uses. To avoid heavy commercial uses that are most
likely to conflict with the historic and scenic character, and most
likely to cause conflicts with homes. To primarily provide for
smaller-scale uses that will not be obtrusive in the landscape and
that will not overload the road system. To serve the purposes listed
in § 203-318.
(7) ON Office-Neighborhood District. To provide for offices and lowintensity
business uses in locations that are adjacent to residential
neighborhoods.
(8) CN Neighborhood Commercial District. To provide for lighter types
of commercial uses that will be compatible with nearby homes.
(9) CG General Commercial District. To provide for a variety of
commercial uses along major highways where a variety of
commercial uses are already present. To provide for a wider range
of commercial uses than the CN and V Districts, including uses that
are more auto-related (such as gas stations). To carefully locate
§ 203-301 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-301
1:622
§ 203-302. Application of district regulations.
commercial areas and commercial driveways to minimize traffic
safety and congestion problems along roads.
(10) LI Light Industrial District. To provide for industrial and certain
types of commercial development in a manner that is compatible
with any nearby homes and the surrounding environment. To
carefully control the types of industrial operations to avoid
nuisances and environmental hazards. To encourage coordinated
development, particularly in regard to traffic access.
(11) GI General Industrial District. To provide for industrial and certain
types of commercial development in a manner that is compatible
with any nearby homes and the surrounding environment. To
carefully control the types of industrial operations to avoid
nuisances and environmental hazards. To encourage coordinated
development, particularly in regard to traffic access. To provide for
a greater number of industrial uses than the LI District.
(12)BC Business Campus District. To provide sufficient space, in
appropriate locations, to meet needs for offices and complementary
types of business development. This district is intended to control
the types and intensities of uses to avoid nuisances and hazards.
This district is also intended to provide for development that will
generate additional tax revenue and wider employment
opportunities. This district promotes an attractive, welllandscaped,
campus-type of business park development that will
aid in attracting new businesses. This district is also intended to
encourage development that uses deed restrictions imposed by the
subdivider, as well as interior road systems. This district promotes
landscaped front yards and substantial buffers adjacent to
residential development. To attract higher paying jobs to the
Township.
(13) IN Institutional District. To provide for a variety of institutional
uses and related uses, such as medical offices.
(14) R-C Residential-Cluster District. The purposes in § 203-320 shall
apply.
(15)TND Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District. The
provisions of § 203-314 shall apply.
(16)OSD Open Space Development Overlay District. The provisions of
§ 203-311 shall apply.
A. The regulations set by this chapter shall apply uniformly to each class
or kind of structure or land, except as provided for in this chapter.
B. No structure shall hereafter be erected, used, constructed,
reconstructed, structurally altered or occupied and no land shall
§ 203-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-302
1:623
§ 203-303. Zoning Map.
§ 203-304. District boundaries.
The following rules shall apply where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of
any district as shown on the Zoning Map:
hereafter be used, developed or occupied unless it is in conformity with
the regulations herein specified for the use and district in which it is
located.
C. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter
shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.
D. Boundary change. Any territory which may hereafter become part of
the Township through annexation or a boundary adjustment shall be
classified as the AR Zoning District of Lower Paxton Township until or
unless such territory is otherwise classified by Board of Supervisors.
A. A map entitled "Lower Paxton Township Zoning Map" accompanies this
chapter and is declared a part of this chapter. The Official Zoning Map,
which should bear the adoption date of this chapter and the words
"Official Zoning Map," shall be retained in the Township Building.
B. Map changes. Changes to the boundaries and districts of the Official
Zoning Map shall only be made in conformity with the amendment
procedures specified in the State Municipalities Planning Code. All
changes should be noted by date with a brief description of the nature
of the change, either on the map or within an appendix to this chapter.
C. Replacement Map. If the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of changes and
additions, or needs to have drafting errors or omissions corrected,
Township Supervisors may, by resolution, adopt a new copy of the
Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning
Map. Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been
totally destroyed, the prior map or any remaining parts shall be
preserved together with all available records pertaining to its previous
adoption or amendment.
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the
center line of street rights-of-way, streams and railroads, and lot lines
as they existed on a recorded deed or plan of record in the County
Recorder of Deeds' office at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
unless such district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on
the Official Zoning Map.
§ 203-302 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-304
1:624
§ 203-305. Setbacks across municipal boundaries.
§ 203-306. Table of Allowed Uses in Each Zoning District.
B. Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows lot lines, such boundary shall be construed to
follow such lot lines unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. The location of a district boundary on unsubdivided land or where a
district boundary divides a lot shall be determined by the use of the
scale appearing on the Zoning Map unless indicated otherwise by
dimensions.
D. Where a municipal boundary divides a lot, the minimum lot area shall
be regulated by the municipality in which the principal use(s) are
located, unless otherwise provided by applicable case law. The land
area within each municipality shall be regulated by the use regulations
and other applicable regulations of each municipality.
A. Intent. To continue the objective of compatible land uses across
municipal boundaries.
B. This chapter requires additional setbacks and the provision of buffer
yards when certain uses would abut an existing dwelling or a
residential zoning district. These same additional setback and buffer
yard provisions shall be provided by uses proposed within Lower Paxton
Township regardless of whether such abutting existing dwelling or
principally residential zoning district is located in an abutting
municipality and/or in Lower Paxton Township.
A. For the purposes of this § 203-306, the following abbreviations shall
have the following meanings:
P = Permitted by right use (zoning decision by Zoning
Officer)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning
Hearing Board)
C = Conditional use (zoning decision by Board of
Supervisors)
N = Not permitted
(S.
402)
= See additional requirements in § 203-402
(S.
403)
= See additional requirements in § 203-403
B. Table of allowed uses.50
50.Editor's Note: The Table of Allowed Uses is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 203-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-306
1:625
Unless otherwise provided by state or federal law or specifically stated
in this chapter (including § 203-105B), any land or structure shall only
be used or occupied for a use specifically listed in this chapter as
permitted in the zoning district where the land or structure is located.
Such uses shall only be permitted if the use complies with all other
requirements of this chapter.
See § 203-105B, which generally provides a process for approval of a
use that is not listed - based upon similarity to permitted uses and other
criteria. Except as provided in such § 203-105B, any other principal use
that is not specifically listed as P, C or SE in the applicable district in
this table is prohibited in that district.
For temporary uses, see § 203-103G.
When an applicant uses the TND Traditional Neighborhood
Development Overlay District, the provisions of § 203-314 shall apply in
place of the provisions of §§ 203-306 and 203-307.
When an applicant uses the OSD Open Space Development Overlay
District, the provisions of § 203-311 shall apply in place of the
provisions of §§ 203-306 and 203-307.
C. Permitted accessory uses in all districts. An accessory use of a dwelling
is only permitted if such use is customarily incidental to the residential
use and is specifically permitted by this chapter. The following are
permitted by right as accessory uses to a lawful principal use in all
districts, within the requirements of § 203-403 and all other
requirements of this chapter:
(1) Standard antennas, including antennas used by contractors to
communicate with their own vehicles.*
(2) Fence* or wall. *
(3) Garage, household.
(4) Garage sale. *
(5) Pets, keeping of.*
(6) Parking or loading, off-street, only to serve a use that is permitted
in that district.
(7) Recreational facilities, limited to use by: residents of a
development or students at a primary or secondary school or
center for the care and treatment of youth, and their occasional
invited guests.
(8) Residential accessory structure (see definition in Article II) *
(9) Signs, as permitted by Article VII.
(10) Swimming pool, household.*
§ 203-306 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-306
1:626
§ 203-307. Dimensional requirements in each district.
(11) Such other accessory use or structure that the applicant proves to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer is clearly customary and
incidental to a permitted by right, special exception or conditional
principal use.
* See standard for each in § 203-403.
D. Permitted accessory uses to business and institutional uses. The
following are permitted by right accessory uses only to a permitted by
right, special exception or conditional commercial, industrial or
institutional use, provided that all requirements of this chapter are met:
(1) Storage of fuels for on-site use or to fuel company vehicles.
(2) The following accessory uses, provided that the use is clearly
limited to employees, patients, residents and families of employees
of the use and their occasional invited guests:
(a) Internal cafeteria without drive-through service;
(b) Day-care center; or
(c) Recreational facilities.
(3) Bus shelters meeting § 203-403.
(4) Automatic transaction machine.
(5) Storage sheds meeting the requirements of § 203-307A.
A. The following area, yard and building requirements shall apply for the
specified zoning district, unless a more-restrictive requirement for a
specific use is required by § 203-402 or 203-403 or another section of
this chapter. All measurements shall be in feet unless otherwise stated.
See definitions of terms (such as lot width) in § 203-202.51
B. Height. Except as provided in § 203-802, or as specified otherwise in
this chapter for a particular use, the following maximum structure
height shall apply in all zoning districts:
(1) Any structure that is accessory to a dwelling on a lot of less than
five acres shall have a maximum height of two stories (with the
second story limited to non-habitable storage areas) or 25 feet,
whichever is more restrictive,
(2) In the IN District, a maximum building height of 60 feet shall apply,
provided the setbacks in § 203-307A are met, except for residential
retirement development buildings which shall be governed by
§ 203-319G(5). [Amended 4-1-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03]
51.Editor's Note: The Table of Allowed Uses in included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 203-306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-307
1:627
§ 203-308. Wetlands and lakes.
(3) In a traditional neighborhood development, § 203-314 shall apply;
(4) In the BC District, the requirements of § 203-317 shall apply, and
(5) The maximum height for any other structure shall be three stories
or 40 feet, whichever is more restrictive.
C. Accessory structures and uses.
(1) Accessory structures and uses shall meet the minimum yard
setbacks provided for in § 203-307A, unless otherwise provided for
in this chapter, including this § 203-307C.
(2) The minimum side and rear yard setback apply for a permitted
detached structure that is accessory to a dwelling shall be 10 feet
in the CO or AR Districts and five feet in other districts, except in
the following cases:
(a) The minimum rear setback shall be reduced to thee feet for a
residential accessory storage shed having a total floor area of
less than 150 square feet.
(b) A side yard setback is not required for a structure that is
accessory to a dwelling from a lot line along which two
dwellings are attached (such as a lot line shared by twin
dwellings). However, such structure shall still meet the
minimum side yard on a lot line where the dwellings are not
attached.
(c) A residential porch or deck that is unenclosed may extend a
maximum of 15 feet into the required rear setback. Such porch
or deck may be covered by a roof or awning. Space under an
unenclosed porch may be used for household storage. See
Note D above considering front yard setbacks.
(d) See § 203-403 for swimming pools.
(e) If any accessory building or pool is constructed adjacent to a
street (such as a rear yard on a lot that is adjacent to a street
along the front lot line and another street along the rear lot
line), then the building or pool shall be separated from such
street by a buffer yard meeting § 203-803.
(3) No accessory building and no swimming pool shall be allowed in
the minimum front yard.
A. Lot area. Wetlands (as officially defined under federal and/or state
regulations) shall not count towards more than 50% of the required
minimum lot area. The Township may require an applicant to prove that
a lot will contain sufficient contiguous buildable land area that is
outside of wetlands. This § 203-308A shall only apply to a lot within a
§ 203-307 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-308
1:628
§ 203-309. Sewage and water services.
subdivision or land development submitted for approval after the
adoption of this chapter.
B. Wetland studies. It shall be the responsibility of each applicant to
determine whether land areas proposed for alteration meet the federal
or state definition of a wetland prior to submittal of development plans
to the Township. If the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that
wetlands may be present on a site proposed for development or
subdivision, the Zoning Officer may require that the applicant provide a
suitable wetland delineation study prepared by a qualified professional.
The Township may require that the qualifications and any certifications
of the person conducting the wetland delineation be provided in writing
to the Township. The Township may require that a statement be
provided on the plan that is signed by the wetlands delineator stating
that the wetlands are accurately shown according to a standard
government wetlands manual or that wetlands are not present.
[Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
C. Wetland setbacks. A minimum setback of 20 feet shall be required
between any new principal building for which a building permit is
issued after the effective date of this chapter and any "wetland."
A. Central water service. A use shall not be considered to be served by
"Township-approved central water service" unless:
(1) All applicable requirements of state regulations and the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance are met;
(2) The applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Township that there
will be an appropriate system in place to guarantee and properly
fund the long-term operation and maintenance of the system by a
qualified professional operator; and
(3) The applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Township, based
upon review of the Township Engineer, that the system will include
adequate supply, transmission capacity and pressure to serve the
development.
B. Central sewage service. A use shall not be considered to be served by
"Township-approved central sewage service" unless:
(1) All applicable requirements of state regulations and the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance are met;
(2) The applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Township that there
will be an appropriate system in place to guarantee and properly
fund the long-term operation and maintenance of the system by a
qualified professional operator; and
§ 203-308 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-309
1:629
(3) The applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Township, based
upon review of the Township Engineer, that the system will include
adequate treatment capacity and conveyance capacity to serve the
development.
C. Connection to a larger system. Any nonpublic central water or central
sewage system developed after the adoption of this chapter shall be
engineered and constructed in such a manner as to allow its efficient
interconnection in the future into a larger regional system.
(1) Such a system shall include appropriate utility easements and/or
rights-of-way within property controlled by the developer
extending to the borders of the development to allow future
interconnections at logical points.
(2) At the time of subdivision or land development approval, the Board
of Supervisors may request that agreements be established so that
a central water or sewage system is dedicated to a Township
Authority after completion of the development, or at such other
time as is mutually agreed upon. A developer who dedicates a
central water or sewage system to a Township Authority shall
retain the right to use or sell the capacity of the system that was
funded by the developer. The Township may require a developer to
post a bond to guarantee proper operation of a system for at least
two years after dedication.
D. On-lot septic systems.
(1) Purpose: to ensure that a suitable location is available for a new
septic system if the original septic system should malfunction.
(2) This § 203-309D shall only apply to a lot that is officially submitted
for subdivision or land development approval after the adoption of
this chapter.
(3) Each lot shall include both a primary and an reserve septic system
location. Both locations shall be determined by the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer to meet Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection regulations for a septic system location
prior to approval of the final subdivision or land development plan.
(4) The requirement for a reserve septic system location shall not
apply to the following:
(a) A lot of over 10 acres;
(b) The simple merger of two or more existing lots, or an
adjustment to lot lines of an existing lot;
(c) A vacant lot that includes a permanent deed restriction or
conservation easement prohibiting any construction of
buildings on the lot; or
§ 203-309 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-309
1:630
§ 203-310. Steep slopes. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
(d) Lots within a subdivision or land development that will abut a
complete capped sewage system constructed by the developer,
the design of which has been approved by the Township.
(5) The reserve septic system location shall be kept clear of buildings
and parking, and shall be shown on any subsequent applications for
new or expanded buildings or parking. The Township may require
that the location be recorded on the deed.
E. Well and septic system locations. Every plan for a subdivision or land
development and every application for a building permit for a new
principal building that will be served by a well and/or septic system
shall designate the proposed well and primary and alternate septic
system locations.
(1) Such plan shall show that the proposed locations will meet the
minimum isolation distances established by PA DEP regulations
between a well and septic systems on the subject lot and all
adjacent lots.
(2) A plan may show the outer extent of potential well locations,
instead of one exact location, provided all of the potential area
would still meet the isolation distance.
(3) If the well or septic system location is proposed to be changed from
the location shown on the submitted plan, then a site plan showing
the revised location shall be submitted for approval by the Zoning
Officer and Sewage Enforcement Officer prior to issuance of the
building permit.
(4) It is requested that well sites be placed in the front yard, thereby
allowing septic systems to be placed in the rear yard. The intent is
to minimize the visibility of any septic mound systems. In addition,
if wells are located in consistent locations within a subdivision, it
will make it easier for adjacent property-owners to meet minimum
separation distances between septic systems and wells.
F. Expansion of septic use. If the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that
a proposed increase in the number of dwelling units or expansion or
change of a nonresidential use would result in increased flow to a septic
system, then the application shall be referred to the Sewage
Enforcement Officer. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall require
modification, expansion or replacement of the septic system if
necessary to handle the proposed flow.
A. Purposes. The following provisions are primarily intended to avoid
erosion, sedimentation, stormwater management and winter driving
hazards, particularly considering the Township's climate, in addition to
serving the overall purposes of this chapter.
§ 203-309 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-310
1:631
§ 203-311. Open Space Development Overlay District.
B. Regrading. Non-man-made slopes of 15% or more shall not be disturbed
(regraded) prior to the submission of a zoning site plan, or subdivision
or land development plan. This section shall not regulate slopes that
were clearly man-made prior to the adoption of this chapter.
C. Slopes over 25%. A new principal building shall not be located on a
slope greater than 25%.
D. Single-family dwellings and steep slopes. New-single-family detached
dwellings are permitted on slopes that are no greater than 25%.
E. Steep slopes and other uses. A lot shall only be used for a building for
principal uses other than single-family detached dwellings if the
proposed "building area" includes an average slope of less than 20%.
(1) For such uses, the "building area" shall include locations of all
proposed principal buildings and parking areas that serve such
buildings and an area 20 feet around such buildings and related
parking areas.
(2) Access. Each principal building and each parking area shall have
vehicle access from an existing or proposed street by means of a
driveway with a maximum grade of 10%.
F. Site plan and tree protection. If an applicant proposes to alter or build
upon slopes of 15% or greater, then a site plan shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer. A separate site plan is not required if the same
information was included in an approved subdivision or land
development plan.
(1) Site plan. The site plan shall show:
(a) The proposed lot lines;
(b) The existing and proposed contours; and
(c) Existing and proposed building locations, and the outer
perimeter of the proposed "building area" as described above.
(2) Mature trees. Where building or alteration is proposed on slopes of
over 15%, the applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Officer that the removal of healthy trees with a trunk width of over
six inches (measured at a height 4.5 feet above the ground level)
will be minimized. The Zoning Officer may ask for reviews by the
Township Engineer or Planning Commission. The site plan shall
show wooded areas to be removed or preserved, and methods to be
used to make sure trees are protected by temporary fences or other
measures during the construction process.
A. Purposes. To allow reasonable amounts of flexibility in site planning of
residential development to: a) protect environmentally sensitive areas
§ 203-310 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-311
1:632
and avoid severe soil erosion and sedimentation, b) avoid severely
increased stormwater flows and speeds, c) preserve areas of prime
farmland, d) provide additional recreation land, e) steer development to
those areas that are more physically suited for it, f) avoid construction
of steep roads that are difficult, time-consuming, and expensive to
maintain and plow snow upon, g) avoid increased use of steep roads
and driveways that are dangerous to drive upon in snow and ice, h)
conserve forested areas that are an important part of the ecological
cycle, providing for groundwater recharge, air pollution reduction and
wildlife habitats, i) reduce construction costs and municipal
maintenance costs, j) provide for transitional forms of development
between residential and agricultural or industrial areas or highways,
with open space serving as a buffer, and k) allow each property owner
a reasonable use of their land, related directly to the features and
location and accessibility of the land. This option will encourage the
preservation of significant areas of preserved open space.
B. Applicability. For land within the OSD Overlay District, this § 203-311
allows an applicant the option to use the provisions of § 203-311 in
place of the provisions of the underlying zoning district. In order to use
§ 203-311, the applicant must prove compliance with all of the
requirements of this § 203-311, to the satisfaction of the Township. If an
area of land is not within the OSD Overlay District, then an applicant
may request that the Board of Supervisors consider a zoning map
amendment to add the OSD Overlay District to that land area. An open
space development shall be permitted by right within the OSD Overlay
District.
(1) An "open space development" is a residential development that
meets the requirements of this § 203-311 and is approved by the
Township as an open space development. An open space
development shall only be allowed in the OSD Overlay District.
(2) Uses. An open space development shall only include the following
uses: single-family detached dwellings, nature preserves,
Township-owned recreation, noncommercial recreation uses that
the Township approves to be within the preserved open space,
utilities necessary to serve the development, and customary
permitted accessory uses. A mobile/manufactured home park shall
not qualify as a open space development.
(3) A tract shall be eligible for approval for a open space development
if it includes a minimum of 10 acres of lot area in common
ownership in the OSD Overlay District. Such land area shall be
contiguous, except that portions of the tract may be separated only
by existing or proposed streets or creeks.
(a) The amount of preserved open space shall be based upon the
total lot area of all lots within the development, prior to
subdivision, and prior to deletion of rights-of-way of future
streets and before deleting the area of any environmental
§ 203-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-311
1:633
features. Land area of future rights-of-way of existing streets
may be deleted from the total lot area before calculating the
required amount of preserved open space.
[1] Areas that were preserved by a conservation or
agricultural preservation easement or deed restriction
prior to the submittal of the subdivision plan shall not be
counted towards the area of the tract in calculating
preserved open space or allowed density.
(b) Areas used for a principal nonresidential use (other than uses
approved by the Township to be part of the preserved open
space) shall not be included within the land area used to
calculate residential density.
(c) Conservation easements or deed restrictions shall be
established on lots as necessary to ensure that the maximum
density requirement is met over time. Such conservation
easements shall prevent the re-subdivision of lots in a manner
that would violate this § 203-311.
(4) An open space development shall be designed as a unified,
coordinated residential development, and shall be approved with a
single development plan proposed by a single development entity.
After final subdivision approval and within an approved
development agreement(s) and phasing plan, portions of the
development may be transferred to different entities, provided that
there is compliance with the approved development plan and this
§ 203-311.
(5) Procedures.
(a) Applicants are strongly encouraged to first submit a sketch
plan, before completing detailed fully engineered preliminary
subdivision plans. This two-step process will allow the
Township and the applicant to discuss the preserved open
space and development layout before large sums of money are
spent by the applicant on detailed engineering.
(b) The applicant and Township officials are strongly encouraged
to walk the tract after a detailed existing features map has
been provided to the Township, but before the site layout has
been finalized.
C. Density, open space and lot standards. The maximum number of
dwelling units on the tract shall be determined based upon an existing
features map and a yield plan, except within the AR District.
(1) An existing features map shall be required to be submitted as part
of the application for an open space development. This existing
features map shall accurately show the locations of the following at
a minimum: wetlands, 100-year floodplains, areas of woodland,
§ 203-311 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-311
1:634
existing topography, existing buildings with a description of any
buildings over 70 years old, highlighting of 15 to 25% slopes and
25% and greater slopes, and any major scenic views from within
the tract or from outside of the tract.
(2) A yield plan shall be submitted to the Township by the applicant.
The yield plan shall accurately show the maximum number of
dwelling units that would be possible under current Township
ordinances if the open space development provisions would not be
used, and instead the provisions for conventional development in
the applicable zoning district would be used. The yield plan shall be
completed to an accurate scale, including accurately showing the
Existing Feature Map information described above. The yield plan
shall show potential lots, streets, and retention/detention pond
locations. However, the yield plan shall not serve as, and is not
required to contain, the engineering detail requirements of a
preliminary subdivision plan.
(3) The yield plan shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer and
Township Engineer, and then determined by the Planning
Commission as to whether it represents a reasonably accurate
estimate of the number of dwelling units possible on the site, both
physically and legally. If such estimates are determined to not be
accurate, the applicant shall be required by the Zoning Officer to
revise the yield plan until it is accurate.
(a) For land that is not within the AR District, the maximum
number of dwelling units allowed on the tract through open
space development shall be 10% greater than the number of
dwelling units that is determined by the Township to be
possible under the Township-accepted yield plan.
(b) The allowed number of dwelling units may be rounded to the
nearest whole number.
(c) The yield plan shall not have any legal standing except for the
purposes of determining density for an open space
development.
(4) For land within the AR District, the maximum number of dwelling
units allowed on the tract through open space development shall be
equal to an average of one dwelling unit for every 1.0 acre of total
lot area.
(5) All provisions of the zoning district shall apply, except for
provisions that are specifically modified by this § 203-311. The
following dimensional requirements shall apply, provided that the
total maximum density for the tract is not exceeded:
(a) CO District: The minimum lot area shall be one acre (43,560
square feet). The same dimensional requirements shall apply
as are provided for in conventional development in the AR
§ 203-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-311
1:635
District. A minimum of 60% of the total lot area of the tract
(prior to subdivision) shall be preserved as preserved open
space.
(b) AR District: The minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet.
The same dimensional requirements shall apply as are
provided for in conventional development in the R-1 district. A
minimum of 40% of the total lot area of the tract (prior to
subdivision) shall be preserved as preserved open space.
(c) R-1 District: The minimum lot area shall be 10,000 square feet.
The same dimensional requirements shall apply as are
provided for in conventional development in the R-2 district. A
minimum of 40% of the total lot area of the tract (prior to
subdivision) shall be preserved as preserved open space.
(d) R-2 District: The minimum lot area for single-family detached
residential lots shall be reduced to 5,000 square feet. All other
dimensional requirements shall remain the same as are listed
for the R-3 District. A minimum of 25% of the total lot area of
the tract (prior to subdivision) shall be preserved as preserved
open space.
(6) Utilities. Any lot of less than one acre shall be served by Townshipapproved
public sanitary sewerage service and public water
service.
(7) Subdivision of part of a tract. This Subsection C(7) addresses a
situation in which only part of a lot is proposed to be subdivided,
and the applicant at the present time does not intend to subdivide
for the maximum number of dwellings allowed by this section. In
such case, the applicant shall establish a permanent conservation
easement covering preserved open space to comply with this
section. Because only part of the tract is being subdivided, it may
not be necessary to meet the preserved open space requirement
based upon the area of the entire tract.
(a) The land under the conservation easement shall be a regular
rectangle in shape and shall be located where it could adjoin
land that would be added as preserved open space in the future
if the total allowed number of dwellings would be developed.
(b) The following hypothetical example assumes a tract includes
50 acres, and the yield plan determines that the applicant for
an open space development is allowed a total of 30 new
dwellings. In this example, the applicant only wishes to
subdivide lots for 10 new dwellings at the present time, which
is 1/3 of the total number of allowed dwellings. At the present
time, only 1/3 of the open space would need to be preserved,
compared to if all of the allowed housing units would be
developed. However, the preserved open space would need to
be placed on the tract at a location where it could be joined by
§ 203-311 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-311
1:636
the remaining acres of land under a conservation easement if
the applicant in the future decided to subdivide lots for the
remaining 20 dwelling units that are allowed.
(8) A minimum of 50% of the required preserved open space shall be in
one contiguous lot, except that the preserved open space may be
separated by creeks, lakes, and a maximum of one street.
(a) The Board of Supervisors may approve the following, if the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors
that such configuration would serve the purposes of this
section and be in the best interests of the Township,
considering the unique circumstances of the tract:
[1] A reduction of the percentage of the preserved open space
that is in one lot; or
[2] The crossing of the preserved open space by two or more
streets.
(b) An accessway limited to emergency vehicles may also cross the
preserved open space.
(9) The Board of Supervisors may require that the majority of the
required preserved open space be placed:
(a) Adjacent to an existing or planned public or homeowner
association-owned recreation area;
(b) Adjacent to existing farmland;
(c) At the edge of a neighboring undeveloped lot, where the
preserved open space could be connected in the future to open
space on that neighboring lot; or
(d) Adjacent to an arterial street or expressway where the open
space will serve to buffer homes from the traffic.
D. Conditions for approval. An open space development shall only be
approved if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors, based upon review by the Planning Commission, that the
following additional conditions shall be met:
(1) That the open space development would clearly serve a valid public
purpose that would result in a development that would be superior
to what would result if the land would be developed as a
conventional development. Such valid public purposes include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(a) The permanent preservation of dense forests, steep slopes,
wetlands, creek valleys, highly scenic areas or other sensitive
natural features.
§ 203-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-311
1:637
(b) The permanent preservation of a substantial area of land in
agricultural uses, in a tract of proper size and configuration
that allows for efficient agricultural use and that properly
considers the issue of compatibility between the agricultural
uses and homes. In such case, new dwellings shall be clustered
adjacent to existing dwellings and residential zoning districts.
(c) The dedication of recreation land at a site deemed appropriate
by the Board of Supervisors and that involves land that is
clearly suitable for active and/or passive recreation.
(d) The provision of preserved open space in a location that will
allow homes to be buffered from highly-noxious, nuisancegenerating
uses, such as a heavily traveled street or industrial
uses. In such case, intensive landscaping and/or planting for
eventual reforestation shall be provided.
(2) The applicant shall prove that the proposed open space
development has been designed in full consideration of important
natural features, including mature woodlands, creek valleys, steep
slopes and wetlands.
(a) At a minimum, the applicant shall prove that areas along
perennial creeks shall be preserved in their natural state,
except for landscaping, erosion control improvements, public
recreation improvements and needed utility, street and
driveway crossings. Low-maintenance landscaping is
encouraged along creeks and other areas where maintenance
would otherwise be difficult.
(b) The natural features of the site shall be a major factor in
determining the siting of dwelling units and streets.
(3) The Township may require the use of conservation easements
within an open space development to limit the disturbance of
natural slopes over 15%, wetlands, mature forests, creek valleys
and other important natural features.
E. Preserved open space.
(1) Preserved open space. The minimum amount of "preserved open
space" shall be provided, which shall meet the requirements of this
chapter and the definition in § 203-202 of "open space, preserved."
(a) The preserved open space requirements of this § 203-311 shall
be in addition to the recreation land or fee-in-lieu of land
requirements of the Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (SALDO), unless the applicant proves
to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that the
proposed preserved open space would include suitably
improved land that will meet the intent of the recreation land
requirements of the SALDO.
§ 203-311 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-311
1:638
(b) The preserved open space requirements of this § 203-311 shall
not be waived through a payment of a fee in lieu of land.
(2) Open space standards. Required preserved open spaces shall meet
all of the following requirements:
(a) Preserved open space shall be permanently deed-restricted or
protected by an appropriate conservation easement to prevent
the construction of buildings or the use for any nonagricultural
commercial purposes or the use of the land for timber
harvesting, except for routine thinning of woods. Land
approved as required preserved open space shall only be used
for noncommercial active or passive recreation, a
noncommercial community center for meetings and recreation,
a nature preserve, a horse farm, a wholesale plant nursery,
and/or a Township-approved agricultural use.
(b) Improvements to open spaces. Where preserved open space is
proposed to be used for recreation and/or dedicated to the
Township, the application shall include a detailed and legally
binding (if approved) description of what improvements the
applicant will make to any land to make it suitable for its
intended purpose.
[1] Examples of such improvements include preservation and
planting of trees, development of trails, stabilization of
creek banks, removal of undesirable vegetation, and
grading of land for recreation (such as an informal open
play field for youth).
[2] Type of maintenance. The final subdivision plan shall state
the intended type of maintenance of the open space, such
as lawn areas that are regularly mowed, or natural areas
for passive recreation that are intended for minimal
maintenance.
(c) All proposed preserved open space shall be cleared of
construction debris, materials from illegal dumping and any
rocks that were not naturally on the land, unless those rocks
are incorporated into landscaping improvements.
(d) The applicant shall prove that all required preserved open
space would be suitable for its intended and Townshipapproved
purposes. The Township may require the provision of
a trail easement and/or the construction of a recreation trail
through preserved open space. If a developer installs a trail, it
shall be completed prior to the final sale of any adjacent
residential lots.
(e) Lots and preserved open spaces shall be located to promote
pedestrian and visual access to preserved open spaces
whenever possible.
§ 203-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-311
1:639
(f) Sufficient access points from each preserved open space shall
be provided to streets for pedestrian access and maintenance
access. The Board of Supervisors may require that
maintenance and/or pedestrian access points be paved and be
up to eight feet in width, meeting Township standards for a
bike path. Maintenance access points shall be of a slope that is
suitable for access by vehicles and equipment.
(3) Open space ownership. The method(s) to be used to own, preserve
and maintain any preserved open space shall be acceptable to the
Township. The Township shall only approve an open space
development if the applicant proves there will be an acceptable
method to ensure permanent ownership, preservation and
maintenance of land that will not be included in individual home
lots.
(a) The method of ownership and use of any required preserved
open space shall be determined prior to preliminary
subdivision or land development approval. The Township
should be given right of first refusal at the time of such review
to accept proposed open space as public open space. The
Township shall only accept ownership of open space if the
Board of Supervisors has agreed in writing in advance to
accept such ownership. If the preserved open space will not be
owned by the Township, then the preserved open space shall
be permanently preserved by one or a combination of the
following methods that are found to be acceptable to the Board
of Supervisors:
[1] Dedication to the county as public open space, if the
County Commissioners agree in writing to such
dedication.
[2] Dedication to the school district if such Board of Education
agrees in writing to accept such dedication and to use and
maintain the land for school recreation, public recreation,
environmental education and/or related open space.
[3] Dedication to a homeowners association as preserved
open space, with the homeowners legally bound to pay
fees for the maintenance and other expenses of owning
such land, and with such homeowners association being
incorporated with covenants and bylaws providing for the
filing of assessments and/or municipal liens for the
nonpayment of maintenance costs for preserved open
space that is not publicly owned.
[a] Such responsibilities shall be specified as part of each
deed prior to sale of each lot or dwelling unit. The
Township may delay a dedication of maintenance
responsibilities by a developer to a homeowners
§ 203-311 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-311
1:640
association until such association is incorporated and
able to maintain such land.
[4] Dedication of the land to an established nature
conservation organization acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors for maintenance as a nature preserve or
passive recreation area.
[5] Dedication of a permanent conservation easement that
results in the land being used for a Township-approved
crop farming, wholesale tree farm, or an equestrian use,
and which may include one of the allowed dwelling units
on the lot.
[6] Dedication to the State Game Commission, State Fish and
Boat Commission or similar public agency, if such agency
agrees in writing in advance to accept the dedication and
to maintain the land for public recreation.
(b) Legal documents providing for ownership and/or maintenance
of required preserved open space shall be reviewed by the
Township Solicitor and be subject to approval by the Board of
Supervisors prior to recording of the final plan.
(c) A legally binding system shall be established to oversee and
maintain land that will not be publicly owned. The applicant
shall prove compliance with state law governing homeowner
associations. Proper notations shall be required on the
recorded plan. For example, if the preserved open space is
intended to be owned by a homeowners' association as
recreation land, a statement should be included that the
designated open space "shall not be further subdivided and
shall not be used for the construction of any nonrecreation
buildings."
(4) Changes in open space uses. If the required preserved open space
is proposed to be used for purposes that were not authorized in the
Township zoning or final subdivision plan approval, then a revised
Township approval shall be required for the changed use.
F. Steep slopes. Within an open space development, no principal building
shall be placed on slopes of over 25%.
G. Phasing. The development shall include a phasing system that shall be
approved by the Board of Supervisors. Such phases shall ensure that
the requirements of this article will be met after the completion of any
one phase, and that the development could properly function without
the construction of additional phases.
H. Landscaping plan. An application for an open space development
involving over 10 acres shall include a landscape planting and
preservation plan prepared by a registered landscape architect.
§ 203-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-311
1:641
§ 203-312. Conservation along creeks.
(1) Such plan shall show the locations, general species and initial sizes
of landscaping to be planted within the preserved open space and
throughout the tract.
(2) Such plan shall also show that existing substantial healthy trees
will be preserved to the maximum extent reasonable. The methods
to ensure preservation during construction shall be described.
(3) Landscaping shall also be used as appropriate to filter views of
denser housing from any adjacent housing that is less dense.
A. Setbacks. No new building (except an accessory storage shed with a
floor area of 150 square feet or less), new or expanded vehicle parking,
or business outdoor storage shall be located within 50 feet from the top
of the bank of a perennial creek. This minimum setback shall be
increased to 75 feet from the top of the bank of a perennial creek within
the AR and CO Zoning Districts. A perennial creek shall be defined as a
waterway shown as a perennial creek on the United States Geological
Survey quadrangle maps. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
B. Standards. To the maximum extent feasible:
(1) Any street or driveway crossing of a perennial creek shall be
approximately perpendicular to the creek.
(2) Existing healthy natural vegetation adjacent to a creek should be
preserved.
(3) Areas within the setback established by this section shall be
preserved in their natural state, except for: planting of trees and
shrubs, erosion control improvements, public recreation
improvements and necessary utility, street and driveway crossings.
Low-maintenance landscaping is encouraged along creeks and
other areas where maintenance would otherwise prove difficult.
C. Vegetation. Where the majority of the existing trees and/or shrubs are
removed from areas within the setback distance provided by
§ 203-312A as part of, or in preparation to, a subdivision, land
development or construction of a new building, then new trees and
shrubs shall be planted and maintained that will have the same or
better impact upon controlling erosion and filtering pollutants from
runoff as the trees and/or shrubs that were removed.
(1) Publications of the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and
Natural Resources (including "Stream ReLeaf") and/or the
Chesapeake Bay Commission shall be used as standards for the
planting of the buffer. These publications include recommended
species. Native species of vegetation shall be used. If trees and
plants do not survive, they shall be replaced within 100 days
afterwards by the current owner of the property.
§ 203-311 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-313
1:642
§ 203-313. Optional transfer of development rights ("TDR").
A. Purposes. In addition to serving the overall purposes of this chapter,
this section is intended to:
(1) Encourage the permanent preservation of important farmland and
environmentally sensitive areas;
(2) Direct growth to locations where public water and sewerage
services are available; and
(3) Provide a voluntary method for landowners to be compensated by
the free market to preserve their land.
B. Applicability.
(1) The transfer of development rights shall only officially occur at the
time of final approval of a subdivision or land development plan or a
conditional use approval. The approval of a preliminary plan shall
be conditioned upon compliance with this section. As part of a
preliminary and final plan application, the applicant shall present a
draft conservation easement on the "sending property" and a
written, signed and notarized agreement by the owner of the
"sending property" acknowledging and agreeing to the application.
(2) The conservation easement shall be drafted so that it is binding if
the "receiving property" is granted final subdivision or land
development plan approval. The conservation easement shall be
recorded at the same time as, or prior to, the final plan for the
receiving property.
(a) If a final plan is recorded in phases, then the conservation
easement may be recorded in corresponding phases.
(3) The form of the conservation easement shall be acceptable to the
Board of Supervisors, based upon review by the Township Solicitor
and Planning Commission. The term "conservation easement" shall
include, but not be limited to, an agricultural conservation
easement. In the case of agricultural land, the standard language
for an agricultural conservation easement used by the County
Agricultural Land Preservation Board may be utilized.
(4) A sending property shall be within the CO, AR or R-1 District. A
sending property shall have a minimum lot area of 10 acres.
(5) A receiving property shall be within the R-1 or R-2 District.
(6) The owners of the sending and receiving properties shall
voluntarily commit to participate in the transfer of development
rights. Once such conservation easement is established, it shall be
binding upon all current and future owners of the sending property.
The applicant for the receiving property is responsible to negotiate
with, and pay compensation to, the owner of the sending property
§ 203-313 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-313
1:643
for the conservation easement. Such transaction shall occur
privately, and the value shall be determined by the private market.
The Township is under no obligation to pay the owner of the
sending property, unless the Township purchases the development
rights.
(7) Donations or intermediaries. The right to develop a sending
property may be purchased by or donated to the Township, a
Township Authority, the county or an established incorporated
nonprofit organization whose mission includes preservation of
agricultural land or natural features. A permanent conservation
easement shall be established on the sending property at the time
of such purchase or donation. In such case, the right to develop
such dwelling units may be held for a maximum of 10 years, before
being used on a receiving property(ies).
C. Definitions.
RECEIVING PROPERTY — A lot(s) that is approved to permit a higher
density than would otherwise be permitted as a condition of the
restriction of development on sending property.
SENDING PROPERTY — A lot(s) or portion of a lot that is restricted
by a conservation easement or farmland preservation easement as a
condition of approval of a higher density on the "receiving property"
than would otherwise be permitted.
D. Determination of density.
(1) Yield plans shall be presented by the applicant. One yield plan shall
be presented for the receiving property and one for the sending
property. Such yield plans shall be a level of detail typically found in
a sketch plan, including showing potential lots and roads, steep
slopes, 100-year floodplains and suspected wetlands. Such yield
plans shall estimate the number of new dwelling units that could be
lawfully constructed on each property under Township regulations
without any transfer of development rights. Detailed septic perc
tests are not required for such sketches, but new septic systems
shall not be assumed to be possible in areas with severe soil and
slope limitations.
(2) Such yield plans shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer, with
advice by the Township Engineer, to determine whether each
represents a reasonably accurate estimate of the number of
dwelling units possible on each site, both physically and legally. If
such estimates are determined to not be accurate, the applicant
shall be required by the Zoning Officer to revise such yield plan
until it is accurate.
(3) Based upon the yield plans, permission to develop the allowed
number of dwelling units may be transferred from the sending
property to the receiving property.
§ 203-313 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-313

(a) For each dwelling unit that would have otherwise been allowed
on the sending property, one additional dwelling unit may be
approved on the receiving property.
(b) If one or more lots each include less than one acre of lot area
and are not served by Township-approved central sewage
service, such lots shall not be used to transfer density.
(c) If, for example, the yield plan determines that 10 new dwelling
units would be allowed under current zoning on the sending
property, and the sending property will be preserved by a
conservation easement, then the right to develop 10 additional
dwelling units shall be transferred to the receiving property.
(d) The development of the receiving property shall still comply
with all other requirements of this chapter, except for the
maximum density, which shall be regulated by this section.
(4) A partial transfer of the allowed dwelling units shall also be
allowed, depending upon the amount of land affected by the
permanent conservation easement.
(a) For example, if under current zoning, five dwelling units would
be possible on the western portion of a lot and six dwelling
units on the eastern portion, the owner may choose to transfer
the right to develop five dwelling units by placing a permanent
conservation easement on the western portion. The owner
would then still have the right to develop the eastern portion
under the zoning in effect at the time of a future development
application for that eastern portion.
(b) If only a portion of a lot would be affected by the conservation
easement, the applicant shall prove that the conservation
easement would permanently preserve a contiguous area of
rectangular (or similar regular) shape that would relate to the
number of dwelling units that would otherwise be allowed on
such portion of the lot.
(c) Where a conservation easement would be established in
phases over time, each phase shall be contiguous with a
previous conservation easement, unless the applicant proves to
the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that there is a valid
public purpose for the easement to not be contiguous.
(5) The receiving property shall be permitted to include the increased
total number of dwelling units above the number that would
otherwise be permitted, as approved by the Township based upon
the yield plan.
(6) The development of the receiving property shall comply with all
other requirements of this chapter, except that the following
§ 203-313 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-313
1:645
§ 203-314. Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) Overlay
District.
requirements shall be reduced, provided the maximum overall
density for the TDR is not exceeded:
(a) For a receiving property within the R-1 District, for singlefamily
detached dwellings, a minimum lot area of 12,000
square feet and the minimum lot width shall be 90 feet shall
apply, provided both central sewage and central water services
are provided.
(b) For a receiving property within the R-2 District, for a singlefamily
detached dwelling, the minimum lot area shall be
reduced to 8,000 square feet, and the minimum lot width may
be reduced to 60 feet.
(c) For a receiving property within the R-2 District, for other
allowed dwelling types, the minimum average lot area per
dwelling unit shall be reduced to 6,000 square feet.
(7) Utilities. To receive a transfer of development rights, any lot that
includes less than one acre per dwelling unit on the receiving
property shall be served by Township-approved central sanitary
sewerage service and central water service.
(8) The transfer of development rights shall not be combined with
reduced lot sizes and other incentives concerning open space
development or traditional neighborhood development.
E. Once a conservation easement is established under a transfer of
development rights, it shall be permanent, regardless of whether the
receiving property is developed. The approval to develop the receiving
property in a higher density shall be treated in the same manner as any
other final subdivision or land development approval. The Board of
Supervisors may extend time limits to complete the development of the
receiving property in response to a written request.
(1) If an approved development on the receiving property is not
completed, the Township may allow a new development application
to be submitted to use such transferred number of dwelling units
on the same area of land. In such case, the number of additional
dwelling units that are allowed shall be added to the number of
dwelling units that would be allowed under the Township
ordinances in effect at the time of the new development
application.
A. Purposes. Traditional neighborhood development ("TND") is primarily
intended to:
§ 203-313 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-314
1:646
(1) Encourage new development to occur in a manner that will be
consistent with the traditional patterns and scale of development
and mix of uses that occurred in the region before 1946;
(2) Promote a mix of diverse but compatible types of neighborhood
development;
(3) Avoid development that would be inconsistent with the character of
the community, and could cause inefficient patterns of sprawled
development;
(4) Encourage a blending of recreation areas, preserved natural
features, compatible institutional uses, and a mix of housing at a
medium density, including housing intended to be affordable to
middle-income persons;
(5) Provide for reasonably safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle and
vehicle circulation, with an emphasis on avoiding conflicts between
vehicles backing out of garages across sidewalks;
(6) Encourage persons to live, work, shop, attend religious services
and enjoy recreation within the Township;
(7) Encourage the creation of a sense of place, feelings of belonging
and a community spirit that promotes social interaction and
volunteerism;
(8) Encourage the location of principal nonresidential uses with
distinguished architectural features at prominent locations around
a Central Commons, to serve as a focal point for the development;
(9) Serve the purposes for traditional neighborhood development as
listed in the State Municipalities Planning Code, as amended;
(10) Allow a TND under this set of development standards to have a
higher density and a wider range of uses than would otherwise be
allowed, in return for a higher level of site design and preservation
of common open space land; and
(11) Promote the placement of new single-family detached dwellings
abutting preexisting single-family detached dwellings on abutting
lots, when feasible.
B. Applicability. The TND Overlay District is shown on the Zoning Map.
Within the TND Overlay District, in addition to development allowed
under the conventional underlying zoning district, an applicant shall
also have an option of developing a TND under the provisions of this
§ 203-314. A TND shall be permitted by right within the TND Overlay
District. If an area of land is not within the TND Overlay District, then
an applicant may request that the Board of Supervisors consider a
zoning map amendment to add the TND Overlay District to that land
area.
§ 203-314 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-314
1:647
(1) If an applicant chooses to utilize these TND provisions, then all of
the requirements of this § 203-314 shall apply. All of the provisions
of this chapter and other Township regulations shall remain in full
force, except for provisions modified by this § 203-314. Where
§ 203-314 and another Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance provision apply to the same matter,
§ 203-314 shall apply in place of that other provision.
(2) Minimum tract size: 80 acres. However, if one TND has been
approved to include a minimum 80 acres, than an adjacent tract
may have a minimum tract size of 20 acres, provided that the
second TND is designed to be consistent with the first TND,
including compatible architectural standards with the first TND
and a logical extension of streets. The term "tract size" shall
include the lot area of all lots prior to subdivision and land
development, but after deleting existing legal rights-of-way of
preexisting public streets.
(3) Stub streets: Any TND shall be designed with stub street right-ofway
extending to the edges of the tract if the Township determines
that there is potential for interconnected streets onto an adjacent
tract. The developer of the adjacent tract shall be responsible to
fund the completion of the construction of such street extensions at
the time they would be needed. Until such time, the stub right-ofway
shall be maintained in vegetative ground cover. Any TND shall
be designed with streets that can be interconnected with adjacent
lands to the maximum extent feasible and desirable, in the
determination of the Township.
(4) Master plan: The TND shall be developed following a single master
plan. Consistent with final plan approvals, individual portions of the
TND may be owned and constructed by different entities, provided
there is compliance with the overall master plan and the phasing
plan.
C. Master plan for a TND.
(1) Before any use is approved or lot is subdivided for a TND, the
applicant shall submit and have approved an overall master plan.
Such master plan shall be submitted as part of or prior to a
preliminary plan submission for a "traditional neighborhood
development." Such master plan should address coordinated
vehicle access from all adjacent land owned, equitably owned or
otherwise controlled by the applicant. If the applicant's land
extends into an adjacent municipality or zoning district, then it is
requested that the master plan also show such area to plan for a
coordinated road and infrastructure system.
(a) The master plan shall be fully coordinated with any existing,
proposed or approved development on adjacent land, including
providing for pedestrian and bicycle access to adjacent tracts.
§ 203-314 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-314
1:648
(b) Landscaped open space and recreation areas shall be
interspersed within the TND. Pedestrian and motor vehicle
routes shall be laid out to complement the interaction between
the commercial core of the TND and residential areas.
(2) The Overall master plan shall show proposed streets, alleys,
cartway widths, approximate lot lines and dimensions, common
open spaces, recreation areas, major pedestrian and bicycle
pathways, parking areas, major detention basins and proposed
types of housing and nonresidential uses. The master plan shall
designate certain areas for primarily commercial development,
certain areas as preserved open space, and certain areas for
various types and densities of residential development. The intent
is to have the higher density areas closer to the proposed
commercial core, and lower residential densities adjacent to
preexisting single-family detached housing developments on
adjacent lots.
(3) The master plan and application for the traditional neighborhood
development shall be reviewed by the Township Planning
Commission and the Board of Supervisors. After any modifications,
the master plan shall become part of the approved preliminary plan
under the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. Once
preliminary plan approval is granted for the traditional
neighborhood development, then individual lots may be submitted
for final plan approval under the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, and uses allowed by this section may
occur as permitted by right uses.
(a) The master plan is not required to include the same level of
engineering detail as a preliminary subdivision plan.
Stormwater calculations, construction details, erosion and
sedimentation control plans, profiles and similar engineering
details are not required at the master plan stage. The master
plan shall include sufficient information to accurately show
existing conditions and the proposed layout of the homes,
nonresidential uses, lots, open space and streets.
(4) Changes to the master plan may occur, provided there is
compliance with Township Ordinances. The Township may require
that a revised preliminary subdivision or land development plan be
submitted and approved if there are substantial changes from the
previously approved preliminary plan.
(5) The master plan shall designate various areas of the TND for
various types or ranges of uses and types of housing. The intent is
to have most business uses and denser housing clustered at one
area of the development. The intent is to have less-dense housing
towards the perimeter of the TND, particularly adjacent to
preexisting single-family detached housing that is outside of the
TND.
§ 203-314 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-314
1:649
D. Overall requirements. A TND shall meet all of the following
requirements:
(1) The existing street system shall be extended into the new
development, to the maximum extent feasible. Streets shall be
interconnected through the development. The development shall
have a central focal point, such as a central commons, park,
commercial area that is similar to a historic main street and/or
allowed institutional building. Streets or trails should lead towards
this focal point.
(a) A cul-de-sac street shall be permitted only where the applicant
proves that there is no reasonable alternative. Street linkages
shall be provided to allow connections with future phases of
development or adjacent tracts. Where direct street access is
not practical between two areas, then the Township Board of
Supervisors may require the provision of bicycle and
pedestrian access using an easement.
(2) A minimum of 60% of the dwelling units shall have access to a front
door accessing onto an unenclosed front porch with a minimum
depth of five feet and a minimum length of eight feet. Such porch
shall be covered by a permanent roof. Such porch shall not be
enclosed, now or in the future.
(a) A minimum of 50% of single family dwelling units at the
intersection of two or more public streets shall have a porch
that wraps around the front and side of the dwelling, or shall
have separate front and side porches facing onto the streets.
(3) The applicant shall prove that proper site planning and
architectural design will be used to minimize visual impact of
garages and garage doors as viewed from the front of the lot. A
minimum of 50% of the dwelling units shall not have garage doors
for two or more motor vehicles facing onto a street at the front of
the dwelling. The placement of garages along rear or side alleys or
to the rear of the lot with a side driveway is encouraged. No garage
shall be located with a smaller setback from the front lot line along
a street than the living quarters of the dwelling. For single-family
detached dwellings that have a front facing garage, the garage
should be setback a minimum of 20 feet greater than the front of
the dwelling. No garage or carport shall be permitted within five
feet from the right-of-way of an alley. (However, on-street parallel
parking may be approved along an alley under other provisions of
this § 203-314.)
(a) Garage doors shall not make up more than 50% of the front
street level of the facade of a dwelling. Driveways and offstreet
parking spaces shall not make up more than 50% of the
land area of the front yard between the front of a dwelling and
the street right-of-way.
§ 203-314 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-314
1:650
(b) All streets and alleys shall have a right-of-way, whether public
or private.
(c) See § 203-314I, which allows on-street parking to be counted
towards off-street parking requirements. To the maximum
extent feasible, vehicle parking, carports and garages shall be
placed to the rear or side of lots, preferably with rear or side
access. For example, the following alternative methods of
providing parking are permitted and encouraged:
[1] A rear landscaped shared parking court or shared carport
structure;
[2] A garage placed towards the rear of the lot, with a side
driveway that is of minimal width within the front yard and
then widens in front of the garage;
[3] A detached rear garage or rear individual parking pad or
side-entry garage accessed from a rear alley or side street;
[4] Decks built to extend over garages or over driveways
leading to garages; or
[5] A landscaped shared parking court connected to a street,
provided that parked vehicles do not need to back out onto
a through-street and provided that all paving is setback a
minimum of 20 feet from any dwelling (other than a front
porch).
(d) If driveways pass through the front of the lot (such as to reach
detached rear garages), then it is encouraged to place
driveways of adjacent dwellings immediately adjacent to each
other. This would allow the driveway on each lot to be more
narrow than would otherwise be possible. However, each
property owner shall still be responsible for their own half of
the driveway, and each half shall be wide enough to allow a
passenger car to travel on each lot. As an alternative, the
Township may approve shared driveways with maintenance by
a legally binding homeowners' association.
(4) All principal buildings shall have a minimum roof pitch of 4/12 or
have the appearance of such a roof pitch as viewed from the street,
except a flat roof may be approved for townhouses or connected
commercial buildings if the buildings have a decorative cornice.
Variations in rooflines are specifically encouraged.
(5) Sidewalks or other Township-approved pedestrian pathways shall
be provided along both sides of each street, unless a modification
or waiver is granted in writing by the Board of Supervisors under
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. The width of
sidewalks shall be a minimum of eight feet along a commercial
§ 203-314 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-314
1:651
main street (which may include street tree wells) and a minimum
of five feet in other locations.
(a) A sidewalk in a commercial main street area shall be
constructed primarily of decorative masonry or material that
has the appearance of decorative masonry. This may include
interlocking brick pavers or concrete pavers or patterned
concrete that has the appearance of brick. The use of dry laid
pavers on a suitable subsurface of concrete, sand or stone and
stone dust is encouraged.
(b) Pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided in the commercial
main street area using materials and colors that visually
distinguish the crosswalk from the street surface and that
include some texture. The use of pavers, patterned concrete or
stamped textured asphalt is encouraged.
(c) The materials, depths and cross sections of the sidewalks and
crosswalks shall be subject to approval by the Township, after
review by the Township Engineer.
(6) Commercial. Allowed commercial uses and their parking areas
shall occupy a minimum of 5% and a maximum of 15% of the total
land area of the traditional neighborhood development. This
percentage may be increased to 20% if the commercial area will be
adjacent to an arterial street. No such maximum percentage shall
apply in portions of a TND that are within a commercial district. A
principal commercial use shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet
from any dwelling outside of the TND that existed at the time of the
enactment of this section.
(a) If a new TND is proposed adjacent to a previously approved
TND, and if the first TND included a commercial area, then the
second TND is not required to include commercial uses.
(b) Off-street parking for a commercial use shall not be located
between the commercial use building and the front lot line
along a street. Off-street parking shall be located to the side or
rear of a commercial building.
(c) The majority of commercial uses shall be placed in a Main
Street style commercial area, with the businesses fronting
upon a through street, and with parking being on street or to
the rear or side of the businesses. Buildings in commercial
areas of the TND are encouraged to have dwelling units or
offices placed above first-floor commercial uses.
(d) Bulb-out curbs, raised textured crosswalks and similar traffic
calming measures are encouraged to be used in the main
street area.
(7) Housing types.
§ 203-314 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-314
1:652
(a) The allowed housing types within a TND are listed in
§ 203-314E.
(b) Any new dwelling units located within 150 feet from a singlefamily
detached dwelling that existed or approved outside of
the TND at the time that the TND Overlay District was applied
to the subject tract shall be a new single-family detached
dwelling. If such existing single-family detached dwelling is on
a lot of over 20,000 square feet, then any new dwellings built
within 150 feet of such dwelling area shall have a minimum lot
area of 8,000 square feet. The Township may require that a
twenty-foot-wide planting area with a naturalistic mix of
deciduous canopy trees, flowering trees, evergreen trees and
shrubs be planted along the perimeter of the TND tract where
there are concerns about compatibility with the adjacent uses.
Such planting area may overlap a rear yard, but shall be free of
buildings and fences.
(c) A minimum of 30% of the dwelling units shall be single-family
detached dwellings.
(8) Any alleys shall be designed to discourage through traffic. All
streets, whether public or private, shall be constructed following
Township roadbed specifications for a public street. Any alley shall
be constructed with six inches of crushed stone, two inches of
BCBC and one inch of binder course, unless a modification is
granted by the Board of Supervisors.
(a) Alleys shall have a minimum paved width of 12 feet if limited to
one-way traffic and 16 feet if allowing two-way traffic.
Additional width shall be required if any parallel parking is
provided. The right-of-way for an alley shall be at least four feet
wider than the cartway (two feet on each side of the cartway).
An alley shall have adequate sight distance at all corners and
intersections of alleys.
(b) Any alleys shall be maintained by a legally binding
homeowners association, at no expense to the Township.
(9) New streets shall be sufficient in width to allow on-street parking
along at least one side of each street, and to provide room for
bicycle riding, unless a separate bicycle pathway is provided. The
Township may require a prohibition of parking on one side of a
street if the street does not have sufficient width for parking on
both sides.
(10) Any commercial uses that are developed shall be located in an area
that is adjacent to a street that is similar to a traditional main street
of a historic borough or a Central Commons that is immediately
adjacent to such a street. One or more prominent sites adjacent to a
Central Commons should be proposed for a principal
nonresidential use. The subdivision approval for the traditional
§ 203-314 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-314
1:653
neighborhood development may allow for two or more alternative
uses for certain sites, to allow a developer with reasonable
flexibility to attract different uses.
(11) Public transit. An applicant for a Traditional Development
Neighborhood shall provide evidence that they have contacted the
provider of public transit services and requested the provision of
service to the development once it is significantly complete. If
public transit service is intended to eventually be provided, the
applicant shall show that provisions have been made for convenient
public transit stops. The Township may require the applicant to
construct one suitable shelter for persons waiting for a public bus.
The applicant shall also contact the school district and request
comment about appropriate school bus stops within or adjacent to
the TND.
(12) Streetlights. The applicant shall install streetlights meeting
minimum requirements of the Township and the electric provider.
Such streetlights shall be of sturdy construction, have a decorative
design similar to designs used more than 50 years ago, be dark in
color (such as black, dark gray or dark green), and have a
maximum total height of 22 feet. Streetlights shall be provided at
all street intersections and at other locations approved by the
Township as part of the subdivision and land development approval
process.
(13) Architecture. The intent is to have unified and consistent
architectural styles, while avoiding monotony. The applicant shall
establish legally enforceable provisions controlling the styles of
architecture, rooflines, porches and the general types of exterior
materials in such as manner as to incorporate the best features of
traditional architecture commonly found in boroughs and villages
in Pennsylvania, unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors that a more-contemporary architectural
design would be appropriate. Such features shall include front
porches on most dwellings, landscaped front yards, nonprominent
garage doors, varied rooflines and use of masonry on most facades.
The emphasis shall be upon sides of a building visible from a street.
(a) Such provisions shall be approved and sealed by a registered
architect. The substance of such draft provisions shall be
provided to the Township in writing for review at the time of
preliminary subdivision submission. Such provisions shall be
subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors as a condition
of final subdivision and land development approval. Any future
substantive changes to the architectural provisions established
under this section shall require approval by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
(b) Such provisions shall not be designed to require excessive
uniformity in design, nor to restrict home purchasers to a
§ 203-314 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-314
1:654
single design, but instead to encourage high-quality design
with a consistent character. Such provisions shall limit
monotony and excessive modernity in architectural design.
Standards should also be established for the design of fencing.
(c) The architectural provisions shall promote the use of display
windows facing onto the public street on a majority of
commercial principal buildings in the development. Blank
walls without window and door openings shall be avoided
facing onto a public street. Where window openings are not
feasible, then enclosed display windows may be used.
(d) The Township may require that some or all of the architectural
provisions be recorded and/or be included in a development
agreement with the Township. The Township shall have the
authority to ensure that a system continues to be in place to
enforce the architectural provisions that were required by the
Township. However, the Township shall accept no
responsibility to directly enforce private deed restrictions upon
individual properties.
(e) The architectural provisions shall promote use of front or side
porches, and be designed to minimize the visual impact of
garage doors as viewed from a street.
(f) The architectural provisions shall require use of decorative
masonry, or materials with a closely similar appearance, on
specified minimum percentages of the front facades of a
majority of the principal buildings in the development. A
maximum of 40% of the dwelling units shall have a front facade
that is composed primarily of vinyl siding.
(g) The architectural provisions shall promote varied rooflines,
overhangs and/or setbacks along attached dwelling units.
(h) The architectural provisions shall promote the use of
architectural detailing and features, such as decorative
porches, decorative cornices, shutters on multiple principal
buildings in the development.
(i) The architectural provisions shall address the locations of front
doors, particularly to ensure that most dwellings and business
uses have a front door facing onto a street at the front of the
building.
(j) Buildings of over 150 feet in length shall be designed to have
the appearance of smaller connected buildings.
(k) Such provisions shall address minimum sizes of street level
front windows, roof pitches as viewed from the street, siding
materials, porches, front stoops, front awnings, screening of
rooftop mechanical equipment and similar matters. Such
§ 203-314 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-314
1:655
provisions shall also address allowed materials for fences
visible from a street.
(14) Utility meters. Utility meters larger than 100 square inches each
shall not be attached to the front of a dwelling in a manner that
makes them highly visible from a street. If utility meters are
attached to the front of the dwelling, they should have colors
similar to adjacent building materials and/or should be screened by
landscaping.
E. Allowed uses.
(1) The following uses shall be allowed within an approved traditional
neighborhood development, provided all the uses are consistent
with the overall master plan:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Twin dwellings, side-by-side, with each dwelling on its own feesimple
or condominium lot.
(c) Townhouses, with each dwelling on its own fee-simple or
condominium lot.
(d) Places of worship*.
(e) Public transit passenger shelters.
(f) Library, community center, post office* and museum*.
(g) Child or adult day care as a principal use meeting § 203-402 or
as an accessory use meeting § 203-403.
(h) Nursing home* or assisted living/personal care center*, which
shall not exceed 10% of the total tract area of the development.
(i) Offices*.
(j) Meeting facility for a membership club*.
(k) Retail store*, art gallery*, farmers market*, financial
institution,* personal service use*, or restaurant,* with each
establishment limited to a maximum floor area of 10,000
square feet. Outdoor cafes* are encouraged and may extend
onto a sidewalk, provided that a minimum four-foot-wide
pedestrian pathway is maintained. Drive-through facilities, fuel
sales and "adult uses" are prohibited in all cases, except that a
financial institution may include a drive-through.
(l) Exercise club* or hotel/bed-and-breakfast inn with a maximum
of 30 guest rooms*
(m) Apartment dwelling units may only be allowed above a streetlevel
commercial use or where allowed under Subsection
§ 203-314 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-314
1:656
E(1)(s) below, and may only be allowed in areas designated for
such uses in the approved master plan. These dwelling units
may be designed as "live work units" that encourage a person
to work on the first floor and live in the upper stories.
(n) Indoor or outdoor noncommercial recreation facilities owned
by the Township or a property owner association.
(o) Preserved open space or a nature preserve.
(p) Golf course with a minimum acreage of 50 acres.
(q) Major and minor home occupations and accessory uses shall be
addressed in the same manner as the underlying zoning
district, except that a major home occupation shall be
permitted by right in an area of the TND that is approved by
the Township for commercial uses.
(r) A second dwelling unit in an allowed single-family detached
dwelling building or above the garage of a single-family
detached dwelling, provided:
[1] No more than 5% of such dwellings shall have a second
dwelling unit;
[2] The locations of the lots allowed to have a second dwelling
unit shall be designated on the master plan; and
[3] The second dwelling unit shall not include more than 1,000
square feet of habitable indoor floor area and shall not
include more than two bedrooms.
* Uses marked with an asterisk shall only be permitted
adjacent to or within 200 feet from a Central
Commons within a TND or along a traditional
downtown-style main street, unless the uses are
placed within a rehabilitated historic building.
Business buildings shall have their main pedestrian
entrance facing a street or a Central Commons. No
outdoor commercial storage shall be permitted unless
it is completely screened by landscaping and/or
buildings.
F. Preserved open space.
(1) A minimum of 20% of the total lot area of the tract shall be
permanent preserved open space.
(a) The minimum amount of preserved open space shall be
reduced from 20% to 15% of the total lot area of the tract if the
applicant commits to construct and continue to provide a
minimum of three of the following types of recreational
facilities, and provided such facilities are available at a
§ 203-314 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-314
1:657
minimum for use of the residents and their invited guests with
no charge that exceeds the costs of operating and maintaining
the facility. A minimum of one of the three recreation facilities
shall be a community center with a minimum floor area of
2,500 square feet built around an ADA-accessible meeting
room for community meetings and social events. That
community center may be temporarily used as a sales office
until the TND is completed, and may also include a property
owners' association office.
[1] 2 golf putting greens.
[2] 2 regulation-sized tennis courts.
[3] One full or two half basketball courts.
[4] An outdoor amphitheater that allows seating by a
minimum of 100 people and is used for outdoor music
concerts, at a minimum, and which does not involve shows
with a mandatory admission charge.
[5] A swimming pool.
[6] A roofed picnic pavilion with tables and seating for a
minimum of 40 persons.
[7] A fitness center with a variety of exercise machines.
[8] An open grass generally level play field with a minimum
length of 100 feet and a minimum width of 50 feet that
allows for unscheduled informal sports by young persons.
[9] An improved area near the commercial main street area
that is suitable for special events, including both hardsurfaced
and landscaped areas and benches.
[10] A decorative water fountain or waterfall of sufficient size
and scope so as to be a focal point of the community,
located at or near the commercial main street.
(b) A minimum of 25% of the required preserved open space shall
be in an interconnected area that is linked together with a
looping recreation trail. The preserved open space shall meet
the definition of "open space, preserved or common" in
§ 203-202.
[1] SALDO. This open space requirement shall be in place of
any recreation land or fee requirements in the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, provided that a
minimum of 50% of the required preserved open space is
improved for active and passive recreation purposes that
is open to use by the residents of the TND, at a minimum. A
§ 203-314 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-314
1:658
payment of a fee in lieu of providing open space required
by this section shall not be allowed for a TND.
[2] A landscaping plan for the preserved open space shall be
prepared by a registered landscape architect.
(c) A minimum of 25% of the required preserved open space shall
be composed of the following areas when added together:
landscaped central commons, squares, greens or similar areas
suitable for at least passive recreation and that each include
walkways/paths and trees.
(2) At least a portion of the preserved open space shall be provided
within at least one Central Commons with a minimum lot area of
20,000 square feet.
(a) The majority of the Central Commons should be planted so as
to eventually result in a canopy of deciduous trees over areas
of the Commons that are not planned for active recreation.
Existing trees may be retained to serve the same purposes, if
found acceptable by the Township Shade Tree Commission.
(b) The required Central Commons shall have a minimum width
and minimum length of 60 feet.
(c) The required Central Commons shall include benches of
durable construction and hard surface pathways. The majority
of the pathways in a Central Commons shall be ADAaccessible.
(3) Stormwater detention basins and drainage channels shall not be
used to meet the minimum common open space requirements,
except for areas that the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
Township Board of Supervisors would be able to be attractively
maintained and be usable for recreation during the vast majority of
weather conditions or that would have the appearance of a natural
scenic pond.
G. Dimensional requirements.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings:**
(a) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet. See provisions in Section
314.D.7. that require larger lot sizes adjacent to certain preexisting
single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Minimum lot width at the minimum building setback line: 40
feet, except 50 feet if garage door(s) for two or more vehicles
will face the front of the dwelling along a street.
(2) Twin dwelling unit:**
(a) Minimum lot area: 4,500 square feet.
§ 203-314 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-314
1:659
(b) Minimum lot width at the minimum building setback line: 30
feet, except 40 feet if garage door(s) for two or more vehicles
will face the front of the dwelling along a street.
(3) Townhouse dwelling unit:**
(a) Minimum lot area: 2,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum dwelling unit width at the front of the enclosed
dwelling unit: 18 feet, except 24 feet if garage door(s) for two
or more vehicles will face onto the front of the dwelling along a
street.
(c) Maximum number of connected townhouse dwellings: eight.
(d) Minimum separation distance between each set of townhouses:
20 feet.
(4) Principal nonresidential use (a lot may include more than one
allowed nonresidential use, and within Township-approved
commercial areas, principal buildings with a first-floor business use
may be attached to each other and may include upper story
dwelling units):
(a) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width at the minimum building setback line: 30
feet.
(5) Maximum building coverage for each phase of the TND after
completion: 40%.
(6) Building setbacks/yards** (along a street, minimum yards shall be
measured from the proposed future/ultimate right-of-way):
(a) Front yard and side yard from a local street: minimum five feet,
maximum 30 feet from a new local street.
(b) Front yard or side yard from a collector street: minimum 10
feet, maximum 35 feet from a new collector street.
(c) Any yard from an arterial street: minimum 30 feet, except
minimum of 10 feet if the arterial street is integrated into the
commercial portion of the development.
(d) Side yards: minimum five feet each, except zero where
buildings are approved to be attached. Commercial buildings
shall be allowed to be attached to each other within the
approved commercial portion of the development. Each twin
dwelling unit shall have one side yard, while a side yard shall
be required for each end townhouse unit. A detached garage
located to the rear of the lot shall have a minimum side yard
setback of three feet. If a garage is only connected to a
dwelling by a breezeway, it may be considered to be attached
§ 203-314 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-314
1:660
or detached by the applicant for the purposes of meeting
setback requirements.
[1] For a detached principal building, the subdivision plan
may be approved with one side yard wider than the other
to allow wider use by the residents of the larger side yard
and/or to provide for a side driveway to rear parking. In
such case, one side yard may be a minimum of three feet,
provided the total width of the two side yards equals a
minimum of 10 feet.
(e) Rear yard for a principal nonresidential building: minimum 30
feet.
(f) Rear yard for a vehicle garage serving a dwelling or a dwelling
unit that is allowed to be above a garage: minimum of five feet.
A deck attached to a dwelling may extend into the rear yard
and may extend over a vehicle garage, provided the deck is not
enclosed.
(g) Each dwelling unit, other than an apartment, shall have a
minimum of 300 square feet of usable outdoor space for the
exclusive use of the residents of that dwelling unit. If a singlefamily
detached dwelling is allowed to have an accessory
dwelling, then the two dwellings together shall provide 300
square feet of such outdoor space. Such outdoor private space
may be a yard, garden, patio, porch or unenclosed deck or a
combination of such features. Measures shall be used to
provide some measure of privacy for residents in rear yards,
such as use of decorative walls, fencing, berming, latticework,
awnings or landscaping.
(h) See provisions in § 203-803 that require two front yards for
corner lots.
(i) Swimming pools and accessory buildings that are not vehicle
garages shall have a minimum side yard and rear yard setback
of three feet.
(j) A maximum of 20% of the single-family detached, twin or
townhouse dwelling units are not required to have a minimum
lot width directly along a street-right-of-way, provided each
dwelling unit:
[1] Has a minimum lot width of 20 feet along an alley; and
[2] Fronts upon a landscaped common open space with a
paved or concrete sidewalk or pathway that provides
pedestrian access to a street.
§ 203-314 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-314
1:661
(k) A maximum of five feet of the required front yard setback may
be used for an unenclosed front porch, stoop, steps,
handicapped ramp, awning, or canopy.
** In place of individual fee-simple lots meeting these
dimensional requirements, an applicant may choose to
utilize a condominium form of ownership. In such case,
the lots shall be laid out so that the dimensional and
coverage requirements would be physically able to be met
as if the dwellings were on fee-simple lots. However, for
a condominium development, the actual lot lines do not
need to be legally established.
(7) Parking setback. No parking area of five or more spaces shall be
located within 30 feet from a contiguous lot line of a dwelling that
is outside the perimeter of the TND and that existed prior to the
enactment of this section.
(8) Maximum overall density. The maximum overall density of the
traditional neighborhood development shall be determined as
follows, as calculated in acres (and decimals):
(a) Start with the total land area of the development tract, after
deleting existing rights-of-way of existing streets.
(b) Delete 75% of all areas of land with a slope exceeding 25% and
delete 50% of the area of lands with a slope over 15% to 25%
from Subsection G(8)(a) above.
(c) Delete 50% of the area of lands within the 100-year floodplain
from Subsection G(8)(a) above.
(d) Multiply the resulting acreage by the following dwelling units
per acre to result in the maximum number of permitted
dwelling units within the development. See bonuses in
Subsection G(9) below.
[1] For acreage in the AR Agricultural Residential District:
two dwelling units per acre.
[2] For acreage in the R-1 District: four dwelling units per
acre.
[3] For acreage in the R-2 District: six dwelling units per acre.
Note: This method of calculating density does not require
the deletion of stormwater detention basins, shared
parking areas, new streets, new preserved/common open
space, new alleys or similar features. Therefore, the
actual density that could be achieved on a "net" piece of
land would be higher than the above numbers.
§ 203-314 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-314
1:662
(e) Each three beds in a nursing home or personal care center
shall be counted the same as one dwelling unit for the purposes
of controlling density.
(9) Density bonuses:
(a) As an option to the applicant, the applicant may apply for
conditional use approval from the Board of Supervisors to
approve the following increases in the maximum density
provided in Subsection G(8) above. In such case, only the
increase in density shall need conditional use approval.
[Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
[1] If the applicant proves that the architectural standards
required by § 203-314D(13) will result in excellence in
traditional architectural beyond the minimum
requirements of this chapter, the maximum density may be
increased by a maximum of 0.5 additional dwelling unit
per acre.
[2] The maximum density may be increased by a maximum of
0.5 additional dwelling unit per acre if the applicant
commits to provide a minimum of 30% of the total tract
area in common open space.
[3] The maximum density may be increased by a maximum of
0.5 additional dwelling unit per acre if the applicant
commits to construct substantial recreation improvements
and landscaping beyond the amounts of landscaping and
improvements that would otherwise be required. The
market value of the additional recreational improvements
and landscaping shall exceed a minimum of $15,000 per
each additional dwelling unit that is allowed.
[4] The maximum density may also be increased through use
of the age-restricted housing bonus provided in § 203-315.
(10) Maximum building height: 45 feet or three stories, whichever is
more restrictive. See exceptions in § 203-802 and definition in
§ 203-202.
H. Landscaping and street trees.
(1) See § 203-804. A green area with a minimum diameter of 4.5 feet
shall be provided to accommodate street trees between the curb
and the sidewalk, unless an alternative location for street trees is
specifically approved by the Township. Tree wells may be used.
Areas that are between the dwelling and the street curb and that
are not used for approved sidewalks shall be maintained in a
vegetative ground cover and landscaping.
§ 203-314 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-314
1:663
(2) A minimum of one deciduous street tree shall be required for an
average of each 50 feet of street frontage on each side of each
existing or proposed street. A uniform separation is not required
between street trees. Such street trees shall have a minimum trunk
width when planted of two inches, measured five inches above the
ground level. The species shall be approved by the Township Shade
Tree Commission.
(3) The site design of a traditional neighborhood development shall
carefully consider and maximize the preservation of existing
healthy attractive trees with a trunk width of six inches or more,
measured at a height of 3.5 feet above the ground level.
(4) A landscape planting plan shall be prepared by a registered
landscape architect. Such plan may specify a range of species in
various locations and may include typical planting locations
without specifying the exact location of each plant. Such plan shall
state the minimum initial sizes of landscaping. Such landscaping
plan shall be offered for review by the Planning Commission and
Shade Tree Commission and shall be approved by the Supervisors
as part of the subdivision plan.
I. Parking incentive. An applicant may meet a maximum of 50% of the offstreet
parking space requirements of adjacent uses by counting onstreet
spaces parallel to the curb along a local street or along an alley.
This provision shall be permitted only:
(1) For spaces along the same side of a street along curb that is
directly contiguous to the set of lots being served, or a new alley
within a TND, and provided the spaces are within 200 feet of each
use they serve; and
(2) If the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the street or alley would be sufficiently wide to
allow the parking, and that there are no unusual safety hazards
involved, compared to typical on-street parking at other locations;
and
(3) If the applicant proves that such number of parking spaces could be
legally accommodated along the street, considering the locations of
driveways, fire hydrants and street corners.
Note: Required parking may also be reduced through § 203-602F,
particularly for shared parking among uses.
J. Deed restrictions/covenants. The applicant shall submit a written
statement of the proposed substance of deed restrictions or similar
controls that would affect matters addressed in this chapter.
K. Association provisions. If applicable, a draft set of homeowner
association or condominium association provisions shall be submitted
§ 203-314 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-314
1:664
for legal acceptance by the Township Solicitor prior to recording of the
final subdivision plan.
L. SALDO and street standards. As authorized by the traditional
neighborhood provisions of the State Municipalities Planning Code, the
Township Board of Supervisors shall have the authority to modify
specific street and other requirements of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, without proof of hardship, in order to result in
a development that is pedestrian-oriented and that promotes low-speed
traffic.
(1) For example, the Board of Supervisors may approve reduced street
cartway widths, street right-of-way widths and street curve radii.
(2) The Board of Supervisors may also defer certain submission
requirements from the preliminary to the final plan stage.
(3) The applicant shall submit a request for modifications in writing,
which shall state the reasons why the modification would be
consistent with the purposes for a traditional neighborhood
development as stated in this chapter and the State Municipalities
Planning Code and would be in the public interest while protecting
public safety.
(4) The following street right-of-way and cartway widths shall be
allowed for new streets that are not dedicated to the Township or
the state, in addition to options that are allowed under the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance:
(a) A street fronting upon commercial development with two-way
traffic may be constructed with two travel lanes of 12 feet
each, diagonal parking lanes of 18 feet each or eight feet wide
parallel parking lanes, a 4.5 feet wide planting area for street
trees using tree wells on each side of the street, pedestrian
sidewalks on each side of the street that are a minimum of
eight feet in width (which may count walkable parts of tree
wells as sidewalks), and a right-of-way width that extends a
minimum of nine feet on either side of the curbline.
(b) A street with two-way traffic that does not front upon
commercial development may be constructed with two travel
lanes of 10 feet each and eight feet wide parallel parking, a 4.5
feet wide planting strip with street trees on each side of the
street, pedestrian sidewalks on each side of the street that are
a minimum of five feet and a minimum right-of-way width that
extends a minimum of 9.5 feet on either side of the curbline.
(5) Any street within the TND Overlay District, whether public or
private, shall meet the same minimum construction material
requirements as any new street intended to be dedicated to the
Township under Township ordinances.
§ 203-314 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-314
1:665
§ 203-315. Age-restricted residential development.
(6) The development shall be subject to review by Township Fire
Officials to assist the Township in determining whether sufficient
access points, cartway widths and turning radii will be provided for
access by emergency vehicles and equipment.
M. Access controls. The applicant shall prove that the development
involves a fully coordinated interior traffic access system that
minimizes the number of streets and driveways entering onto a State
highway.
N. Phasing. A phasing plan shall be submitted for the TND. The applicant
shall show that each phase of the TND would be able to function
properly and meet Township requirements if later phases of the TND
are not completed.
O. Signs. For commercial uses, signs shall be allowed meeting the
requirements for signs in the CN district. However, no signs shall be
internally illuminated, and no freestanding sign shall have a height
exceeding eight feet.
A. This § 203-315 provides a density bonus for a residential development
that is age-restricted in compliance with the federal requirements for
"housing for older persons" as specified in the United States Code.
(Note: As of 2006, such provisions were in 42 U.S.C. § 3607.) This
provision shall not change the allowed dwelling types in the district.
This option is available as a by-right bonus in any zoning district where
dwellings are allowed.
B. In order to be approved by the Township as age-restricted residential
Development, every dwelling unit (except one dwelling unit for one
manager) on a tract of land shall be permanently restricted by deed, by
any lease and by notes on the recorded plan to the following occupancy
limitations: 1) a minimum of one head of household of each dwelling
unit shall be age 55 years or older or who is physically disabled as
defined by Social Security disability regulations, and 2) no person
under age 18 shall live in the dwelling unit for more than 30 days in any
calendar year, unless such person has a disability as defined under
federal fair housing regulations. Any violation of such age restrictions
shall be a violation of this chapter. In addition, in order to be approved
as age-restricted development, the applicant shall establish an
appropriate legal entity, such as a property owners' association that has
the duty, authority and responsibility to enforce such age restrictions
over time. If a household met this requirement at the time of initial
occupancy, it shall not be required to move in case of death, divorce or
separation of a resident of that same household.
C. If an entire residential development is approved under this § 203-315,
then the minimum lot area or the minimum average lot area per
dwelling unit, as applicable, shall be reduced by 15%. Alternatively,
§ 203-314 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-315
1:666
§ 203-316. Historic buildings.
where density is stated in terms of a maximum number of dwelling
units per acre, the maximum density may be increased by 15% under
this § 203-315. The minimum side yards may also be reduced by 15%.
An age-restricted residential development shall meet all other
requirements of Township ordinances, including limitations on the
housing types allowed in that zoning district.
D. This density bonus shall only be approved if the development includes
an appropriate system of sidewalks or pathways. At least one looped
portion of a pathway system shall have slopes and a surface that are
intended for use by older persons, with slopes consistent with the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or no more than 5%, whichever is
less. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
A. Purposes. In addition to serving the overall purposes of this chapter,
this section is intended to:
(1) Promote the retention of community character through
preservation of the local heritage by recognition and protection of
historic and architectural resources.
(2) Establish a clear process to review and approve demolition of
designated historic buildings.
(3) Encourage continued use, appropriate rehabilitation and adaptive
reuse of historic buildings.
(4) Implement Sections 603(b), 603(g), 604(1) and 605(2) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code which address
protecting and facilitating the preservation of historic values
through zoning and using zoning to regulate uses and structures at
or near places having unique historic, architectural or patriotic
interest or value.
(5) Strengthen the local economy by promoting heritage tourism,
improving property values and increasing investment in older
buildings.
(6) Carry out recommendations of the Township Comprehensive Plan.
B. Applicability.
(1) This § 203-316 shall apply to any principal building within a V
Village District, except for a building or building addition for which
the Zoning Officer has knowledge that it was built after 1945. The
applicant may provide evidence to the Zoning Officer that a
building was built after 1945. This § 203-316 shall also apply to any
principal building identified on the Historic Buildings Map as an
historic building.
§ 203-315 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-316
1:667
(2) Any partial or complete demolition of a principal building regulated
by this § 203-316 shall only occur in compliance with this section.
(3) Demolition shall be defined as "the dismantling, tearing down,
removal or razing of the exterior of a building, in whole or in part.
This term shall not include changes to the interior of a building,
provided such changes do not alter the structural integrity of the
building." A partial demolition shall include, but not be limited to:
removal of an attached porch roof, removal of porch columns and
removal of exterior architectural features.
C. Historic Buildings Map. An Historic Buildings Map may be adopted as
part of this chapter, or a later amendment of this chapter.
D. Approval of demolition.
(1) A building regulated by this § 203-316 shall not be demolished, in
whole or in part, unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors as a conditional use that one or more of
the following conditions exists:
(a) The existing building cannot feasibly and reasonably be
reused, and that such situation is not the result of intentional
neglect or demolition by neglect by the owner; or
(b) The denial of the demolition would result in unreasonable
economic hardship to the owner, and the hardship was not selfcreated;
or
(c) The demolition is necessary to allow a project to occur that will
have substantial, special and unusual public benefit that would
greatly outweigh the loss of the building regulated by
§ 203-316. For example, a demolition may be needed for a
necessary expansion of an existing public building or to allow a
street improvement that is necessary to alleviate a public
safety hazard; or
(d) The existing building has no historical or architectural
significance and the demolition will not adversely impact upon
the streetscape. To meet this condition, the applicant may
present information concerning the proposed design of any
replacement building or use to show that the proposed
building or use will result in a net improvement to the
streetscape.
(2) For approval of a demolition, the standards of this § 203-316 shall
apply in place of the general conditional use standards. In
reviewing the application, the Board of Supervisors shall consider
the following:
(a) The effect of the demolition on the historical significance,
streetscape and architectural integrity of neighboring historic
§ 203-316 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-316
1:668
buildings and on the historic character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(b) The feasibility of other alternatives to demolition.
(3) A complete application for the demolition shall be submitted by the
applicant in writing. This application shall include the following:
(a) The name, address and daytime telephone number of the
owner of record and the applicant for the demolition.
(b) Recent exterior photographs of the building proposed for
demolition. If the applicant is alleging that the building cannot
be reused or rehabilitated, then interior photos and floor plans
shall be provided as needed to support the applicant's claim.
(c) A site plan drawn to scale showing existing buildings and the
proposed demolition.
(d) A written statement of the reasons for the demolition.
(e) The proposed use of the site, and a proposed timeline for
development of that proposed use.
(4) Evidence. The applicant shall provide sufficient credible evidence
to justify any claims that a building cannot feasibly be repaired or
reused.
(5) Emergency. The Zoning Officer may issue a permit for the
demolition without compliance with this section if the Building
Inspector certifies in writing that the building represents a clear
and immediate hazard to public safety, and that no other
reasonable alternatives exist to demolition.
(6) In the V District where new construction or vehicle parking is
proposed in place of the demolished building, information about
the proposed use shall be provided prior to approval of the
demolition.
(7) If a principal building is to be demolished, a performance bonding
shall be required to be posted to ensure that the site is adequately
cleared after the demolition, with proper disposal of debris.
(8) A separate demolition permit shall also be required under the
Township Construction Codes, and the applicant shall prove
compliance with State Department of Environmental Protection
requirements for disposal of the debris.
E. Exceptions. Conditional use approval shall not be needed for the
following:
(1) Demolition of accessory buildings or structures.
§ 203-316 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-316
1:669
§ 203-317. Additional requirements for the BC District.
(2) Interior renovations or removal of features (such as a rear porch)
that do not harm the structural stability of the building and that are
not visible from a public street (not including an alley).
(3) Removal of features that were added after 1945, such as a modern
porch or aluminum siding or carport.
(4) Relocation of a building within the Township, provided that the
relocation does not result in a partial or complete demolition that is
regulated by this section.
A. Impervious coverage. The maximum impervious coverage provided in
§ 203-307A may be modified as follows, if the flexibility is used to
provide a substantial buffer adjacent to existing dwellings:
(1) Within a subdivision or land development, the maximum
impervious coverages of certain individual lots may be approved to
be a maximum of 70%, provided that deed restrictions are put into
place to restrict the maximum impervious coverage of other lots to
a lower percentage, so as to ensure that a maximum impervious
coverage of 60% is maintained for the total land area of all lots.
This provision is intended to allow for substantial buffer areas
adjacent to dwellings or for common recreation areas.
(a) For example by deed restrictions, one lot of two acres might
have a maximum impervious coverage of 75%, while another
two acre lot is approved with a maximum impervious coverage
of 55%, resulting in an average impervious coverage of 65%.
B. Height. A maximum height of 60 feet or six stories, whichever is more
restrictive, shall apply if a BC District includes more than 10 contiguous
acres. If a BC District includes less than 10 contiguous acres, then a
maximum height of 40 feet or three stories, whichever is more
restrictive, shall apply. Also, a maximum height of 40 feet or three
stories, whichever is more restrictive, shall apply for any portion of a
building that is within 100 feet from the lot line of an existing
residential use.
(1) Customary extensions of a building that are not occupied by
persons may exceed this height limit, such as elevator equipment,
skylights, water towers, chimneys, smokestacks, parapet walls
used to screen mechanical equipment, and similar features.
C. Landscaping and screening.
(1) See §§ 203-803 and 203-804.
(2) Planting strips shall be provided adjacent to each public street. The
planting strip shall have a minimum width of 30 feet adjacent to the
curbline of an arterial street and 15 feet adjacent to the curbline to
§ 203-316 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-317
1:670
any other street. If curbing is not provided, then such width shall
be measured from the street right-of-way line. A sidewalk of
approved width and approximately perpendicular driveways of
approved width may be placed within this planting strip. The
planting strip shall be maintained in deciduous shade trees, shrubs
and an attractive vegetative ground cover.
(3) As part of land development review for each new principal building,
a landscaping plan shall be submitted to the Township. A minimum
of 20% of each lot shall be landscaped, which shall include grass or
other vegetative ground cover and an appropriate distribution of
trees and shrubs.
D. Utilities. All new electric and telephone service lines within the
development shall be placed underground.
E. Pedestrian access and amenities.
(1) See the provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance regarding sidewalks along streets. An applicant may
apply for a modification under such ordinance to allow a
bituminous asphalt bicycle/walking trail in place of concrete
sidewalks.
(2) Consideration should be given to providing pedestrian routes (such
as crushed stone paths in areas that are not along a public street)
and outdoor lunch areas with picnic tables and trees within a
subdivision for the use of employees of businesses within the
subdivision.
F. Additional BC provisions.
(1) Facade materials. It is strongly encouraged that a minimum of 75%
of the facades of buildings facing onto streets consist of glass, brick
or other decorative masonry. This provision is intended to avoid
metal or cinder block construction, at least as visible from a street.
Subdividers are strongly encouraged to place such a requirement
on each lot through deed restrictions.
(2) Landscaped front yards. Parking in the front yard should primarily
be used for visitor parking and handicapped parking. Other vehicle
parking should primarily be placed to the side or rear of buildings.
(3) Loading docks. An applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Township that loading docks have been located within reason to
seek to minimize their visibility from dwellings, public streets and
expressways. No loading dock routinely served by tractor-trailer
trucks shall be located within 75 feet of the existing right-of-way of
a public street.
(4) Access. The Board of Supervisors may require that vehicle access
be provided using an alternative other than direct access from lots
§ 203-317 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-317
1:671
§ 203-318. Additional requirements in the V Village District.
onto Linglestown Road or another arterial street. These
alternatives may include, but are not limited to, access onto a
street that is perpendicular to Linglestown Road, access by
multiple lots onto a new interior street, use of a cross-easement
from an adjacent nonresidential lot, or another method that is
not in conflict with minimum sight distance requirements of the
state. The Board of Supervisors may require that a new lot, use
or land development include a cross-easement and an appropriate
driveway design or a stub right-of-way to allow adjacent lots to
access an arterial street at an appropriate and coordinated access
point.
A. Purposes. The V District is intended to serve the following purposes, in
addition to purposes described in the Comprehensive Plan and the
overall objectives of this chapter:
(1) To promote traditional neighborhood development in village areas,
particularly to protect significant historic resources in accordance
with the traditional neighborhood development provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, which purposes are
hereby included by reference;
(2) To create traditional neighborhood development that regulates new
development and infill development where existing uses and
structures may be incorporated into existing development;
(3) To promote the historic integrity of village areas;
(4) To develop and redevelop in a manner generally consistent with
historic development patterns and existing character of village
areas;
(5) To uphold the design principles of traditional neighborhood
development;
(6) To promote the use, reuse, and renovation of existing structures;
(7) To preserve the look and feel of existing village characteristics,
which may include a centrally located village square, greenspaces,
commercial enterprises, public buildings, residences, and facilities
for social activity, recreation and community functions;
(8) To encourage a livable neighborhood with a fully integrated, mixed
use, pedestrian-oriented community;
(9) To provide for adequate and safe circulation patterns for
pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle traffic, and other modes of
transportation through village areas;
§ 203-317 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-318
1:672
(10) To foster a sense of place and community by providing a setting
that encourages the natural intermingling of everyday uses and
activities within a recognizable community;
(11) To support and enhance the economic viability of village areas;
(12) To encourage off-street community parking areas located on small
vacant lots and parcels adjacent to alleys, based upon site and land
development plan approvals;
(13) To protect natural, historic, and cultural resources of village areas
through regulation of the use of land;
(14) To encourage a variety of architectural features and building
materials to give each building or group of buildings a distinct
character; and
(15) To develop compactly in ways that are designed for the human
scale, including sensitivity to walking distances, the height of
buildings, the design of streetlights and signs, sidewalks, and other
features that preserve the look and feel of village areas as seen
from public view.
B. Dimensional standards.
(1) Lot area: 6,000 square feet minimum.
(2) Lot access: Each lot shall front on a public street, not including an
alley. The Township may establish minimum cartway and pavement
standards for abutting segments of an alley.
(3) Minimum lot width: 50 feet measured at front lot line. The
minimum lot width shall be 45 feet per dwelling unit for a singlefamily
semidetached dwelling.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 120 feet measured at the side lot line.
(5) Setbacks: The following minimum setbacks shall apply:
(a) Front yard setback: 15 feet, 10 feet of which may be occupied
by an unenclosed front porch, which may be covered by a roof.
Where the majority of principal buildings on a block along a
public street have a certain predominant front yard setback,
then any new principal building shall be constructed with a
setback that is not more than 10 feet greater than such
predominant front yard setback.
(b) Rear yard setback: 30 feet, except five feet from an alley for a
storage building or vehicle garage that is accessory to a
dwelling.
(c) Side yard setback: five feet, except 10 feet for a new principal
nonresidential building from a lot line of a lot occupied by a
principal dwelling.
§ 203-318 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-318
1:673
(6) Maximum impervious surface per lot: 80%, except 65% if the lot
does not include a principal nonresidential use.
(7) Height regulations:
(a) Minimum height: The height of a principal building or
structure shall not be less than 22 feet. There shall be no
minimum height for accessory buildings or structures.
(b) Maximum height:
[1] No principal building or structure shall be erected to a
height greater than 35 feet.
[2] No accessory building or structure shall be erected to a
height greater than 20 feet.
[3] Exceptions to maximum height include steeples of places
of worship, cupolas, flagpoles, or other appurtenances
usually required to be placed above the roof line, and not
intended for human occupancy, provided that the height of
the appurtenance shall not exceed a maximum of 20 feet
over the building height.
(c) All principal buildings shall be at least two stories and no more
than three stories in height.
(8) Building area:
(a) No single use shall exceed a gross floor area per floor of 3,500
square feet.
(b) No building or structure shall exceed a total gross floor area of
5,000 square feet, unless otherwise specified herein.
C. Parking and access.
(1) If a public alley or a non-through-street borders any portion of the
lot, then any new vehicle access to the lot shall be from the public
alley or non-through street, unless existing conditions prohibit safe
access from any public alley and any non-through street.
(2) Parking spaces shall be located to meet the following requirements:
(a) All uses shall provide parking on the same lot with the
principal use that the parking serves or off-premises within 500
lineal feet of the lot. When the off-premises parking option is
taken, it shall be met in one or more of the following ways:
[1] On-Street: Parking spaces along the street frontage of the
lot, except where there are driveway curb cuts, may be
counted toward the minimum number of parking spaces
required for the use on that lot.
§ 203-318 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-318
1:674
[2] Parking lot:
[a] Parking for two or more private uses in an off-street
parking lot, if the total number of spaces provided is
not less than the sum of the spaces required for each
use individually.
[b] However, the number of spaces required in a common
parking lot may be reduced below this total if
approved under § 203-602F.
[3] Fee-in-lieu:
[a] Fees-in-lieu of providing a certain number of the
required off-street parking spaces may be allowed, as
provided in this section. A fee-in-lieu of parking shall
only be allowed where additional parking is required
because of a new building or building addition or
change in use and the additional parking spaces
cannot feasibly be provided on the lot. [Amended
11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
[b] Fee-in-lieu of parking shall be subject to such
reasonable operations and maintenance fees as may
be assessed for community lots.
[c] Fee-in-lieu of parking shall be permitted under the
following provisions:
[i] If this option is chosen, the applicant must:
provide at least two of the required parking
spaces on site; and provide a minimum of 50% of
the total required off-street parking spaces in a
manner that does not use the fee-in-lieu of
parking option.
[ii] The Board of Supervisors, upon written
application, may permit the payment of a fee by
the applicant in lieu of the applicant's providing
such required off-street parking within the V
District.
[iii] The fee to be charged shall be a fee per space in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted
through resolution by the Board of Supervisors
and on file at the administrative offices of the
Township and payable in accordance with the
administrative policies established by the Board
of Supervisors. If a fee schedule has not been
established for such fee, then the fee shall be
$3,000 per parking space.
§ 203-318 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-318
1:675
[iv] All fees collected hereunder and all interest
earned thereon shall be placed in the Parking
Facilities Fund to be established by the Board of
Supervisors, and such funds shall be used only for
studies relating to parking and parking facilities,
the acquisition and/or lease of land for
improvement or maintenance of municipally
operated off-street parking facilities.
[v] Such collected fees shall be expended for the
purposes set forth herein within 10 years of the
receipt thereof.
(3) Off-street parking lots shall be located to the side or rear of
buildings and shall not be located within the front yard. Side yard
parking shall be designed so that parking spaces do not protrude
into the front yard.
(4) Reduction of impervious surfaces through the use of interlocking
pavers, or other pervious or semipervious materials is strongly
encouraged for areas, such as community parking lots and parking
areas for periodic uses in accordance with Chapter 170,
Stormwater Regulations.
D. Village design standards.
(1) Design and construction of new buildings and structures,
alterations to existing buildings and structures, and demolition of
buildings and structures shall be completed in a manner consistent
with the preservation of the character of a village and shall meet
the following requirements.
(a) Principal buildings shall be located to have their front facade
facing towards a public street. A principal building shall not be
oriented to front toward a parking lot.
(b) No drive-through service or drive-in facilities shall be
permitted.
(c) Outdoor lighting:
[1] Lighting on pole fixtures shall not exceed 16 feet in height.
[2] The maximum maintained illumination average shall not
exceed 5.0 footcandles for nonresidential sites and 2.0
footcandles for residential sites. The minimum maintained
illumination average shall not be less than 2.0 footcandles
for nonresidential sites and 0.5 footcandle for residential
sites.
[3] The maximum permitted illumination at the property line
for nonresidential uses that are located adjacent to other
nonresidential uses shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle. All
§ 203-318 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-318
1:676
other uses, including nonresidential uses adjacent to
residential uses, shall not exceed 0.2 footcandle as
measured at ground level.
[4] Exterior lighting shall be recessed and shielded at the top
and sides to:
[a] Prevent light shining beyond the lot lines onto
adjacent properties or public ways.
[b] Direct light downward or otherwise angled in order to
prevent glare and overhead sky glow.
[5] Lighting from all fixtures, including internally illuminated
signs that are to remain illuminated during nonoperating
hours shall be reduced by at least 75% of the lighting level
used during hours of operation; provided that such
reduction shall not apply to residential uses.
(d) Outdoor storage and display:
[1] Outdoor storage and display area, when accessory to a
permitted use, shall be regulated as follows:
[a] Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part
of the street right-of-way and no other area intended
or designed for pedestrian use or required parking
area;
[b] Outdoor storage, excluding display, shall be shielded
from view from the public streets and adjacent
residential uses, and shall not be located in the
required front yard; and
[c] Outdoor display shall only be permitted during
business hours of operation. There shall be no
overnight outdoor display of goods or services.
[2] Maximum areas:
[a] Outdoor display areas shall not exceed 300 square
feet.
[b] Outdoor storage areas shall not exceed an area of 25%
of the total lot size.
(e) Restaurant outdoor seating area: outdoor customer seating
areas shall be permitted as additional restaurant seating,
provided the following standards are met:
[1] Outdoor customer seating areas shall include, but not be
limited to, patios, decks, terraces, and porches;
§ 203-318 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-318
1:677
[2] Outdoor customer seating areas shall not exceed 600
square feet; and
[3] Restaurant parking requirements shall include outdoor
customer seating in the calculation for the total number of
parking spaces required in accordance with Article VI.
(f) Fences, walls and hedges: All fences, walls, and continuous
hedges shall conform to the following standards in addition to
§ 203-403.
[1] Chain-link and solid fences are prohibited between a street
and the front wall of the principal building;
[2] Fences, walls, and continuous hedges within the area
between the street frontage right-of-way and the building
or structure may not exceed 42 inches in height; and
[3] Fences, walls, and hedges within clear sight triangles shall
not exceed 36 inches in height.
(g) Note: See also provisions of the International Construction
Codes that provide flexibility in certain standards to encourage
the reuse and renovation of historic buildings.
E. Demolition of an existing principal building. The requirements of
§ 203-316 shall apply.
F. Additional requirements for new principal buildings.
(1) See § 203-318D.
(2) The architectural features, materials, and the articulation of a
facade of a building shall be continued on all sides visible from a
public street and be consistent in character with the village.
(3) Porches, pent roofs, roof overhangs, hooded front doors or other
similar architectural elements shall define the front entrance to all
residences.
(4) For commercial or mixed use buildings with commercial uses on
the first floor, no less than 20% of the front facade facing onto a
public street on the ground floor shall consist of window or door
openings of glass, plexiglass or similar transparent materials. No
more than 60% of the front facade of a building facing onto a public
street shall consist of glass, plexiglass or similar surfaces.
(5) All roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 4/12 pitch.
(6) Guidelines. The following advisory guidelines should be considered
in the design of new construction. Some of these features may be
required by other sections of this chapter in specific cases.
§ 203-318 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-318
1:678
§ 203-319. R-R Residential-Retirement Development ("RRD").
[Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01; 4-1-2008 by Ord. No.
08-03; 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-08; 2-20-2018 by Ord. No. 17-18]
(a) Exterior building materials facing onto a public street should
be brick, stone, or wood, vinyl or aluminum siding or materials
with a closely similar appearance, in keeping with the
character of existing village development.
(b) Vehicle parking and any garage doors should be placed to the
rear of buildings as opposed to between buildings and the
street. Where rear parking is not practical, then parking
should be provided to the side of a building. Where a driveway
needs to enter from the front, the garage should be setback
further from the street than the house, and the driveway
should be as narrow as practical through the front yard.
(c) See § 203-318B(5).
(d) Modern additions and features should be placed towards the
rear of the property.
(e) New construction should have rooflines that are similar to
adjacent older buildings. Where a pitched roof is not practical,
then the roof should at least appear to have angles and a pitch
when viewed from the street.
(f) Where existing older buildings have a certain horizontal or
vertical orientation, that orientation should be continued in
new construction. Where existing older buildings have a
certain spacing of windows and doors, similar spacing (and
similar sizes of windows and doors) should be continued in new
construction. Blank walls without door and window openings
shall not be allowed facing onto a public street.
(7) Review of new construction. If a new principal building is proposed
to be constructed or expanded, the applicant shall submit a plan
elevation or sketch that shows the appearance of the building, as
viewed from a public street. The applicant shall also submit a
description of the exterior building materials that will be used on
sides of the building that face a public street. This information shall
be submitted to the Zoning Officer, who may distribute it to other
Township officials for their review and advisory comment.
A. General provision. Residential retirement development shall be allowed
as an optional type of development in districts where authorized by
§ 203-306. Where an applicant chooses to use this residential
retirement development option, the provision of this § 203-319 shall
apply in place of the zoning district provisions.
B. Purposes. The RRD option is designed to accommodate nursing care,
assisted living and independent retirement living primarily for persons
§ 203-318 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-319
1:679
age 55 and over. Such development may provide residents with a series
of compatible uses and services ranging from lodging, housekeeping,
meal preparation and service, laundry service, transportation,
recreation, health care, pharmacy and banking services, and other uses
as applicable.
C. Residential retirement development. Any developer who desires to
utilize the RRD option shall submit to the Planning Commission and the
Board of Supervisors through the Planning and Zoning Officer the
following supplemental information as part of a preliminary subdivision
and/or land development plan for any portion of an RRD:
(1) Location map showing the project in relation to the surrounding
area;
(2) Master concept plan of the overall RRD showing:
(a) Property lines and easements with dimensions and area;
(b) Approximate location, size, spacing, setbacks and dimensions
of all existing and proposed buildings and structures;
(c) The general building types and floor plans to clearly define the
character of the project;
(d) Topographic information showing existing features and
conditions and proposed grading;
(e) Landscaping plans showing open spaces, planting, existing and
proposed trees and recreational area and facilities;
(f) Existing streets, showing access to the project, proposed roads
and parking layout with dimensions; and
(g) Pedestrian circulation plan, providing for effective pedestrian
travel on-site between facilities.
(3) Written information regarding land use designations, surrounding
land uses, project design team, development schedule, type, size,
number and estimated selling price of units and density
calculations; and
(4) Written information regarding the following:
(a) The nature and extent of the common open space in the
project, the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space, and the adequacy of the amount and
function of the open space in terms of the densities and
dwelling types proposed in the plan;
(b) The manner in which such plan does make adequate provision
for public services, provide adequate control over vehicular
traffic and further the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment;
§ 203-319 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-319
1:680
(c) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed
development upon the physical environment and the
neighborhood in which it is proposed to be established;
(d) Whenever applicable, aspects of the RRD requiring compliance
and approval of mandated State statutes or other laws shall be
identified;
(e) The manner in which such plan addresses the community need
or demand for the type of housing and services proposed; and
(f) Architectural guidelines for buildings. It is not the intent of the
Board of Supervisors to dictate architectural styles. However, a
set of standards shall be chosen by the applicant and adhered
to for the buildings of the RRD. Standards selected shall be
consistent with the architectural design objectives under this
Subsection C(4)(f).
D. Permitted by right uses. Only the following uses shall be permitted by
right in an RRD:
(1) Nursing home;
(2) Assisted living facility or personal care center;
(3) Independent retirement living apartment units;
(4) Single-family detached dwellings;
(5) Twin dwellings;
(6) Townhouses;
(7) Apartments; and
(8) Meeting and recreation center that primarily serves residents of
the development and their guests, and which may include a
temporary sales office while the development is under construction
and management offices for the development after construction is
completed.
(9) The following nonresidential uses where an RRD abuts an arterial
street:
(a) Offices;
(b) Individual and family social services, adult day-care centers,
and places of worship;
(c) Retail stores;
(d) Restaurants, cafeterias and coffee shops;
(e) Drug stores and pharmacies;
§ 203-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-319
1:681
(f) Financial institutions;
(g) Beauty and barber shops;
(h) State-licensed brew pubs and limited distilleries;
(i) Personal services;
(j) Hospitals, hospices or surgery centers;
(k) Publicly owned or operated recreation areas and parks or
required open space; and
(l) Commercial indoor recreation and commercial outdoor
recreation.
E. Conditional uses. In an RRD that does not abut an arterial street, the
following uses shall be conditional uses as long as they are ancillary to a
permitted use:
(1) Office of physicians dentists, osteopathic physicians, and other
health practitioners;
(2) Individual and family social services, including adult day-care
centers;
(3) Stores selling food, gifts, and household items;
(4) Restaurants, cafeterias and coffee shops without a separate
exterior entrance;
(5) Drug stores and pharmacies;
(6) Financial institutions; and
(7) Beauty and barber shops.
F. Overall requirements.
(1) An RRD shall be limited to residential and mixed use development
that serves the needs of persons age 55 and older and persons with
significant disabilities. RRD promotes a continuum of care. A
minimum of 75% of the overall tract area of an RRD shall be used
for residential, assisted living facility, personal care center, nursing
home, common open space, and/or park uses (inclusive of streets
providing access to such uses and stormwater management
facilities serving such uses).
(2) Subject to § 203-319G, to promote visibility and universal design, a
minimum of 80% of all single-family detached, twin, and townhome
dwellings shall meet the design standards set forth in
§ 203-319F(7) and 100% of apartment units shall meet the design
standards set forth in § 203-319F(8).
§ 203-319 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-319
1:682
(3) A minimum of 50% of all single-family detached, twin, and
townhouse dwellings shall be occupied by at least one person 55
years of age or older in accordance with federal law and there shall
be a permanent legally binding restriction placed of record in
accordance with federal law. A note shall be placed on the plan
stating the age residency requirement.
(4) A plan for the entire tract of an RRD shall be approved and
recorded as an entity. However, lots may be subdivided and sold as
part of the overall land development plan. The overall land
development plan may take place in phases.
(5) All nursing care and assisted living facilities are subject to all
relevant federal and state regulations, and a condition of the land
development approval process shall be that a statement be
provided indicating that such requirements will be met. Proof shall
be provided that all applicable state, county and Township licenses
have been obtained following their receipt from the appropriate
regulatory authority.
(6) Standards for retail stores, restaurants, cafeterias, and coffee
shops.
(a) Where an RRD abuts an arterial street:
[1] Only one grocery store shall be permitted, which shall not
exceed 40,000 square feet of gross floor area.
[2] Only one drug store or pharmacy shall be permitted, which
shall not exceed 15,000 square feet of gross floor area.
[3] Places of worship, financial institutions, beauty and
barbershops, personal services, and retail stores, other
than grocery stores and drug stores and pharmacies, shall
not exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
[4] Offices and commercial indoor recreation, and commercial
outdoor recreation shall not exceed 30,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
[5] Hospitals, hospices and surgery centers exceeding 30,000
square feet of gross floor area shall be permitted only by
conditional use.
[6] Drive-through service facilities. Drive-throuth service
facilities shall be permitted only for drug store, pharmacy,
coffee shop, and financial institution uses. In addition to
the specific use standards of Article IV of this chapter for
drive-through service facilities, drive-through windows
and menu boards/boxes shall not be located between the
arterial streetscape buffer yard [as required under
§ 203-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-319
1:683
§ 203-319F(23)] and the building to which they are
attached or serve.
[7] Parking lots that are located between a building used and
the arterial streetscape buffer yard [as required under
§ 203-319F(23)] shall be limited to not more than four
rows of parking spaces. Such parking lots shall be
screened from the arterial streetscape buffer yard by a
masonry wall, decorative fence or evergreen hedge or
combination of wall, fence and hedge.
(b) Where an RRD does not abut an arterial street:
[1] Drive-through service facilities shall be prohibited; and
[2] No retail use shall exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
(7) Single-family detached dwellings, twin dwellings and townhouses
qualifying under § 203-319F(2) shall incorporate the following
design elements:
(a) Each dwelling unit shall have a master bedroom and accessible
bathroom located on an accessible ground floor level;
(b) Each dwelling unit shall be located on a lot that does not
exceed a lot or unit area of 9,000 square feet;
(c) Each dwelling unit shall be incorporated in a declaration of
planned community or condominium that provides for some
level of exterior maintenance (e.g., lawn and landscaping
maintenance, snow removal, etc.);
(d) Each dwelling unit shall have at least one stepless entrance;
(e) Each dwelling unit shall have at least 36 inches of clear
passage through all exterior doors and at least 32 inches of
clear passage through all interior doors, including bathroom
doors; and
(f) Each dwelling unit shall have at least five additional universal
design features for housing set forth in the most recently
published version of universal design in housing standards
developed by the Center of Universal Design, School of Design,
North Carolina State University at Raleigh, or successor
organization.
(8) A maximum of 40 apartment dwellings may be located within a
single building. A maximum of 40% of all of the dwelling units
within an RDD may be apartment dwellings. Apartment buildings
shall incorporate the following design elements:
(a) Elevator access shall be provided to all floors;
§ 203-319 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-319
1:684
(b) The apartment building complex shall include common area
amenities such as a library, entertainment area, or other
similar feature;
(c) The apartment building complex shall include a fitness center
or provide access to a fitness center within the RRD;
(d) Each apartment building shall have at least 36 inches of clear
passage through all exterior doors and at least 32 inches of
clear passage through all interior doors that are open to
residents of the building. Each apartment dwelling shall have
at least 32 inches of clear passage through all doors, including
bathroom doors; and
(e) At least five additional universal design features for housing
set forth in the most recently published version of universal
design in housing standards developed by the Center of
Universal Design, School of Design, North Carolina State
University at Raleigh, or successor organization.
(9) The maximum height of any structure on a tract in an RRD shall be
no more than 40 feet measured from the average level of the grade
at the building perimeter to the average height between the eave
and the ridge of the roof. See height exceptions in § 203-802.
However, if the RRD is within the IN District, then the maximum
building height may be increased to 60 feet (or to 70 feet for
apartment buildings where the RRD abuts an arterial street),
provided that the minimum yard setback to the lot line shall be
increased by two feet for each foot that the height of the building
exceeds 40 feet, except along lot lines abutting a lot in common
ownership, a street right-of way, or a lot used as a single-family
detached or townhome dwelling unit.
(10)Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
following:
(a) Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two parking
spaces for each dwelling unit. In addition, one additional
parking space for each four apartment dwelling units or
townhouse dwelling units shall be provided for guest parking.
(b) One visitor parking space shall be provided for every four
patient beds located in an assisted living or nursing care
facility, plus at least one additional space for each full-time
staff member per maximum shift. In addition, space shall be
provided for service vehicle parking and for automobile
passenger pick-up and discharge near buildings.
(c) Off-street parking for nonresidential uses shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of § 203-601.
§ 203-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-319
1:685
(11) A mobile/manufactured home park shall not be developed within
the RRD regulations.
(12) The maximum impervious coverage for the overall tract of an RRD
is as follows: maximum impervious coverage for the entire
development after completion: 60%
(13) The minimum setbacks for nursing homes and personal care/
assisted living facilities and all nonresidential uses are as follows:
(a) Minimum lot area: N/A.
(b) Minimum lot frontage: N/A.
(c) Minimum yard setback:
[1] Front yard: 15 feet.
[2] Side yard: 10 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 25 feet.
(d) Minimum distance between residential structures: 20 feet.
(e) Minimum distance between nonresidential structures: 40 feet.
(14) For single-family detached and twin dwelling units, the following
minimum lot areas and minimum lot widths shall apply:
Bedrooms
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot Width
(feet)
1 2,750 35
2 3,700 35
3 4,200 40
(15) For townhouses, the following requirements shall apply:
Bedrooms
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot Width
(feet)
1 1,600 18
2 1,800 20
3 2,000 22
(16) The minimum setbacks for all other residential uses are as follows:
(a) Minimum yard setbacks.
[1] Front yard: 20 feet.
§ 203-319 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-319
1:686
[2] Side yard: five feet, except zero feet at the shared lot or
unit line of lawfully attached dwellings
[3] Rear yard: 20 feet.
(b) Minimum distance between residential structures (except at
the shared lot or unit line of lawfully attached dwellings): 10
feet.
(17) All required front, side and rear yard areas shall be landscaped
with trees and shrubs and/or other ground cover. When a nursing
home or assisted living/personal care center or nonresidential use
is contiguous to an adjacent existing residential development, rear
and side yard setbacks and buffer zones shall be increased by
100%. Minimum buffer distances are as follows:
Not Adjacent to an Existing
Residential Development
Adjacent to an Existing
Residential Development
Front 15 30
Side 10 20
Rear 25 50
(a) Parking areas serving an assisted living/personal care or
nursing home facility or shall not intrude upon minimum
landscape requirements; however, entrance and/or exit drives
may be located within the required front yard landscaped area
if perpendicular to the street. Where adjacent to existing
residential development, required landscaping shall be of a
type that shall provide at maturity a visual screen or barrier
between the residential zone and the RRD. Such landscaping
shall include at least 50% evergreen species of trees and
shrubs which are no less than four feet in height at the time of
planting and 20 feet apart. Any trees or shrubs that fail to grow
shall be replaced by the property owner within 12 months of
planting.
(18) If nonresidential uses are developed within an RRD, such facilities
shall be designed and integrated into the RRD to serve the
occupants. Delivery facilities to such nonresidential facilities shall
be concealed or screened from the normal pedestrian circulation
routes of the RRD.
(19) An assisted living/personal care center and any apartment
dwellings shall be designed to accommodate the elderly by
incorporating necessary safety and convenience features. At least
one looped portion of a pathway system shall have slopes and a
surface that are intended for use by older persons, with slopes
consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or no
more than 5%, whichever is less.
§ 203-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-319
1:687
(20) Maximum overall density. The maximum overall density of the
residential retirement development shall be determined as follows,
as calculated in acres (and decimals):
(a) Start with the total land area of the development tract, after
deleting existing rights-of-way of existing streets, and
(b) Delete 75% of all areas of land with a slope exceeding 25% and
delete 50% of the area of lands with a slope over 15 to 25%
from Subsection F(20)(a) above, and
(c) Delete 50% of the area of lands within the 100-year floodplain
from Subsection F(20)(b) above.
(d) Multiply the resulting acreage by six dwelling units per acre to
result in the maximum number of permitted dwelling units
within the development. See bonuses in Subsection F(21)
below.
Note: This method of calculating density does not require
the deletion of stormwater detention basins, shared parking
areas, new streets, new preserved/common open space, new
alleys or similar features. Therefore, the actual density that
could be achieved on a "net" piece of land would be higher
than the above numbers.
(e) Each three beds in a nursing home or personal care center
shall be counted the same as one dwelling unit for the purposes
of controlling density.
(21) Density bonuses:
(a) As an option to the applicant, the applicant may apply for
conditional use approval from the Board of Supervisors to
approve the following increases in the maximum density
provided in Subsection F(20) above. In such case, only the
increase in density shall need conditional use approval.
[1] If the applicant proves that the architectural standards
required by § 203-314D(13) of the traditional
neighborhood development are met or exceeded, the
density may be increased by a maximum of 0.5 additional
dwelling unit per acre.
[2] The maximum density may be increased by a maximum of
0.5 additional dwelling unit per acre if the applicant
commits to provide a minimum of 30% of the total tract
area in common open space.
[3] The maximum density may be increased by a maximum of
0.5 additional dwelling unit per acre if the applicant
commits to construct substantial recreation improvements
and landscaping beyond the amounts of landscaping and
§ 203-319 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-319
1:688
improvements that would otherwise be required. The
market value of the additional recreational improvements
and landscaping shall exceed a minimum of $15,000 per
each additional dwelling unit that is allowed.
[4] The maximum density may also be increased through use
of the age-restricted housing bonus provided in § 203-315.
(22) Required open space and recreation land.
(a) For RRDs, open space and recreation land shall be provided in
the amount of 3,150 square feet (0.0723 acres) per dwelling
unit. To the extent feasible, such open space and recreation
land shall consist of one contiguous area. A minimum of 50% of
such land shall be suitable for active recreation.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance or this Zoning Ordinance to the
contrary, the required open space and recreation land shall
satisfy all of the open space and recreation requirements of
such ordinances.
(c) The open space and recreation land shall be permanently
preserved for open space and recreational use through deed
restrictions or other appropriate restriction of record.
(23) Vehicular and Pedestrian Connectivity.
(a) The existing street system shall be extended into a new RRD to
the extent feasible. Streets, other than cul-de-sac streets, and
sidewalks or trails shall be interconnected throughout the
RRD. The RRD shall have a focal point, such as a commons,
park, or commercial area that is interconnected with the
residential areas of the RRD via streets and sidewalks or other
Township-approved pedestrian pathways.
(b) Sidewalks or other Township-approved pedestrian pathways
shall be provided along both sides of each street, excluding
arterial streets, unless a modification or waiver is granted in
writing by the Board of Supervisors under the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance. The width of sidewalks shall be
a minimum of five feet.
(c) Pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided in the commercial
area using materials and colors that visually distinguish the
crosswalk from the street surface.
(24) Arterial streetscape buffer yard.
(a) A minimum 35 feet wide streetscape buffer yard with screen
plantings shall be required along arterial streets.
§ 203-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-319
1:689
(b) The arterial streetscape buffer yard shall comply with buffer
and landscaping standards of §§ 203-803 and 203-804 of this
chapter, and be maintained in deciduous shade trees, shrubs
and an attractive vegetative ground cover.
(25) Architectural design objectives. The developer shall establish
legally enforceable provisions controlling the guidelines of
architectural design of nonresidential buildings and shall adhere to
the following objectives:
(a) Building facades.
[1] Use of preferred materials is required on the sides of any
building that: contains the building's main entrance, and is
oriented toward any street that adjoins the lot on which
such building is located. Preferred materials include brick,
stone, cast stone, precast, stucco, dryvit, textured splitfaced
block, fiber cement siding, wood siding and
materials of similar quality; provided, however, no
preferred materials shall include metal siding or
nontextured split-faced block.
[2] The wall of a building containing the main entrance shall
be architecturally emphasized through fenestration,
entrance treatment, columns, colonnades, pilasters, piers,
recesses, projections, bays, offsets, or other architectural
details.
[3] In order to scale down the horizontality of a building
having a gross floor area exceeding 20,000 square feet,
any pilasters, piers or columns that are used shall be
regularly spaced at intervals of no less than 20 feet on
center and no more than 40 feet on center.
[4] Any portico, colonnade, porch or other building projection
that is supported by the above mentioned pilasters, piers
or columns shall extend at least eight feet from the
building.
[5] The wall of a building that is oriented toward a street
adjoining the lot on which such building is located shall be
architecturally emphasized through fenestration, entrance
treatment, columns, colonnades, pilasters, piers, recesses,
projections, bays, offsets or other architectural details that
breaks up the wall so as not to provide the appearance of a
blank wall. The materials and colors of such side, and the
base of the building, shall be consistent with the materials
and colors of the wall of the building that contains the
main entrance.
(b) Roofs.
§ 203-319 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-319
1:690
[1] Use of preferred materials also is required on all pitched
roofs. Preferred materials include slate shingles, standing
seam metal roofs, architectural grade fiberglass shingles
and materials of similar quality.
[2] Flat roofs shall be provided with a thirty-inch or taller
parapet along any edge of a building facing a street rightof-
way, Township-approved public pedestrian pathway,
residential zoning district or occupied residential dwelling
that adjoins the lot on which such building is located.
[3] For any buildings occupied by more than one principal use,
roof line offsets of a minimum of two feet shall be provided
in order to provide architectural interest and variety to the
massing of a building and relieve the effect of a single roof
line.
G. Combination of Age-Restricted and Non-Age-Restricted Development
Areas.
(1) Within the IN District, two adjacent residential development areas
may be submitted for approval of their zoning densities in one
subdivision and/or land development plan application, provided the
two adjacent development areas are in common ownership at the
time of such zoning density determination by the Township and a
concept plan is submitted to the Township showing how the street
access and open space of the two development areas will be
coordinated. Such development areas may subsequently be
developed by independent entities, provided there is compliance
with the overall density determination under this Section and any
conditions placed upon such determination by the Township.
(2) One of the two development areas shall meet all of the
requirements of this § 203-319. The second development area shall
meet the requirements of this § 203-319, except that the second
development area shall not be required to meet the requirements
of § 203-319F(2) and (3) above. If approved under this § 203-319G
then the maximum density of the two adjacent development areas
may be calculated as an average for the two development areas as
if they were a single development area. At that time, a maximum
density shall be assigned to each of the two development areas,
provided the requirements of this chapter are met.
(3) This § 203-319G shall only be allowed to be used if: a minimum of
60% of the total single-family detached, twin, and townhouse
dwelling units in the two development areas together would qualify
under the requirements of § 203-319F(2) above; and a minimum of
50% of the total single-family detached, twin, and townhouse
dwelling units would meet the age restriction requirements of
§ 203-319F(3), including a restriction on occupancy by at least one
person age 55 or older. In such case, the maximum average density
§ 203-319 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-319
1:691
§ 203-320. R-C Residential Cluster District.
of the two development areas, when calculated together, shall not
exceed five dwelling units per acre.
(a) An applicant may choose a second option of having: a minimum
of 70% of the total single-family detached, twin, and townhouse
dwelling units in the two development areas together meeting
the requirements of § 203-319f(2) above; and a minimum of
50% of the total single-family detached, twin, and townhouse
dwelling units meeting the age restriction requirements of
§ 203-319f(3), including a restriction on occupancy by at least
one person age 55 or older. In such case, the maximum average
density of the two development areas, when calculated
together, shall not exceed six dwelling units per acre.
(4) For dwellings that are not age-restricted or qualify under
§ 203-319f(2) above, the parking requirements of § 203-601 shall
apply instead of the parking standards for § 203-319.
A. Purposes.
(1) To allow the developer more choices of housing types, and enable
development of lots smaller than those specified in other
residential zoning districts, provided the land saved is reserved for
permanent common use, usually in the form of open space.
(2) To permit a procedure for development which shall:
(a) Improve living and working environments;
(b) Promote more economic subdivision layout;
(c) Encourage a variety of types of residential dwellings;
(d) Encourage ingenuity and originality in total subdivision and
individual site design; and
(e) Preserve open space to serve recreational, scenic and public
service purposes.
(3) In the R-C District, the maximum gross density of the zoning
district it replaced shall not be exceeded.
(4) This district is intended to recognize land areas that were
specifically rezoned by the Township in the past for residentialcluster
development, in order to maintain a certain amount of
consistency in regulations applying to ongoing developments. This
district is not intended to be applied to land areas where the R-C
District was not previously established. Instead, the intent is to
promote use of the open space development provisions in other
areas of land.
§ 203-319 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-320
1:692
B. Submission requirements. In addition to submission requirements
under the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, the following
shall be submitted with development plans for an R-C development:
(1) Landscaping plans showing open spaces, planting, existing and
proposed trees and recreational area and facilities.
(2) Existing streets, showing access to the project, proposed roads and
parking layout with dimensions.
(3) Written information regarding land use designations, surrounding
land uses, project design team, development schedule, type, size,
number and estimated selling price of units and density
calculations.
(4) Written information regarding the following:
(a) The nature and extent of the common open space in the
project, the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space, and the adequacy of the amount and
function of the open space in terms of the densities and
dwelling types proposed in the plan;
(b) The manner in which such plan does make adequate provision
for public services, provide adequate control over vehicular
traffic and further the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment; and
(c) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed
development upon the physical environment and the
neighborhood in which it is proposed to be established.
C. Criteria for approval. A cluster development shall only be approved if
the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors,
based upon review by the Planning Commission, that the following
conditions will be met:
(1) That the cluster development would clearly serve a valid public
purpose that would result in a development that would be superior
to what would result if the land would be developed as a
conventional development. Such valid public purposes include but
are not limited to the following:
(a) The permanent preservation of dense forests, steep slopes,
wetlands, creek valleys, highly scenic areas or other sensitive
natural features.
(b) The permanent preservation of a substantial area of land in
agricultural uses, in a tract of proper size and configuration
that allows for efficient agricultural use and that properly
considers the issue of compatibility between the agricultural
uses and homes. In such case, new dwellings shall be clustered
adjacent to existing dwellings and residential zoning districts.
§ 203-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-320
1:693
(c) The dedication of recreation land at a site deemed appropriate
by the Board of Supervisors and that involves land that is
clearly suitable for active and/or passive recreation.
(d) The provision of common open space in a location that will
allow homes to be buffered from highly noxious nuisancegenerating
uses, such as a heavily traveled street or industrial
uses. In such case, intensive landscaping and/or planting for
eventual reforestation should be provided.
(2) That the proposed cluster development has been designed in full
consideration of important natural features, including mature
woodlands, creek valleys, steep slopes and wetlands.
(a) At a minimum, that areas along perennial creeks shall be
preserved in their natural state, except for planting of trees
and shrubs, erosion control improvements, public recreation
improvements and needed utility, street and driveway
crossings. Low-maintenance landscaping is encouraged along
creeks and other areas where maintenance would otherwise be
difficult. See § 203-312.
(b) The natural features of the site shall be a major factor in
determining the siting of dwelling units and streets.
(3) The proposed cluster development shall not have substantial or
undue adverse effects, as compared to a standard development
permitted by the existing zone, upon adjacent property, the
character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, parking, utility
facilities and other matters affecting the public health, safety and
general welfare.
(4) The proposed cluster development shall be constructed, arranged
and operated so as not to interfere with the development and use of
neighboring property.
(5) The proposed cluster development shall be served adequately by
streets.
(6) The proposed cluster development shall not result in the
destruction, loss or damage of any natural, scenic or historic
feature of significant importance.
D. Allowed uses. § 203-306 shall apply.
E. Qualifications for a residential-cluster development.
(1) Tract size. Minimum developable tract size shall be 10 contiguous
acres for development where the replaced zoning district was R-1
or R-2, and 20 contiguous acres for development where the
replaced zoning district was A-1 or P-1. Excluded from the
determination of developable tract size are the following:
§ 203-320 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-320
1:694
(a) One-half of all land situated in the 100-year floodplain.
(b) One-half of all land situated in slopes of over 15%.
(2) Density. The maximum number of dwelling units on the tract shall
be determined based upon an existing features map and a yield
plan.
(a) An existing features map shall be required to be submitted as
part of the application for a cluster development. This existing
features map shall accurately show the locations of the
following at a minimum: wetlands, 100-year floodplains, areas
of woodland, existing topography, existing buildings with a
description of any buildings over 70 years old, highlighting of
15 to 25% slopes and 25% and greater slopes, and any major
scenic views from within the tract or from outside of the tract.
(b) A yield plan shall be submitted to the Township by the
applicant. The yield plan shall accurately show the maximum
number of dwelling units that would be possible under
Township ordinances in effect as of June 1, 2005, under the
regulations of the zoning district that applied immediately
prior to the rezoning to the R-C District. The yield plan shall be
completed to an accurate scale, including accurately showing
the existing features map information described above. The
yield plan shall show potential lots, streets and retention/
detention pond locations. However, the yield plan shall not
serve as, and is not required to contain, the engineering detail
requirements of a preliminary subdivision plan.
(c) Such yield plan shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer, with
advice by the Township Engineer, to determine whether each
represents a reasonably accurate estimate of the number of
dwelling units that were possible on the site, both physically
and legally. If such estimates are determined to not be
accurate, the applicant shall be required by the Zoning Officer
to revise such yield plan until it is accurate.
(d) Density. The maximum number of dwelling units allowed on the
tract through cluster development shall be equal to the
number of dwelling units that is determined by the Township to
have been possible under the Township-accepted yield plan.
However, for land that was formerly in the A-1 District prior to
rezoning to the R-C District, the yield plan may be based upon
one-acre minimum lots.
(3) Mix of dwelling units.
(a) Where the replaced zone was either a R-1 or P-1 District, a
minimum of 45% of the total number of units shall be singlefamily
detached dwellings.
§ 203-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-320
1:695
(b) Where the replaced zone was a R-2 District, a minimum of 25%
of the total number of dwelling units shall be single-family
detached dwellings.
(c) Where the replaced zone was an A-1 District, all proposed units
shall be single-family detached. However, if a tract includes
more than 100 acres, then a minimum of 45% of the dwelling
units shall be single-family detached, provided that no housing
type other than single-family detached houses shall be
constructed within 150 feet from a lot of a single-family
detached dwelling that existed prior to the adoption of this
chapter.
(4) Permitted lot reductions. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No.
07-01]
(a) For a cluster development in any zoning district, both public
sewage service and central water service shall be provided.
(b) For a cluster development in any zoning district, the minimum
yard requirements of the R-2 District shall apply, unless
otherwise specified.
(c) For a cluster development where the replaced district was the
AR or CO District, the minimum lot area shall be reduced to
20,000 square feet and the minimum lot width shall be reduced
to 90 feet, with minimum yard requirements meeting the R-1
District. However, if a tract includes more than 100 acres and
the dwellings will be served by public sewer and water, then
the minimum lot area may be reduced to 7,500 square feet for
single-family detached dwellings with a minimum lot width of
60 feet.
(d) For a cluster development where the replaced zone was NOT
the AR or CO District, for single-family detached dwellings, a
reduction in minimum lot area to 10,000 square feet shall be
allowed with a minimum lot width of 75 feet. If a cluster
development includes a tract of more than 100 total acres, then
such minimum lot area may be reduced to 7,500 square feet
with a minimum lot width of 60 feet. For all other types of
allowed housing, up to 20% reduction is allowed from the
minimum amount of land area required per dwelling unit.
(e) No specific minimum lot area shall apply for townhouses,
provided the overall density requirement is met for the tract.
Individual dwellings may be held in a condominium
arrangement.
(5) Yard dimensions. Yard dimensions shall be as recommended by the
Planning Commission and approved by the Board of Supervisors as
part of the preliminary plan approval, except that each lot in a
cluster development which abuts property in a residential district
§ 203-320 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-320
1:696
shall have a side or rear yard of not less than the required side or
rear yard of the abutting district, and that the yard setback for all
lots fronting on public streets shall not be less than the front yard
setback requirements of the respective zoning districts in which
they were formerly located.
(6) Buffer areas. Buffer areas shall be required along exterior property
lines where units in a proposed cluster development abut
noncluster residential development. Buffers shall consist primarily
of six feet or higher evergreen trees spaced 10 feet apart in
staggered double rows. Additional plant materials and earthen
mounding are encouraged to soften the linear appearance of the
rows of evergreen trees. Where buffers are required, a planting
plan shall be required which shows the location, size, species and
number of plant materials to be used.
F. Housing.
(1) In addition to the other allowed housing types, the following
housing types may be constructed as part of a cluster development:
(a) Atrium house. The atrium house is a single-family attached
dwelling unit with individual outside access. The lot shall be
fully enclosed by a wall at least seven feet high. A private yard,
herein called an "atrium," shall be included on each lot. All
living spaces, such as living rooms, dens and bedrooms, shall
open onto the atrium.
[1] Lot area and width:
Bedrooms
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
1 1,375 35
2 1,850 35
3 2,100 40
4 2,300 40
5 2,500 40
[2] Minimum atrium dimension: 16 feet.
[3] Minimum atrium area: 288 square feet.
(b) Lot line house. A lot line house is a single-family detached
residence on an individual lot, with the building set on one of
the side property lines. An easement for maintenance on the
adjoining lot is required.
[1] Lot area minimum: 7,000 square feet.
§ 203-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-320
1:697
[2] Minimum yard:
[a] Front: 25 feet.
[b] Rear: 30 feet.
[3] Minimum lot width at building setback line: 60 feet.
[4] Minimum principal building spacing: 30 feet.
(2) Not more than eight townhouses shall be attached in a single
group, and no more than two contiguous townhouses in any group
may be constructed in line.
(3) Spacing of buildings. Minimum distances between principal
buildings shall be as follows:
(a) Single-family detached: 30 feet in former A-1 or P-1 zoned
areas; 20 feet in former R-1 or R-2 zoned areas.
(b) Twin dwelling: 30 feet between buildings in all areas.
(c) Apartments: 40 feet between buildings in all areas.
(d) Townhouse: 40 feet between buildings in all areas.
(e) Atrium house: 30 feet between buildings in all areas.
(f) Lot line house: 30 feet in former A-1 or P-1 zoned areas, 20 feet
in former R-1 or R-2 zoned areas.
G. Garages and accessory buildings. Garages and accessory buildings may
be located in any rear yard, provided that they do not violate the
coverage regulation herein set forth and that side yards of not less than
two feet are provided, and that a rear yard setback from the rear
property line of not less than three feet is provided.
H. Impervious coverage regulations. The maximum permitted impervious
coverage shall be 30% and shall apply to the developable tract area
total, rather than to individual lots.
I. Height regulations. Single-family residences shall not exceed 35 feet in
height, and other permitted uses shall not exceed 40 feet in height.
J. Utilities. Both public water and public sewage shall be provided in any
cluster development.
K. Open space requirements.
(1) Open space areas shall be developed to complement and enhance
the manmade environment. In the selection of the location of such
areas, consideration shall be given to the preservation of natural
and manmade features which will enhance the attractiveness and
value of the remainder of the property to be subdivided or
developed, such as floodplains, including streams and ponds,
§ 203-320 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-320
1:698
slopes equal to or greater than 15%, natural permanent vegetation,
historical amenities and other community assets.
(a) A minimum of 40% of the total tract area shall be permanently
preserved as "common open space," with a method of
ownership and maintenance that is acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors, after review by the Township Planning
Commission. A minimum of 50% of the required common open
space shall be in one contiguous tract, which may be separated
only by creeks or by a maximum of one street. Common open
space may also be traversed by an accessway limited to
emergency vehicles.
(2) The area shall be so located and designed that it is easily accessible
to all people including the handicapped. Safe and easy access to
common open space areas shall be provided either by adjoining
road frontage, easements or paths.
(3) Whenever possible, common open space areas shall be designed as
a continuous system of usable areas, which are interspersed among
groupings of residential buildings, provided, however, in those
instances in which the total minimum required open space is less
than two acres in size, such acres shall be located in one parcel;
and shall only be broken up if the development site or its physical
constraints dictate otherwise with the concurrence of the Planning
Commission and Board of Supervisors.
(4) Such areas specifically designed for open space shall be fully
usable and suitable for that purpose and shall be set aside by deed
restriction.
(5) Accessways to the site shall be sufficiently wide so that
maintenance equipment shall have reasonable convenient access to
such areas. In all instances, such open space areas shall be
maintained in a careful and prudent manner.
(6) Common open space may be dedicated partially or entirely to
public use. The Township Parks and Recreation Commission may
recommend and the Board of Supervisors may approve the
dedication of any common open space land for public use. However,
the Board of Supervisors shall also have the right to not accept any
dedication of open space if it finds that the size, location, type of
development or cost of development or maintenance of such
common open space or the availability of other public open space
nearby would make public use undesirable or unnecessary.
(7) Private ownership. When common open space is not dedicated and
accepted to public use, it shall be protected by legal arrangements,
satisfactory to the Township, sufficient to assure its maintenance
and preservation for whatever purpose it is intended. Covenants or
other legal arrangements shall:
§ 203-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-320
1:699
(a) Obligate purchasers to participate in a homeowners
association and to support maintenance of the open areas by
paying to the association assessments sufficient for such
maintenance and subjecting their properties to a lien for
enforcement of payment of the respective assessments.
(b) Obligate such an association to maintain the open areas and
private streets and utilities.
(c) Empower the Township to enforce the covenants in the event of
failure of compliance. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No.
07-01]
(d) Provide for agreement that, if the Township is required to
perform any maintenance work pursuant to the item above,
such purchasers would pay the cost thereof and that the same
shall be a lien upon their properties until such cost has been
paid; provided that the developer shall be responsible for the
formation of the homeowners' association of which the
developer, or if the developer is not the owner of the
development, then such owner, shall be a member until all of
the lots of record are sold. Other equivalent provisions to
assure adequate perpetual maintenance may be permitted if
approved by the Board of Supervisors. Assurance that such
covenants or equivalent provisions will be included in the
deeds or other instruments of conveyance shall be evidenced
by the recordation in the office of Recorder of Deeds, of a
perpetual maintenance of facilities as prescribed herein above
and identifying the tract and each lot therein. The declaration
shall be included in the deed or other instrument of
conveyance of each lot of record and shall be made binding on
all purchasers, provided that such declaration may, as to
subsequent conveyances other than the initial conveyance of
each lot of record, be incorporated by reference in the
instrument of conveyance.
(e) Guarantee that any association formed to own and maintain
common open space will not be dissolved without the consent
of the Board of Supervisors and any other specifications
deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors.
(f) Such covenants or equivalent legal arrangements shall be
submitted for preliminary review with the preliminary plan and
shall be reviewed and approved by the Board of Supervisors
prior to the granting of final plan approval.
(8) The common open space shall be limited to uses or a range of uses
approved by the Board of Supervisors at the time of subdivision,
land development and/or conditional use approval. Any future
change to the allowed uses in the common open space shall require
conditional use approval.
§ 203-320 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-320
1:700
(9) The Board of Supervisors may require that the majority of the
required common open space be placed:
(a) Adjacent to an existing or planned public or homeowner
association-owned recreation area,
(b) Adjacent to existing farmland,
(c) At the edge of a neighboring undeveloped lot, where the
common open space could be connected in the future to open
space on that neighboring lot, or
(d) Adjacent to an arterial street where the open space will serve
to buffer homes from the street.
§ 203-320 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-320
1:701

ARTICLE IV
Additional Requirements for Specific Uses
§ 203-401. Applicability.
§ 203-402. Additional requirements for specific principal uses.
A. This article establishes additional specific requirements for certain
specific uses, in addition to the sign, parking, environmental and other
general requirements of this chapter and the requirements of each
district. Wherever two requirements conflict, the stricter requirement
shall apply.
(1) For uses allowed within a specific zoning district as "special
exception" uses, see also the procedures and standards in
§ 203-116. For conditional uses, see also § 203-117.
A. Each of the following uses shall meet all of the following requirements
for that use:
(1) Adult Use. (This is limited to the following: adult bookstore, adult
movie theater, massage parlor, or adult live entertainment facility)
(a) Purposes. The regulations on adult uses are intended to serve
the following purposes, in addition to the overall objectives of
this chapter.
[1] To recognize the adverse secondary impacts of adult uses
that affect health, safety and general welfare concerns of
the Township. These secondary impacts have been
documented in research conducted across the nation.
These secondary impacts typically include, but are not
limited to: increases in criminal activity, increases in
activities that increase the risk of transmission of sexually
transmitted diseases, increases in activities that increase
the risk of transmission of other communicable diseases,
increases in blight, decreases in the stability of residential
neighborhoods, and decreases in property values for
surrounding homes, and decreases in the marketability of
nearby commercial business space. The research
conducted across the nation concludes that adult uses
typically involve insufficient self-regulation to control
these secondary effects.
[2] To limit adult uses to locations where these secondary
impacts can be minimized, particularly as they affect
residential neighborhoods and commercial revitalization.
[3] To not attempt to suppress any activities protected by the
"free speech" protections of the State and United States
Constitutions, but instead to control secondary effects.
§ 203-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:703
(b) An adult use and its parking area shall not be located within
any of the following distances, whichever is most restrictive:
[1] Five hundred linear feet from the lot line of an existing
dwelling,
[2] Five hundred linear feet from the lot line of any lot in a
residential zoning district.
[3] One thousand linear feet from the lot line of any primary or
secondary school, place of worship, library, public park,
day care center or child nursery.
(c) No adult use shall be located within 1,000 lineal feet from any
existing "adult use."
(d) A fifty-foot buffer yard shall be provided, regardless of zoning
district, along the side and rear lot lines. If such buffer area
does not include substantial mature trees that will be
preserved, it shall include continuous screening by evergreen
trees with an initial height of five feet.
(e) No pornographic material, displays or words shall be placed in
view of persons who are not inside of the establishment.
Definite precautions shall be made to prohibit minors from
entering the premises.
(f) No adult use shall be used for any purpose that violates any
federal, state or municipal law.
(g) Pornographic and sexually explicit signs and displays shall be
prohibited that are visible from outside of the premises.
(h) The adult use shall not include the sale or display of "obscene"
materials, as defined by Pennsylvania criminal law, as may be
amended by applicable court decisions.
[1] An adult use shall be prohibited in all districts except
where specifically allowed under § 203-306. An adult use is
a distinct use and shall not be allowed under any other use,
such as a retail store or club.
(i) A minimum lot area of one acre is required.
(j) For public health reasons, private or semiprivate viewing
booths of any kind are prohibited. This specifically includes,
but is not limited to, booths for viewing adult movies or nude
dancers.
(k) No use may include live actual or simulated sex acts nor any
physical or sexual contact between employees and entertainers
nor or between employees or entertainers and customers. At
an adult live entertainment use, employees or entertainers
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:704
shall maintain a minimum distance of three feet from
customers. This shall include, but not be limited to, a
prohibition on "lap dancing."
(l) Only "lawful" massages as defined by state court decisions
shall be performed in a massage parlor.
(m) All persons within any adult use shall wear non-transparent
garments that cover their genitals and the female areola,
except within a permitted lawful "adult live entertainment
facility."
(n) Any application for such use shall state the names and home
addresses of: all individuals intended to have more than a 5%
ownership in such use or in a corporation owning such use; and
an on-site manager responsible to ensure compliance with this
chapter on a daily basis. A telephone number shall be provided
where the on-site manager can be reached during Township
business hours. Such information shall be updated at the
beginning of each year in writing to the Zoning Officer.
(o) The use shall not operate between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 7:00 a.m.
(p) As specific conditions of approval under this chapter, the
applicant shall prove compliance, where applicable, with the
following state laws, as amended: the Pennsylvania Liquor
Code, Act 219 of 1990 (which pertains to sale or consumption
of alcohol between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.), Act 207 of 1990
(which pertains to obscenity) and Act 120 of 1996 (which
pertains to adult-oriented establishments and which limits
enclosed viewing booths among other matters).
(q) An adult use shall not be on the same lot as a use that sells
alcoholic beverages.
(2) Adult Day-Care Center.
(a) The use shall be fully licensed by the state, if required by the
state.
(b) The use shall include constant supervision during all hours of
operation.
(c) The use shall not meet the definition of a "treatment center."
(3) After-Hours Club. This use is effectively prohibited by State Act
219 of 1990, as amended (Section 7327 of Title 18 of the
Pennsylvania Statutes). In the event that the use would be
determined to be allowed, a 500 feet setback shall apply from the
building and any parking areas from any residential zoning district.
The applicant shall prove that adequate on-site security will be in
place.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:705
(4) Airport.
(a) As part of a conditional use approval, the Board of Supervisors
shall have the authority to establish reasonable conditions that
limit the types, sizes and weights of aircraft and the hours of
operation in order to minimize noise nuisances to dwellings.
(b) As part of a conditional use application, the applicant shall
provide evidence that flight patterns will be designed to
minimize noise nuisances to dwellings.
(c) Each end of a runway shall be set back a minimum of 200 feet
from all lot lines. Each side of a runway shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet from all lot lines.
(d) See also state airport zoning regulations, which generally
address tall structures within the major approaches to an
airport. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
(5) Animal Cemetery.
(a) All the regulations for a "cemetery" in this section shall apply.
(b) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Officer that the use will be conducted in such a manner that
the public health and groundwater quality will not be
threatened.
(6) Apartments. See "townhouses and apartments" in this § 203-402.
(7) Assisted Living Facility/Personal Care Center. The standards
for nursing homes in this section shall apply.
(8) Auto, Boat or Mobile/Manufactured Home Sales.
(a) No vehicle, boat or home on display shall occupy any part of
the existing or future street right-of-way or required customer
parking area. See buffer yard provisions in § 203-803.
(b) See light and glare standards in § 203-507.
(c) Any mobile/manufactured homes on a sales site shall meet the
required principal building setbacks from the perimeter lot
lines.
(9) Auto Repair Garage.
(a) All paint work shall be performed within a building, with a
fume collection and ventilation system that directs fumes away
from any adjacent dwellings. Outdoor major repairs (such as
body work and grinding) and outdoor welding shall not occur
within 250 feet of a "residential lot line."
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:706
(b) All reasonable efforts shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, vibration, light or electrical interference to
adjacent lots. See standards in Article V. See buffer yard
requirements in § 203-803.
(c) Outdoor storage of motor vehicles shall not be within any
required buffer yard or street right-of-way.
(d) Overnight outdoor storage of "junk" other than permitted junk
vehicles shall be prohibited within view of a public street or a
dwelling.
(e) Any "junk vehicle" (as defined by Article II) shall not be stored
for more than 20 days within view of a public street or a
dwelling. A maximum of six junk vehicles may be parked on a
lot outside of an enclosed building at any one time. Any junk
vehicle stored outside overnight shall be screened from view of
adjacent dwellings.
(f) Service bay doors shall not face directly towards an abutting
dwelling (not including a dwelling separated from the garage
by a street) if another reasonable alternative exits.
(10) Auto Service Station.
(a) See definition of this term and "auto repair garage" in Article
II. The uses may be combined, if the requirements for each are
met.
(b) All activities except those to be performed at the fuel or air
pumps shall be performed within a building. The use shall not
include spray painting.
(c) Fuel pumps shall be at least 25 feet from the existing street
right-of-way and shall meet side yard principal building
setback requirements.
(d) Overnight outdoor storage of "junk" shall be prohibited within
view of a public street or dwelling. Any junk vehicle stored
outside overnight shall be screened from view of adjacent
dwellings.
(e) Any "junk vehicle" (as defined by Article II) shall not be stored
more than 20 days within view of a public street or a dwelling.
No junk vehicles shall be stored within 20 feet of an existing
street right-of-way. No more than six junk vehicles shall be
stored on the lot outside of an enclosed building at any point in
time.
(f) The use may include a "convenience store" if the requirements
for such use are also met.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:707
(g) A canopy shall be permitted over the gasoline pumps with a
minimum front yard setback of 20 feet from each street rightof-
way line.
[1] Such canopy may be attached to the principal building.
The canopy shall not include any signs, except for the
following:
[a] A sign may be attached to each of two sides of the
canopy in place of an allowed freestanding sign;
[b] An allowed wall sign may be placed on a portion of the
canopy that is behind the minimum front yard setback
line; and
[c] Necessary warning signs.
[2] Within the minimum front yard building setback, the
distance between the ground level and the bottom of the
canopy shall not be greater than 20 feet. Parts of a sloped
canopy may have a taller height if the purpose of the taller
height is to deflect soot and glare away from the street or
neighboring properties.
(h) Fuel tanks and dispensers and ventilation equipment shall be
set back a minimum of 100 feet from the lot line of any
residential or institutional use (such as a school or nursing
home). Fuel dispensers shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet
from the existing street right-of-way line.
(11) Bed-and-Breakfast Inn.
(a) Within an agricultural or residential district (where permitted
under § 203-306), a maximum of six rental units shall be
provided and no more than three adults may occupy one rental
unit. No maximums shall apply within other permitted
districts. Only one bed-and-breakfast inn shall be permitted
per lot.
(b) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each rental
unit, plus employee parking. To the maximum extent feasible,
off-street parking spaces for the bed-and-breakfast inn shall
be: located either to the side or rear of the principal building;
and screened from the street and abutting dwellings by
landscaping. Off-street parking spaces shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from lot lines.
(c) There shall not be any signs, show windows or any type of
display or advertising visible from outside the premises, except
for a single sign with a maximum sign area of eight square feet
on each of two sides and with a maximum height of eight feet.
No internal lighting of the sign shall be permitted.
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:708
(d) Within a residential district, the use shall have a residential
appearance and character.
(e) The use shall be owned, operated or managed by permanent
residents of the lot.
(f) There shall not be separate cooking facilities in any guest
room. Food shall only be served to guests who are staying
overnight, unless a restaurant is also permitted.
(g) No guest shall stay for more than 14 days in any month.
(h) In the CO Conservation District, a minimum lot area of 15
acres shall apply where a bed-and-breakfast inn is allowed.
(12) Boardinghouse (includes Rooming House).
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum side yard building setback: 30 feet side.
(c) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(d) Maximum density: six bedrooms per acre; but in no case shall
the lot serve a total of more than 20 persons.
(e) Each bedroom shall be limited to two adults each.
(f) A buffer yard with screening meeting § 203-803 shall be
provided between any boardinghouse building and any
abutting dwelling.
(g) Note: There are separate standards for an "assisted living
facility," which is not considered a boardinghouse.
(h) Signs shall be limited to two wall signs with a maximum of two
square feet each.
(i) Rooms shall be rented for a minimum period of five
consecutive days.
(13) Campground, Camp or Recreational Vehicle Campground.
(a) Within a residential district, for each acre of total lot area,
there shall be a maximum average of: five recreational vehicle
sites (where allowed); 10 tent sites; or cabin sleeping capacity
for 20 persons. Such sites may be clustered in portions of the
tract. Such maximum density shall not apply within a
commercial district.
(b) Retail sales shall be allowed as an accessory use. Within a
residential district, any store shall be limited to sales of
recreational, household, food, gift and camping items. Within a
residential district, any store shall be primarily intended to
serve persons camping on the site.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:709
(c) For a campground, which includes a recreational vehicle
campground, the requirements of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance shall also apply.
(d) Minimum lot area: five acres in an allowed commercial or
industrial district, 10 acres in any other district where the use
is permitted under Article III.
(e) All campsites, recreational vehicle sites, and principal
commercial buildings shall be set back a minimum of 75 feet
from any contiguous lot line of an existing dwelling that is not
part of the campground or camp. Within this buffer, the
applicant shall prove to the maximum extent feasible that any
existing healthy trees will be maintained and preserved. Where
healthy mature trees do not exist within this buffer, and if
practical considering soil and topographic conditions, new
trees shall be planted within this buffer.
[1] The screening of evergreens provided in § 203-803
between business and residential uses is not required if
the tree buffer would essentially serve the same purpose,
or if removal of mature trees would be needed to plant the
shrubs.
[2] Removal of trees within this buffer shall be only allowed
for a necessary crossing of a street (which shall be
generally perpendicular to the buffer), stormwater
channel, driveway, and utility and to provide safe sight
distance.
(f) Buildings used for sleeping quarters shall not be within the
100-year floodplain. See maximum steep slope disturbance
provisions in the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(g) Maximum impervious coverage: Within a residential district,
10%, which shall include the typical lot area covered by
recreational vehicles at full capacity. Within any other district,
the maximum impervious coverage shall be the percentage
that applies to that zoning district in § 203-307A.
(h) No person other than a bona fide resident manager/caretaker
shall reside on the site for more than six months in any
calendar year. No recreational vehicle shall be occupied on the
site for more than six months in any calendar year by any one
individual or one family, other than a resident manager/
caretaker.
(14) Car Wash.
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:710
(a) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets. On-lot traffic circulation channels and
parking areas shall be clearly marked.
(b) Adequate provisions shall be made for the proper and
convenient disposal of refuse. The applicant shall provide
evidence that adequate measures will be in place to prevent
pollutants from being washed into the groundwater or
waterways. Any chemicals or polluted runoff that may be
hazardous to aquatic life shall be stored within an area that
will completely contain any leaks, spills or polluted runoff.
(c) Water from the car wash operation shall not flow onto
sidewalks or streets in such a manner as could cause ice
hazards.
(d) Any car wash that is located within 250 feet of an existing
dwelling shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
(e) No portion of a car wash shall be located within 100 feet from
the center line of a perennial waterway.
(f) Minimum lot area: five acres, which shall be reduced to one
acre if the applicant proves that most of the water used in the
operation will be recycled on site.
(15) Cemetery.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres, which may be on the same lot as
an allowed place of worship.
(b) A crematorium, where allowed by Article III, shall be set back a
minimum of 250 feet from all lot lines of existing dwellings and
all undeveloped residentially zoned lots.
(c) All structures and graves shall be set back a minimum of: 30
feet from the future right-of-way of any public street, 10 feet
from the cartway of an internal driveway, and 20 feet from any
other lot line. Any buildings with a height greater than 20 feet
shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all lot lines.
(d) No grave sites and no structures shall be located within the
100-year floodplain.
(e) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Officer, based upon review by the Township Solicitor, that the
use will include an appropriate financial system to guarantee
perpetual maintenance.
(16) Commercial Communications Antennas/Tower as principal
or accessory use.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:711
(a) An accessory commercial communications antenna shall be
permitted by right in any district if it meets the following
requirements:
[1] In a district other than a commercial or industrial district,
the antenna shall extend a maximum of 20 feet beyond the
existing structure to which it is attached. The antenna
shall be attached to one of the following existing lawful
structures:
[a] A principal agricultural building or silo;
[b] An electric high-voltage transmission tower;
[c] An existing lawful commercial communications tower;
[d] A fire station or steeple or bell tower of a place of
worship; or
[e] A water tower.
[2] In a commercial or industrial district, the antennas shall
extend a maximum of 40 feet beyond an existing building
or structure (other than a dwelling), provided the antenna
is setback a distance equal to its total height above the
ground from any lot line of a dwelling on another lot.
(b) Any commercial communications antenna/tower that does not
meet Subsection A(16)(a) above (such as a new freestanding
tower) shall only be allowed where specifically authorized in
§ 203-306, and in compliance with the following additional
regulations:
[1] Such antenna/tower shall be set back from all lot lines and
street rights-of-way a distance that is greater than the
total height of the antenna/tower above the surrounding
ground level. The Board of Supervisors may permit an
easement arrangement to be used without meeting the
setback requirement from the edge of the leased area,
provided that there are legal safeguards to ensure that the
setback will continue to be met over time from a lot line.
[2] A new tower, other than a tower on a lot of an emergency
services station, shall be set back the following minimum
distance from any existing dwelling: 300 feet plus the total
height of the tower above the surrounding ground level.
[3] A tower attached to the ground shall be surrounded by a
security fence/gate with a minimum height of eight feet
and evergreen plantings or preserved vegetation with an
initial minimum height of four feet.
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:712
[4] The applicant shall provide a written statement sealed by a
professional engineer stating that the communications
antenna/tower will meet the structural and wind
resistence requirements of the Construction Code.
[5] The applicant shall describe in writing the policies that will
be used to offer space on a tower to other communications
providers, which shall serve to minimize the total number
of towers necessary in the region. This policy shall be
designed to minimize the total number of towers necessary
in the Township.
[6] An applicant for a new commercial communications tower
shall provide evidence to the Board of Supervisors ("the
Board") that they have investigated co-locating their
facilities on an existing tower and other tall structures and
have found such alternative to be unworkable. The reasons
shall be provided.
[7] A maximum total height of 200 feet above the ground shall
apply in a commercial and industrial district and 150 feet
in any other district where it may be allowed, unless the
applicant proves to the Board of Supervisors as a
conditional use that a taller height is absolutely necessary
and unavoidable.
[8] The application shall describe any proposed lighting. The
Board may require lighting of an antenna even if it will not
be required by the Federal Aviation Administration. Such
lighting is intended to provide protection for emergency
medical helicopters. Strobe lighting shall not be used, but
flashing lights may be used.
[9] A new tower shall be designed in a manner that minimizes
its visual intrusiveness and environmental impacts to the
maximum extent feasible. For example, monopole designs
or designs worked into a flag pole are preferred over
lattice designs. Self-supporting towers are preferred over
towers with guy wires that would require removal of larger
numbers of trees.
(c) Purposes. These provisions for commercial communications
antenna/towers are primarily designed to serve the following
purposes, in addition to the overall objectives of this chapter:
[1] To protect property values.
[2] To minimize the visual impact of antenna/towers,
particularly considering the importance of the scenic
beauty of the area in attracting visitors for outdoor
recreation.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:713
[3] To minimize the number and heights of towers in a manner
that still provides for adequate telecommunications
services and competition.
(d) A tower/antenna that is intended to primarily serve emergency
communications by a Township-recognized police, fire or
ambulance organization, and is on the same lot as an
emergency services station, shall be permitted by right. Such
tower/antenna may also serve commercial purposes.
(e) Any antenna and tower that is no longer in active use shall be
completely removed within six months after the discontinuance
of use. The operator shall notify the Zoning Officer in writing
after the antenna or tower use is no longer in active use. Any
lease shall require such removal by the owner of the antenna/
tower. Any lease should provide that the lease shall expire once
the antenna/tower is removed. The Board of Supervisors may
require that a financial guarantee be posted to pay for removal
of the tower if the Board determines such guarantee is needed.
(f) All accessory utility buildings or cabinets shall: have a
maximum total floor area of 400 square feet, which may be
divided among adjacent buildings serving separate companies,
have a maximum height of 10 feet and meet principal building
setbacks.
(g) No new or existing antenna shall cause interference with
public safety telecommunications. The Township may require
the applicant for a new commercial communications tower to
submit a study by a radio frequency engineer or other qualified
professional to analyze the threat of interference. The study
shall also show that the tower and antenna will not create
interference with other communications systems, such as
amateur ham radio operators.
(17) Conversion of an Existing Building (including an Existing
Dwelling) into Dwelling Units.
(a) See Article III, which regulates where conversions are
permitted. Applicable state fire safety requirements shall be
met.
(b) The following regulations shall apply to the conversion of an
existing one-family dwelling into a greater number of dwelling
units:
[1] The building shall maintain the appearance of a one-family
dwelling with a single front entrance. Additional entrances
may be placed on the side or rear of the structure. The
dwelling units may internally share the single front
entrance.
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:714
[2] The conversion shall not be permitted if it would require
the placement of an exterior stairway on the front of the
building, or would require the placement of more than
three off-street parking spaces in the required front yard.
(c) A previously residential building shall maintain a clearly
residential appearance, except as may be necessary for
restoration of an historic building.
(d) A maximum total of four dwelling units may be developed per
lot unless a more restrictive provision is established by another
section of this chapter, unless the building included more than
4,000 square feet of building floor area at the time of adoption
of this chapter.
(e) Each unit shall meet the definition of a dwelling unit and shall
meet the minimum floor area requirements of § 203-801C.
(18) Day-Care Center, Child.
(a) See also "day care: family day-care home or group day care" as
an accessory use in § 203-403.
(b) The use shall comply with any applicable state and federal
regulations, including having an appropriate Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare (or its successor agency)
registration certificate or license.
(c) Convenient parking spaces within the requirements of Article
VI shall be provided for persons delivering and waiting for
children.
(d) In residential districts, where permitted as a principal use, a
day care use shall have a minimum lot area of 30,000 square
feet and a minimum setback for buildings and outdoor play
areas of 25 feet from an abutting "residential lot line."
(e) The use shall include secure fencing around outdoor play
areas.
(f) This use shall not be conducted in a dwelling that is physically
attached to another dwelling that does not have a common
owner.
(g) In residential districts, any permitted day care use shall
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is
compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
(h) A day-care use may occur in a building that also includes
permitted or non-conforming dwelling units.
(i) See also the standards for a "place of worship" in this section,
which allows a day-care center as an adjunct use.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:715
(19) Emergency Services Station.
(a) The following uses shall be allowed as accessory uses to the
principal use of a fire company station: a banquet hall, bingo
games, fairgrounds for periodic special events, indoor rental
storage, and auction house. Any building(s) detached from the
fire company station that are used for such purposes shall:
[1] Not cover more than 10% of the total lot area, and
[2] Be set back a minimum of 60 feet from the lot line of an
existing dwelling and be separated from such residential
lot line by a buffer yard meeting § 203-803.
(20) Forestry. See "timber harvesting" in this section.
(21) Golf Course. A golf course may include a restaurant or clubhouse,
provided that such building is located a minimum of 150 feet away
from any lot line of an existing dwelling. The maximum impervious
area covered by man-made surfaces shall not exceed 5% of the total
lot area of the golf course.
(22) Groundwater or Springwater Withdrawal, involving removal of
an averaging of more than 100,000 gallons per day from a lot for
off-site consumption. (Note: If the water is being utilized for uses
on adjacent lots or as part of a public water system, it shall not be
considered off-site consumption.)
(a) See § 203-309G. The regulations of this § 203-402A(22) shall
not apply to water used by a principal agricultural use within
the Township.
(b) If the water will be trucked off site, the applicant shall provide
a written report by a professional engineer with substantial
experience in traffic engineering. Such study shall analyze the
suitability of the area street system to accommodate the truck
traffic that will be generated. The application shall only be
approved if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors that the area street system is suitable in
terms of structure, geometry, safety and capacity to
accommodate the additional truck traffic.
(c) If the water will be trucked off-site, any area used for loading
or unloading of tractor-trailer trucks shall be set back a
minimum of 150 feet from any adjacent residential lot.
(d) Minimum lot area five acres, plus five additional acres for each
20,000 gallons per day of capacity of withdrawal, up to a
maximum of 100 acres.
(e) Any bottling or processing operations shall be considered a
distinct use and shall only be allowed if "food or beverage
manufacturing" is an allowed use under § 203-306.
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:716
(23) Group Homes. Group homes are permitted within a lawful
dwelling unit, provided the following additional requirements are
met:
(a) The use shall meet the definition in § 203-202.
(b) A group home shall not include any use meeting the definition
of a "treatment center."
(c) A group home shall include the housing of a maximum of six
unrelated persons, except:
[1] If a more-restrictive requirement is established by another
Township code;
[2] The number of bona fide paid professional staff shall not
count towards such maximum; and
[3] As may be approved by the Zoning Hearing Board under
§ 203-111D.
(d) The facility shall have adequate trained staff supervision for
the number and type of residents. If the staffing of the facility
has been approved by a state or county human service agency,
then this requirement shall have been deemed to be met.
(e) The applicant shall provide evidence of any applicable federal,
state or county licensing or certification to the Zoning Officer.
(f) The group home shall register in writing its location, general
type of treatment/care, maximum number of residents and
sponsoring agency with the Zoning Officer.
(g) Any medical or counseling services shall be limited to a
maximum of three nonresidents per day. Any staff meetings
shall be limited to a maximum of five persons at one time.
(h) Parking See § 203-601.
(i) If a group home is in a residential district, an appearance shall
be maintained that is closely similar to nearby dwellings, and
no sign shall identify the use.
(j) The persons living on site shall function as a common
household unit.
(k) The applicant shall notify the local ambulance and fire services
of the presence of the group home and the type of residents.
(l) An off-street parking space shall be provided for the largest
vehicle that serves the use.
(m) The building shall have lighted exit lights, emergency lighting
and interconnected smoke alarms.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:717
(24) Heliport.
(a) The applicant shall prove that the heliport has been located
and designed to minimize noise nuisances to other properties.
(b) For a heliport in the BC Zoning District, the minimum lot area
on which the heliport is located shall be no less than 10 acres.
The rotor diameter of the largest private helicopter expected to
use the heliport shall not exceed 35 feet. Landings and takeoffs
shall be prohibited between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and on
weekends and national holidays and limited to not more than
two landings per day. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-07]
(c) The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions on the size of
helicopters, frequency of use, fueling facilities, setbacks and
hours of operation to minimize nuisances and hazards to other
properties. Provided that the conditions do not conflict with
safety or federal or state regulations, the Zoning Hearing
Board may require that the majority of flights approach from
certain directions, and not from other directions that are more
likely to create nuisances for residential areas.
(25) Hotel or motel.
(a) See definitions in § 203-202, which distinguish a hotel/motel
from a boardinghouse.
(b) Buildings and tractor-trailer truck parking shall be a minimum
of 50 feet from any "residential lot line."
(26) Junkyard (includes automobile salvage yard).
(a) Storage of garbage or biodegradable material is prohibited,
other than what is customarily generated on-site and routinely
awaiting pickup.
(b) Outdoor storage of junk shall be at least: 100 feet from any
residential lot line; and 50 feet from any other lot line and the
existing right-of-way of any public street.
(c) The site shall contain a minimum of two exterior points of
access, each of which is not less than 20 feet in width. One of
these accesses may be limited to emergency vehicles. Cleared
driveways with a minimum width of 15 feet shall be provided
throughout the entire use to allow access by emergency
vehicles. Adequate off-street parking areas shall be provided
for customers.
(d) Outdoor storage shall be completely enclosed (except at
approved driveway entrances) by a forty-foot wide buffer yard
which complies with § 203-803, unless such storage is not
visible from an exterior lot line or street. The initial height of
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:718
the evergreen planting shall be six feet. Secure fencing with
a minimum height of eight feet shall be provided and wellmaintained
around all outdoor storage areas. Such fencing
shall be provided inside of the evergreen screening.
(e) Burning or incineration is prohibited.
(f) See the noise or dust regulations of Article V.
(g) All gasoline, antifreeze and oil shall be drained from all
vehicles and properly disposed of. All batteries shall be
removed from vehicles and properly stored in a suitable area
on an impervious and properly drained surface.
(h) Lot area: five acres minimum; 20 acres maximum.
(i) Tires. See the "outdoor storage and display" standards in
§ 203-403.
(j) Any storage of junk shall be maintained a minimum distance of
100 feet from the center line of any waterway, and shall be kept
out of a drainage swale.
(k) Where a junkyard is regulated by both this chapter and
another chapter of the Codified Ordinances of the Township,
the provision that is more restrictive upon the junkyard use
shall apply.
(27)Kennel.
(a) All buildings in which animals are housed (other than buildings
that are completely soundproofed and air-conditioned) and all
runs outside of buildings shall be located at least 150 feet from
all "residential lot lines." This 150 feet setback shall be
increased to 200 feet if more than 20 dogs are kept overnight
on the lot, and be increased to 250 feet if more than 50 dogs
are kept overnight on the lot.
(b) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds
generated within the buildings cannot routinely be heard
within any principal building on another lot.
(c) No animal shall be permitted to use outdoor runs from 9:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m. that are within 250 feet of an existing
dwelling. Runs for dogs shall be separated from each other by
visual barriers a minimum of four feet in height, to minimize
dog barking.
(d) See state law regulating kennels.
(e) Minimum lot area: six acres, unless a larger lot area is required
by another section of this chapter.
(28) Livestock and Poultry, Raising of.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:719
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres, except a minimum lot area of 25
acres shall apply for an "intensive raising of livestock or
poultry" use.
(b) Except for an intensive raising of livestock or poultry use, any
building or concentrated feeding areas for the keeping of
livestock or poultry shall be located a minimum of: 300 feet
from a lot in a residential district; 200 feet from an existing
dwelling that is not within a residential district; and 50 feet
from all other exterior lot lines. As a special exception use, the
Zoning Hearing Board may approve a smaller setback for the
expansion of facilities that existed prior to the adoption of this
section where the applicant proves that there is no reasonable
and feasible alternative and where the applicant proves that
the lesser distance would not be detrimental to public health or
safety or create significant hazards or nuisances.
(c) For an intensive raising of livestock or poultry use, any
building or concentrated feeding areas for the keeping of
livestock or poultry shall be located a minimum of: 600 feet
from a lot in a residential district; 200 feet from an existing
dwelling that is not within a residential district; and 100 feet
from all other exterior lot lines. As a special exception use, the
Zoning Hearing Board may approve a smaller setback for the
expansion of facilities that existed prior to the adoption of this
section where the applicant proves that there is no reasonable
and feasible alternative and where the applicant proves that
the lesser distance would not be detrimental to public health or
safety or create significant hazards or nuisances.
(d) The setbacks from property lines provided in this § 203-402A
for this use shall not apply from dwellings or lots owned by: the
operator or owner of the livestock use; or affected property
owners providing a written notarized letter waiving such
setback.
(e) Fencing shall be used as necessary and practical to prevent
livestock from entering streets or unauthorized property.
(f) The keeping of putrescent garbage-fed swine shall meet the
setbacks for an intensive raising of livestock or poultry use.
See the State Domestic Animal Law provisions regarding
garbage-fed animals.
(g) For a new or expanded raising of livestock or poultry use,
evidence shall be provided by the operator/applicant to the
Township to show that there will be compliance with
procedures and requirements of the State Nutrient
Management Act and accompanying state regulations.
(h) Buildings used for the keeping of livestock or poultry shall:
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:720
[1] Meet Township floodplain regulations;
[2] Not be located within 100 feet of a perennial stream, river,
spring, lake, pond or reservoir, and
[3] Not be located within 100 feet of an active public water
supply drinking well or an active intake for a public water
supply.
(i) For manure storage facilities that are specifically required to
have a setback from lot lines under the State Nutrient
Management regulations, that state setback shall apply. For
any other manure storage facilities, a 100 feet minimum
setback shall apply from all lot lines.
(j) The following additional requirements shall apply to an
intensive raising of livestock or poultry use:
[1] The applicant shall provide a soil and erosion control plan
to the County Conservation District for review and pay
their review fees.
[2] The applicant shall describe in writing or on site plans
methods that will be used to address water pollution and
insect and odor nuisances. The applicant shall provide a
written comparison of proposed methods of controlling
insect and odor nuisances and avoiding water pollution to
applicable sections of the Pennsylvania Soil and Water
Conservation Technical Guide as published by the United
States Department of Agriculture and the State
Department of Environmental Protection's Manure
Management Manual for Environmental Protection, or
their successor publications. The applicant may meet this
requirement by providing a cross-reference to certain
sections of such manuals or other written industry
standards to describe the methods that will be used.
[3] The location of the facility is requested to consider
prevailing wind patterns as they may affect the nearest
existing dwellings.
[4] An area shall be provided for trucks to turnaround on the
property that avoids the need to back out onto a public
road.
(29) Manufactured Homes and Manufactured Home Parks. See
"mobile/manufactured home" in this section.
(30) Membership Club.
(a) See definition in Article II.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:721
(b) Any active outdoor play areas shall be set back at least 30 feet
from any abutting "residential lot line."
(c) This use shall not include an "after-hours club."
(31) Mineral Extraction.
(a) If a mineral extraction use involves mining activities over more
than two acres of land in any calendar year, then the following
additional requirements shall be met:
[1] The applicant shall prove that a continuous route over
roads will be available and will be used by trucks leaving
the use that entirely involves roads with a minimum paved
cartway width of 18 feet from the exit driveway of the
mineral extraction use to reach Interstate 81, Interstate 83
or Route 22. This route shall consider any improvements
that the applicant proposes to fund.
[2] A copy of all information submitted to State agencies shall
also be submitted to the Zoning Officer at the same time.
[3] A detailed and appropriate land reclamation and reuse
plan of the area to be excavated shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer. Compliance with such plan shall be a
condition of Township permits.
[4] After areas are used for mineral extraction, those areas
shall be reclaimed in phases to a nonhazardous and
environmentally sound state permitting some productive
or beneficial future use.
[5] A 50 feet wide yard covered by natural vegetative ground
cover (except at approved driveway crossings) shall be
required along all exterior lot lines that are within 200 feet
of an area of excavation. The Board of Supervisors may
require this yard to include an earth berm with a minimum
average height of six feet and an average of one shade tree
for each 40 feet of distance along the lot lines. Such shade
trees shall be planted outside of any berm and any fence.
[a] New trees shall not be required where preserved trees
will serve the same purpose.
[6] The following minimum setbacks shall apply for the
excavated area of a mineral extraction use from property
that is not owned by the owner or operator of the mineral
extraction use:
[a] One hundred feet from the existing right-of-way of
public streets and from all exterior lot lines of the
property;
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:722
[b] One hundred fifty feet from a nonresidential principal
building, unless released by the owner thereof;
[c] Four hundred feet from the lot line of a dwelling;
[d] One hundred fifty feet from the lot line of a publicly
owned recreation area that existed at time of the
application for the use or expansion.
[7] The excavated area of a mineral extraction use shall be set
back 150 feet from the average waterline of a perennial
stream or the edge of a natural wetland of more than two
acres.
[8] Truck access to the use shall be located to reasonably
minimize: hazards on public streets and dust and noise
nuisances to residences.
[9] Fencing. The Board of Supervisors may require secure
fencing in locations where needed to protect public safety.
As an alternative, the Board of Supervisors may approve
the use of thorny vegetation to discourage public access.
Also, warning signs shall be placed around the outer edge
of the use.
[10] Hours of operation. The Board of Supervisors, as a
condition of conditional use approval, may reasonably limit
the hours of operation of the use and of related trucking
and blasting operations to protect the character of
adjacent residential areas.
[11] The activities and residual effects shall not create
conditions that are significantly hazardous to the health
and safety of neighboring residents.
[12] The Township may require that the applicant post financial
security to cover the costs of damage that may occur to
entrances and exits to public roads as a result of the trucks
carrying mining materials.
[13] A plan shall be submitted showing sequential phases of
mining activities on the land. Mining activities shall be
conducted on a maximum of 50 acres at a time.
Reclamation shall be initiated on one phase before the
next phase is opened for mining.
[14] A plan shall be submitted showing how dust will be
controlled.
(32) Mobile/Manufactured Home installed on an individual lot or
within a mobile/manufactured home park approved after the
adoption of this chapter.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:723
(a) Construction. Any mobile/manufactured home placed on any
lot after the adoption of this chapter shall be constructed in
accordance with 1976 or later safety and construction
standards of the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development. (Note: These federal standards supersede
local construction codes for the actual construction of the
home itself.)
(b) Each site shall be graded to provide a stable and well-drained
area.
(c) Each home shall have hitch and tires removed.
(d) Anchoring. A mobile/manufactured home on an individual lot
or mobile/manufactured home park shall include a system that
properly secures the home to the ground to prevent shifting,
overturning or uneven settling of the home. The requirements
of the Construction Codes shall apply, in addition to the
manufacturer's specifications for installation.
(e) Foundation treatment. The space between the bottom of the
home and the ground and/or home pad shall be enclosed using
a durable fire-resistant material. This enclosure shall have the
appearance of a foundation of a site-built home, such as
material with a concrete-type or stucco facing, except that
metal skirting shall be allowed for a dwelling within a
manufactured/mobile home park. Provisions shall be provided
for access to utility connections under the home.
(33) Mobile/Manufactured Home Park.
(a) Plans and permits. Plans shall be submitted and reviewed by
the Township for all mobile/manufactured home parks in
compliance with the mobile/manufactured home park
provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance and all other provisions of such ordinance that
apply to a land development, including the submission,
approval and improvements provisions (other than specific
provisions altered by this section).
(b) The minimum tract area shall be three contiguous acres,
unless a larger tract area is required by § 203-306 in a
particular zoning district. This minimum tract area shall be
under single ownership.
(c) Density. The maximum average density of the tract shall be
four dwelling units per acre.
[1] To calculate this density: land in common open space or
proposed streets within the park may be included, but land
within the 100-year floodplain, wetlands and slopes over
25% shall not be included.
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:724
(d) Landscaped perimeter. Each mobile/manufactured home park
shall include a thirty-five-foot wide landscaped area including
substantial attractive evergreen and deciduous trees around
the perimeter of the site, except where such landscaping would
obstruct safe sight distances for traffic. A planting plan for
such area shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors as
part of any required conditional use approval. Such landscaped
area shall not be required between adjacent mobile home park
developments. The same area of land may count towards both
the landscaped area and the building setback requirements.
(e) A dwelling, including any attached accessory building, shall be
set back a minimum of 25 feet from another dwelling within the
mobile home park, except that unenclosed porches, awnings
and decks may be 15 feet from the walls of another dwelling.
(f) The minimum separation between homes and edge of interior
street cartway or parking court cartway shall be 25 feet.
(g) The minimum principal and accessory building setbacks from
exterior/boundary lot lines and rights-of-way of preexisting
public streets shall be 50 feet.
(h) Each home shall comply with the requirements for "mobile/
manufactured homes" stated in the preceding subsection.
(i) Accessory structures. A detached accessory structure or
garage shall be separated a minimum of 15 feet from any
dwelling units which the accessory structure is not accessory
to.
(j) "Common open space" for a mobile home park. A minimum of
15% of the total lot area of the entire mobile home park shall
be set aside as common open space for the residents. The
applicant shall prove that these areas will be suitable for active
or passive recreation. If a development will not be restricted to
persons over age 55, then the common open space shall at a
minimum include a rectangular grass field 100 feet by 200 feet
suitable for free play by young persons. If a development will
be restricted to persons over age 55, then the common open
space shall at a minimum include landscaped paved trails. A
recreation building or pool available to all residents of the
development may count towards this requirement.
(k) Streets.
[1] Access to individual mobile home spaces shall be from
interior parking courts, access drives or private streets
and shall not be from public streets exterior to the
development.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:725
[2] Streets within the mobile home park that provide access to
reach 20 or more dwellings shall have a minimum paved
cartway of 24 feet, and other local private streets or
parking courts serving less than 20 homes shall have a
minimum paved cartway of 20 feet.
[3] Curbs and sidewalks are not required on the private
streets, but all private streets shall meet all other
Township cartway construction standards.
(l) Utilities. All units within the mobile home park shall be
connected to a public water and a public sewage system. The
system shall meet appropriate minimum water pressure/fire
flow and hydrant requirements. The applicant shall prove that
adequate provisions are made for solid waste disposal.
(m) Along through streets, a minimum nighttime lighting level of
0.2 footcandle shall be maintained, as no expense to the
Township.
(n) Other requirements. A manufactured/mobile home park shall
comply with all of the same requirements of Township
ordinances that apply to a subdivision or land development of
site-built single-family detached dwellings, except for
requirements that are specifically modified by this § 203-402A.
This includes, but is not limited to, submission, approval and
improvement requirements of the Township subdivision and
land development regulations.
(34) Motor Vehicle Racetrack.
(a) All areas used for the racing, testing and maintenance of motor
vehicles shall be set back a minimum of 400 feet from the lot
line of an existing dwelling or a residential district boundary.
(b) All buildings, parking, loading and unloading areas shall be set
back a minimum of 150 feet from the lot line of an existing
dwelling or a residential district boundary.
(c) The applicant shall prove that the standards of Article V will be
met, including noise, lighting and dust.
(d) Minimum lot area: 30 acres.
(35) Nursing Home.
(a) Licensing: See definition in Article II.
(b) A minimum of 15% of the lot shall be suitable and developed
for passive recreation. This area shall include outdoor sitting
areas and pedestrian walks.
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:726
(36) Outdoor Storage and Display. The provisions listed for this use
under § 203-403 shall apply.
(37) Picnic Grove, Commercial.
(a) All buildings, pavilions and areas used for nighttime activities
shall be a minimum of 150 feet from an existing dwelling on
another lot. All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of
75 feet from any residential lot line. The use shall not operate
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(b) See noise and glare standards in Article V.
(c) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(38) Place of Worship.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres in a residential district, unless a
larger lot area is required by the applicable zoning district. In
any other district, a place of worship shall meet the minimum
lot area provided in Article III for that district.
(b) Weekly religious education rooms and meeting rooms are
permitted accessory uses provided they are incidental to the
place of worship. A primary or secondary school and/or a child
or adult day care center may be approved on the same lot as a
place of worship provided the requirements for such uses are
also met. See § 203-305. Buses used primarily to transport
persons to and from religious services or a permitted school on
the lot may be parked on the lot. Other uses shall only be
allowed if all of the requirements for such uses are also met,
including being permitted in the applicable district.
(c) A maximum of one dwelling unit may be accessory to a place of
worship on the same lot, to house employees of the place of
worship and/or an employee and his/her family. Such dwelling
shall meet the maximum number of unrelated persons in the
definition of a "family." No other residential use shall be
allowed.
(d) If within a residential district, any new place of worship shall
be adjacent to an existing collector or arterial street that is in
public ownership.
(e) Minimum building setback from a lot line of an existing
dwelling in a residential district: 60 feet.
(f) Minimum parking setback from a lot line of an existing
dwelling in a residential district: 20 feet.
(39) Recreation, Outdoor.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:727
(a) All buildings, pavilions and areas used for nighttime activities
shall be a minimum of 150 feet from an existing dwelling on
another lot. All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of
75 feet from any residential lot line.
(b) This term shall not include "publicly owned recreation," a "golf
course," or a "motor vehicle racetrack."
(c) See provisions for a nonhousehold swimming pool in this
§ 203-402.
(d) Lighting, noise and glare control: see Article V.
(e) In a residential district, the minimum lot area shall be 2.5
acres, unless a more-restrictive lot area is established by
another section of this chapter.
(f) Maximum impervious coverage in any residential district: 20%.
(g) Maximum building coverage in any residential district: 15%.
(h) A site plan meeting the requirements of Article I shall be
submitted to the Township.
(i) Where woods exist adjacent to an exterior lot line of the use
adjacent to a residential lot line, such woods shall be preserved
within at least 20 feet of such lot line, except for approved
driveway, utility and trail crossings. Where such woods will not
exist, a 20 feet wide buffer yard in accordance with § 203-803.
(j) Hours of operation. In a residential district, active recreation
facilities shall be conducted only between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m., unless differing hours are established as a
condition of any needed Zoning Hearing Board or Board of
Supervisors approval.
(k) Any restaurant open to the public, tavern, firearms target
range, camp, campground, or commercial picnic ground use
shall only be allowed if those uses are permitted in the
applicable district and if all requirements for each such use(s)
are also met.
(40) Recycling Collection Center.
(a) This use shall not be bound by the requirements of a solid
waste disposal facility.
(b) All materials shall be kept in appropriate containers, with
appropriate sanitary measures and frequent enough emptying
to prevent the attraction of insects or rodents and to avoid fire
hazards.
(c) Adequate provision shall be made for movement of trucks if
needed and for off-street parking.
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:728
(d) A 20 feet wide buffer yard with screening as described in
§ 203-803 shall be provided between this use and any abutting
"residential lot line."
(e) This use may be a principal or accessory use, including being
an accessory use to a commercial use, an industrial use, a
public or private primary or secondary school, a place of
worship or a Township-owned use, subject to the limitations of
this section.
(f) Materials to be collected shall be of the same character as the
following materials: paper, fabric, cardboard, plastic, metal,
aluminum, and glass. No garbage shall be stored as part of the
use, except for that generated on-site and that accidentally
collected with the recyclables. Only materials clearly being
actively collected for recycling may be stored on site.
(g) The use shall only include the following operations: collection,
sorting, baling, loading, weighing, routine cleaning, and
closely similar work. No burning or landfilling shall occur. No
mechanical operations shall routinely occur at the site other
than operations such as baling of cardboard.
(h) The use shall not include the collection or processing of pieces
of metal that have a weight greater than 50 pounds, except
within an industrial district.
(i) The use shall include the storage of a maximum of 50 tons of
materials on the site if the use is within a residential district
and within 500 feet of an existing dwelling.
(41) Residential Conversions. See "conversions of an existing
building" within this section.
(42) Restaurant.
(a) Screening of dumpster and waste containers. See § 203-806.
(b) See "drive-through" service in § 203-403.
(c) Drive-through service shall only be provided where specifically
permitted in the applicable district regulations.
(43) (Reserved)
(44) School, Public or Private, Primary or Secondary.
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres in a residential district. In any
other district, the use shall meet the standard minimum lot
area requirement for that district.
(b) No children's play equipment, basketball courts or illuminated
recreation facilities shall be within 50 feet of a residential lot
line.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:729
(c) The use shall not include a dormitory unless specifically
permitted in the district.
(45) Self-Storage Development.
(a) All storage units shall be of fire-resistant construction.
(b) Outdoor storage shall be limited to recreational vehicles,
boats, and trailers. No "junk vehicles" shall be stored within
view of a public street or a dwelling.
(c) Trash, radioactive or highly toxic substances, garbage, refuse,
explosives or flammable materials, hazardous substances,
animal carcasses or skins, or similar items shall not be stored.
(d) Nothing shall be stored in interior traffic aisles, required offstreet
parking areas, loading areas or accessways.
(e) The use shall not include a commercial auto repair garage
unless that use is permitted in the district and the use meets
those requirements.
(f) Adequate lighting shall be provided for security, but it shall be
directed away or shielded from any adjacent residential uses.
(g) See § 203-803 concerning buffer yards. In addition, any
outdoor storage or garage doors within 200 feet of a street
right-of-way and visible from the street shall be screened from
that street by a buffer yard meeting § 203-803. Any fencing
shall be placed on the inside of the plantings.
(h) Minimum separation between buildings: 20 feet. Maximum
length of any building: 300 feet.
(46) Solid Waste Transfer Facility, Solid Waste Landfill, or Solid
Waste-to-Energy Facility.
(a) All solid waste storage, disposal, incineration or processing
shall be at least 200 feet from the following: public street rightof-
way, exterior lot line, 100-year floodplain, edge of a surface
water body (including a water filled quarry), or wetland of
more than 1/2 acre in area.
(b) All solid waste storage, disposal, incineration or processing
shall be a minimum of 500 feet from any residential district,
perennial creek, publicly owned park or any existing dwelling
that the applicant does not have an agreement to purchase.
(c) The use shall be served by a minimum of two paved access
roads, each with a minimum cartway width of 24 feet. One of
these roads may be restricted to use by emergency vehicles.
(d) No burning or incineration shall occur, except within an
approved waste-to-energy facility.
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:730
(e) The operation and day-to-day maintenance of the solid waste
disposal area shall comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations as a condition of the continuance of any permit of
the Township. Violations of this condition shall also be
considered to be violations of this chapter.
(f) Open dumps and open burning of refuse are prohibited.
(g) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the existing street network can handle the
additional truck traffic, especially without bringing
extraordinary numbers of trash hauling trucks through or
alongside existing residential or residentially zoned areas and
especially considering the width and slopes of streets in the
Township.
(h) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that the use would not routinely create noxious
odors off of the tract.
(i) A chainlink or other approved fence with a minimum height of
eight feet shall surround active solid waste disposal areas to
prevent the scattering of litter and to keep out children, unless
the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Board of
Supervisors that this is unnecessary. The Board shall require
earth berms, evergreen screening, and/or shade trees as
needed shall be used to prevent landfill operations from being
visible from an expressway or arterial streets or dwellings.
(j) A minimum lot area of 15 acres shall be required for the first
250 tons per day of capacity to treat or dispose of waste, plus
one acre for each additional 100 tons per day of capacity. A
solid waste facility shall have a maximum total capacity of 500
tons per day.
(k) Health hazards. Any facility shall be operated in such a manner
to prevent the attraction, harborage or breeding of insects,
rodents or vectors.
(l) Attendant. An attendant shall be present during all periods of
operation or dumping.
(m) Gates. Secure gates, fences, earth mounds, and/or dense
vegetation shall prevent unauthorized access.
(n) Emergency access. The operator of the use shall cooperate
fully with local emergency services. This should include
allowing practice exercises on the site and the provision of all
information needed by the emergency services to determine
potential hazards. Adequate means of emergency access shall
be provided.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:731
(o) Under authority granted to the Township under Act 101 of
1988, the hours of operation shall be limited to between 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(p) Tires. See "outdoor storage and display" in § 203-403.
(q) Litter. The operator shall regularly police the area of the
facility and surrounding streets to collect litter that may
escape from the facility or trucks.
(r) Dangerous materials. No radioactive, hazardous,
chemotherapeutic or infectious materials may be stored,
processed, disposed or incinerated. Infectious materials are
defined as medical wastes used or created in the treatment of
persons or animals with seriously contagious diseases.
(s) The applicant shall provide sufficient information for the
Township to determine that the requirements of this chapter
will be met.
(t) State requirements. Nothing in this chapter is intended to
supersede any state requirements. It is the intent of this
chapter that when similar issues are regulated on both the
Township and state levels, that the stricter requirement shall
apply for each aspect, unless it is determined that an individual
state regulation preempts Township regulation in a particular
aspect. The applicant shall provide the Zoning Officer with a
copy of all written materials and plans that are submitted to PA
DEP at the same time as they are submitted to DEP.
(u) For a solid-waste-to-energy facility or solid waste transfer
facility, all loading and unloading of solid waste shall only
occur within an enclosed building, and over an impervious
surface drains to a holding tank that is then adequately
treated. All solid waste processing and storage shall occur
within enclosed buildings or enclosed containers.
(47) Stable, Nonhousehold (includes riding academies; see also
"keeping of pets in § 203-403).
(a) Minimum lot area: two acres for the first horse or similar
animal, plus one acre for each additional horse or similar
animal.
(b) Any horse barn, manure storage areas, or stable shall be a
minimum of 100 feet from any lot line of an adjacent dwelling.
(c) Manure shall be regularly collected and disposed of in a
sanitary manner that avoids nuisances to neighbors. Manure
shall be stored in a manner that prevents it from being carried
off by runoff into a creek. Manure shall not be stored within
100 feet of a perennial waterway.
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:732
(48) Swimming Pool, Nonhousehold.
(a) The water surface shall be set back at least 50 feet from any
existing dwelling on another lot.
(b) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(c) Any water surface within 100 feet of an existing dwelling on
another lot shall be separated from the dwelling by a buffer
yard meeting § 203-803.
(d) The water surface shall be surrounded by a secure, wellmaintained
fence at least six feet in height.
(e) Drainage. A proper method shall be provided for drainage of
the water from the pool that will not flood other property.
(49)Target Range.
(a) All target ranges shall have a barrier behind the target area
which is of sufficient height and thickness to adequately
protect the public safety.
(b) The design of the outdoor firearms target range shall be
compared by the applicant with applicable published
guidelines of the National Rifle Association. The Zoning
Hearing Board may consider such guidelines to be the
generally accepted standard for the safety of these facilities.
(c) An outdoor firearms target range and any firing stations shall
be located a minimum of 250 feet from any "residential lot
line," unless all firing would occur within a completely
enclosed sound-resistant building. Clay pigeon shooting shall
be directed away from homes and streets.
(d) An outdoor firearms target range shall be properly posted. The
Zoning Hearing Board may require fencing as necessary.
(e) The applicant shall provide evidence that the noise limits of
Article V will be met.
(f) An indoor firearms target range shall be adequately ventilated
and/or air-conditioned to allow the building to remain
completely enclosed.
(g) A target range shall only be used for types of firearms or other
weapons for which it was specifically designed. Automatic
weapons shall not be used.
(h) An outdoor target range shall not be used during nighttime
hours. Maximum hours and days of operation may be
established as a condition of the zoning approval.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:733
(i) Minimum lot area for an outdoor firearms target range: 10
acres, unless a more-restrictive provision is established by
another provision of this chapter.
(j) See § 203-803. Wherever woods exist adjacent to an exterior
lot line of an outdoor firearms target range, such woods shall
be preserved within at least 100 feet of each such lot line,
except for approved driveway, utility and trail crossings.
(50) Timber Harvesting. The provisions of Chapter 189, or its
successor section, of the Codified Ordinances of the Township shall
apply to all forestry and timber harvesting activities.
(51)Townhouses and Apartments.
(a) Maximum length and width of an attached grouping of
townhouses: 200 feet. Maximum number of apartments that
shall be within a building: 12, except no maximum shall apply
in a building in which all units are permanently age restricted
to at least one resident age 55 and older. [Amended
11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
(b) Paved area setback: All off-street parking spaces, except
spaces on driveways immediately in front of a carport or
garage entrance, shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from
any dwelling.
(c) Garages. It is strongly recommended that all townhouses be
designed so that garages and/or carports are not an overly
prominent part of the view from public streets. For this reason,
parking courts, common garage or carport structures or
garages at the rear of dwellings are encouraged instead of
individual garages opening onto the front of the building,
especially for narrow townhouse units.
(d) Mailboxes. Any mailboxes provided within the street right-ofway
should be clustered together in an orderly and attractive
arrangement or structure. Individual freestanding mailboxes of
noncoordinated types at the curbside are specifically
discouraged.
(e) Access. Vehicular access points onto all arterial and collector
streets shall be minimized to the lowest reasonable number. No
townhouse dwelling within a tract of five or more dwelling
units shall have its own driveway entering onto an arterial or
collector street.
(f) Common open space. A minimum of 20% of the total lot area of
the development involving townhouses and apartments and
their accessory uses shall be set aside as common open space
for the residents. The applicant shall prove that these areas
will be suitable for active or passive recreation.
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-402
1:734
[1] If a development includes over 30 dwelling units that will
not be restricted to at least one resident age 55 and older,
then the common open space shall at a minimum include a
rectangular grass field 50 feet by 150 feet that is suitable
for free play by young persons. If all dwellings in a
development will be restricted to at least one resident age
55 and older, then the common open space shall at a
minimum include landscaped trails that are ADAaccessible.
[2] A recreation building or pool available to all residents of
the development may count towards the open space
requirement. Areas with a width of less than 50 feet shall
not count towards this requirement. This requirement
shall be in place of any requirement for recreation land or
fees under the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
(52)Treatment Center.
(a) See definition in § 203-202.
(b) The applicant shall provide a written description of all
conditions (such as criminal parolees, alcohol addiction) that
will cause persons to occupy the use during the life the permit.
Any future additions to this list shall require an additional
special exception approval.
(c) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that the use will involve adequate on-site
supervision and security measures to protect public safety.
(d) The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions upon the use
to protect public safety, such as conditions on the types of
residents and security measures.
(e) If the use involves five or more residents, a suitable recreation
area shall be provided that is supervised by the center's staff.
(53)Trucking Company Terminal.
(a) As a condition of conditional use approval, the Board of
Supervisors may require additional earth berming, setbacks,
landscaping and lighting controls as they determine to be
necessary to provide compatibility with adjacent dwellings.
These measures shall be designed to minimum glare, noise,
soot, dust, air pollutants and other nuisances upon dwellings.
(54)Veterinarian Office (includes Animal Hospital).
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
§ 203-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-402
1:735
§ 203-403. Additional requirements for accessory uses.
(b) Any structure in which animals are treated or housed shall be a
minimum of 30 feet from any lot line of an existing dwelling.
Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds
generated within the buildings cannot routinely be perceived
within any adjacent dwellings.
(c) Animals undergoing treatment may be kept as an accessory
use. However, a commercial kennel shall only be allowed if a
kennel is permitted in that district and if the applicable
requirements are met.
A. General. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are clearly
customary and incidental to a permitted by right, special exception or
conditional use are permitted by right, except as is provided for in this
chapter. A business shall only be conducted as an accessory to a
dwelling if specifically permitted by this chapter.
B. Accessory setbacks. The accessory setback requirements of the
applicable district shall apply to every accessory building, structure or
use unless a standard that is clearly meant to be more restrictive or less
restrictive is specifically stated in this Article for a particular accessory
use. Accessory structure setback requirements shall not apply to
permitted surface parking lots, fences or permitted accessory signs.
C. Front yard setback. No accessory structure, use or building shall be
permitted in a required front yard in any district, unless specifically
permitted by this chapter.
D. Special standards. Each accessory use shall comply with all of the
following standards listed for that use:
(1) Antenna, Standard (includes amateur radio antenna).
(a) Height. No standard antenna, including its supporting
structure, shall have a total height above the average
surrounding ground level of greater than 75 feet.
(b) Anchoring. An antenna shall be properly anchored to resist
high winds.
(2) Bees, Keeping of.
(a) The applicant shall maintain the bees in a manner that does not
create a public nuisance.
(b) Bee colonies shall be maintained within hives.
(c) Hives shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line,
except this setback shall be reduced to 50 feet if a six feet
minimum height fence or solid hedge is located along the
§ 203-402 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-403
1:736
adjoining lot line for a distance of at least 100 feet from the
hives.
(d) The approval to keep bees shall be revoked if the use is
maintained in a way that results in unprovoked stinging of
persons who are located on other lots or on streets or
sidewalks.
(3) Bus Shelter.
(a) Bus shelters shall only be allowed at a stop of a regularly
scheduled public bus route. See "accessory uses" in § 203-306
for the allowed zoning districts.
(b) The location of any bus shelter shall be subject to approval by
the Board of Supervisors.
(c) If the bus shelter will be located within the right-of-way,
approval shall be obtained from the Board of Supervisors or
PennDOT, as applicable. If the bus shelter will be located
outside of the right-of-way, the owner of the land shall provide
written permission.
(d) A bus shelter shall be constructed primarily using clear,
shatter-resistant materials.
(e) A bus shelter may include two sign images, each with a
maximum sign area of 35 square feet.
(f) A written agreement shall establish the party that will be
responsible for maintaining the shelter.
(g) A bus shelter shall not obstruct a clear sight triangle.
(h) The Zoning Officer shall require the removal of a bus shelter
within 60 days if the Zoning Officer becomes aware that the
shelter is not being properly maintained or if it is no longer
served by a public bus route.
(i) The applicant shall provide evidence that the local public
transit provider has approved the location of the proposed bus
shelter. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
(4) Composting as a principal or accessory use (other than raising
of mushrooms).
(a) All composting shall be conducted in such a manner that does
not create a fire, rodent or disease-carrying insect hazard and
does not cause noxious odors off of the subject property.
(b) Composting shall be permitted as an accessory use, provided
that the composting is limited to biodegradable vegetative
material, including trees, shrubs, leaves, bark and vegetable
§ 203-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-403
1:737
waste. Such composting shall be kept free of other garbage
and animal fats.
(c) Minimum lot area for composting of manure that was not
generated on-site: 25 acres. Any composting of manure shall
comply with the latest edition of the Pennsylvania Manure
Management Manual.
(d) Setbacks. Composting areas of greater than one acre shall be
set back 75 feet from lot lines of abutting residential lot lines,
except that a 200 feet minimum setback shall apply from all lot
lines for composting of manure that was not generated on site.
(5) Day-Care, Child - as accessory to a dwelling.
(a) See § 203-306 and the definitions in § 203-202 concerning the
number of children who can be cared for in different zoning
districts in a family day-care home or a group day-care home.
(b) In any case, 7 or more children (other than children who are
"related" to the primary caregiver) shall only be cared for at
one time within a single-family detached dwelling with a
minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet and a 20 feet minimum
setback from all existing dwellings on another lot(s). Four to
six children (in addition to children who are "related" to the
primary caregiver) shall only be cared for at one time within a
dwelling that is not attached to another dwelling. The care of
fewer numbers of children may occur within any lawful
dwelling unit.
(c) The dwelling shall retain a residential appearance with no
change to the exterior of the dwelling to accommodate the use,
other than cosmetic improvements.
(d) The use shall be actively operated by a permanent resident of
the dwelling.
(e) If four or more children are cared for who are not related to the
primary caregiver, then a minimum of 400 square feet of
exterior play area shall be available, surrounded by a six feet
high secure fence.
(f) See also "day-care center" as a principal use in § 203-402, and
"day care as accessory to a place of worship" in § 203-306B.
(g) The use shall comply with any applicable state and federal
regulations, including having an appropriate State Department
of Public Welfare (or its successor agency) registration
certificate or license if required by such agency.
(h) The use shall include a secure fence around any outdoor areas
abutting streets that are routinely used for outdoor play.
§ 203-403 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-403
1:738
(6) Drive-Through Facilities.
(a) The proposed traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause
traffic hazards on adjacent streets.
(b) On-lot traffic circulation and parking areas shall be clearly
marked.
(c) A drive-through use shall be designed with space for an
adequate number of waiting vehicles while avoiding conflicts
with traffic onto, around and off of the site. Any drive-through
facilities shall be designed to minimize conflicts with
pedestrian traffic.
(7) Farm-Related Business. This use may be approved on an lawful
existing lot with a minimum lot area of 25 acres that include a
principal agricultural use.
(a) A farm-related business shall be defined as a low-intensity
commercial or industrial activity that functions as a customary
accessory use to an on-site principal agricultural use. Farmrelated
businesses are intended to provide supplemental
income to farmers to encourage the continuation of farming,
and to provide needed services to other farmers.
(b) A farm-related business shall be conducted by a resident or
owner of the property, his/her "relatives," and a maximum total
of four other employees working on site at one time, in addition
to employees of the agricultural use. In addition, a barn that
was constructed for agricultural purposes prior to the adoption
of this section may be leased to a nonresident for a use meeting
these standards.
(c) To the maximum extent feasible, a farm-related business
should use an existing building. Buildings that existed prior to
the effective date of this section may be used for a farm-related
business. Any new building constructed for a farm-related
business and any new parking area for trucks shall be set back
a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line of an existing dwelling,
unless a larger setback is required by another section of this
chapter. The total of all building floor areas used for a farmrelated
business shall not exceed 6,000 square feet. This 6,000
square-foot limit shall only apply to buildings constructed after
the effective date of this chapter. A farm-related business may
also use buildings of any size that existed prior to the effective
date of this chapter. The total area used by the farm-related
business, including parking, shall not exceed three acres.
(d) The farm-related business shall not routinely require the
overnight parking of more than two tractor-trailer trucks,
other than trucks serving the agricultural use.
§ 203-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-403
1:739
(e) Any manufacturing operations shall be of a custom nature and
shall be conducted indoors.
(f) The business shall not generate noxious odors, noise, or glare
beyond amounts that are typically generated by agricultural
operations. Nonagricultural operations shall not routinely
occur in a manner that generates traffic or noise heard by
neighbors between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(g) Any retail sales shall only be occasional in nature, and shall
occur by appointment or during a maximum of 20 hours per
week (except customary retail sales as part of a barber/beauty
shop). This provision shall not restrict permitted sale of
agricultural products.
(h) Only one sign shall advertise a farm-related business, which
shall have a maximum sign area of 10 square feet on each of
two sides, and which shall not be internally illuminated, and
which shall have a maximum height of six feet.
(i) The following activities, and activities that the applicant proves
to the Zoning Hearing Board are closely similar, shall be
permitted as farm-related businesses:
[1] Farm equipment or farm vehicle repair;
[2] Occasional repair of one motor vehicle at a time, beyond
those vehicles owned or leased by a resident of the
property or his/her relative, but not including a junkyard,
auto body shop or spray painting;
[3] Welding and custom machining of parts;
[4] Sale, processing, or mixing of seeds, feed, chemical
fertilizers, or wood/leaves/bark compost;
[5] Barber/beauty shops;
[6] Construction tradesperson's headquarters;
[7] Music, hobby, trade or art instruction for up to 10 persons
at a time;
[8] Small engine repair;
[9] Custom woodworking or wood refinishing;
[10] Custom blacksmithing or sharpening services;
[11] Rental storage of household items, vehicles, boats and
building materials;
[12] Boarding of animals, not including a kennel or a stable
(which are separate uses);
§ 203-403 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-403
1:740
[13] Custom butchering, not including a commercial
slaughterhouse or stockyard;
[14] Processing and storage of agricultural products;
[15] Sawmill; or
[16] Commercial farm tourism and special events, such as farm
tours and Halloween activities.
See also "stable, nonhousehold" and "retail sales of
agricultural products," which are treated as separate
uses.
(j) This subsection shall not regulate agricultural uses that are
permitted under other provisions of this chapter.
(k) If an activity would be permitted as either a farm-related
business or a home occupation, then the applicant may choose
which set of provisions shall apply.
(l) One off-street parking space shall be provided per nonresident
employee, plus parking for any dwelling. In addition, the
applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that sufficient
parking will be available for customers, which is not required
to be paved.
(m) All existing and new buildings shall maintain a residential or
agricultural appearance, as viewed from a public street.
(n) The use shall not involve the storage or use of highly
hazardous, toxic, radioactive, flammable or explosive
substances, other than types typically used in agriculture or a
household.
(o) Landscaping shall be placed between any outdoor storage of
nonagricultural materials or products and any adjacent
dwelling from which storage would be visible.
(p) The lot shall have provisions for trucks to turn around on the
site without backing onto a public street. When special
exception approval is required, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the suitability of the adjacent roads for the amount
and weights of truck traffic that will be generated.
(8) Fences and Walls.
(a) Fences and walls are permitted by right in all districts. Any
fence or wall shall be durably constructed and wellmaintained.
Fences that have deteriorated shall be replaced or
removed. A fence shall not be required to comply with
minimum setbacks for accessory structures.
§ 203-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-403
1:741
(b) No fence, wall or hedge shall obstruct the sight distance as
required by § 203-803C. and/or the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance. (Note: The sight distance provisions
typically regulate features over three feet in height.)
(c) Fences.
[1] Front yard. Any fence located in the required minimum
front yard of a lot in a residential district shall:
[a] Be an open-type of fence (such as picket, wroughtiron,
vinyl post, chain link or split-rail) with a
minimum ratio of 1:1 of open to structural areas; and
[b] Not exceed four feet in height. A taller height may be
approved by the Zoning Officer if necessary to contain
animals or to address a specific hazard, such as an
electric transformer.
[2] On a corner lot, a fence or wall shall meet the same
requirements along both streets as would apply within a
minimum front yard. However, a fence that only extends
behind the rear of a dwelling may have a maximum height
of 6.5 feet along one of the streets, other than the street
that is along the front of the dwelling.
[3] Height.
[a] A fence located in a residential district in a location
other than a required front yard shall have a maximum
height of 6.5 feet, except a maximum of height of 10
feet shall be allowed around a tennis court (provided it
is outside of the minimum front yard) and a taller
height may be allowed where the applicant proves to
the Zoning Officer that such taller height is necessary
to protect public safety around a specific hazard.
[b] A fence in the minimum front yard that is not within a
residential district shall have a maximum height of
four feet.
[4] Setbacks. No fence shall be built within an existing street
right-of-way. A fence may be constructed without a setback
from a lot line, except that a fence shall be located on the
inside of any buffer plantings required by § 203-803 and
except that a five feet minimum setback shall apply for a
fence of a principal business that is more than six feet in
height and that is adjacent to a principal dwelling. Where
no setback is required, a one foot or greater setback is
recommended to provide for future maintenance of the
fence and to account for possible inaccurate lot lines.
§ 203-403 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-403
1:742
[5] Fence materials. Barbed wire shall not be used as part of
fences around dwellings in residential districts.
Electrically charged fences shall only be used to contain
farm animals and shall be of such low intensity that they
will not permanently injure humans. No fence or wall shall
be constructed out of fabric, junk, junk vehicles,
appliances, drums, or barrels.
(d) Walls.
[1] Engineered retaining walls necessary to hold back slopes
are exempted from setback regulations and the
regulations of this section and are permitted by right as
needed in all districts. However, if a retaining wall is over
eight feet in height, it shall be set back a minimum of 15
feet from a lot line of an existing dwelling.
[2] No wall of greater than three feet shall be located in the
required front yard in a residential district, except as a
backing for a permitted sign as permitted in § 203-704.
[3] A wall in a residential district outside of a required front
yard shall have a maximum height of three feet if it is
within the minimum accessory structure setback.
[4] Walls that are attached to a building shall be regulated as
a part of that building.
(9) Garage Sale (includes yard sale, moving sale and porch sale).
(a) See definition in Article II. A garage sale shall not include
wholesale sales, nor sale of new merchandise of a type
typically found in retail stores.
(b) Each dwelling may have garage sales on a maximum of six total
days per calendar year, with no sale lasting more than two
days.
(c) The use shall be clearly accessory to the principal use.
(d) No outdoor storage shall be permitted when the sale is not in
operation.
(e) All items shall be placed and offered for sale within the
confines of the property described in the permit.
(f) No toxic or alcoholic beverages shall be offered for sale at a
garage sale.
(g) Garage sale signs shall have a maximum sign area of two
square feet, shall not be placed more than three days before
the sale, and shall be removed within 24 hours after the
conclusion of the garage sale. The Township may require the
§ 203-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-403
1:743
payment of a deposit or escrow to ensure the removal of
garage sale signs within 24 hours after the garage sale is
completed. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
(10) Home Occupations.
(a) All home occupations shall meet the following requirements:
[1] The use shall be conducted primarily by a permanent
resident of the dwelling, and involve a maximum of one
person working on site at any one time who does not
reside within the dwelling. A maximum of one nonresident
employee shall visit the property on a daily basis or
operate a vehicle based at the property.
[2] The use shall be conducted indoors. No outdoor storage or
display related to the home occupation shall be permitted.
No changes shall occur to the exterior of a building that
would reduce its residential appearance as viewed from a
street.
[3] The use shall occupy an area that is not greater than 25%
of the total floor area of the principal dwelling unit. The
use shall clearly be secondary to the residential use.
[4] One off-street parking space shall be required per
nonresident employee. In addition, for a major home
occupation, the Zoning Hearing Board shall require
additional off-street parking if the Board determines it is
necessary for customer parking.
[5] The use shall not require delivery by tractor-trailer trucks.
[6] The regulations of § 203-403A(14)(d) regarding parking of
trucks shall apply to a home occupation. No excavating
equipment shall be parked overnight on a residential lot or
an adjacent street as part of a home occupation.
[7] No equipment or machinery shall be permitted that
produces noise, noxious odor, vibration, glare, electrical or
electronic interference detectable on another property.
The use shall not involve the storage or use of hazardous,
flammable, or explosive substances, other than types and
amounts typically found on a residential property. The use
shall not involve the storage or use of "toxic" or "highly
hazardous" substances.
[8] A home occupation shall not be conducted in a manner
that is perceptible to other residents between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
[9] Any tutoring or instruction shall be limited to a maximum
of three students at a time.
§ 203-403 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-403
1:744
[10] A barber or beauty shop shall not include any nonresident
employees.
[11] The main office of a medical doctor, chiropractor or dentist
shall not be permitted as a home occupation.
[12] A home occupation may include a single one square foot
nonilluminated sign, as permitted by Article VII. The sign
shall have a maximum height above the ground of six feet
and may be attached to a building or a pole. The sign shall
not be allowed within the street right-of-way.
[13] The Zoning Hearing Board shall deny a major home
occupation application, or limit its intensity through
conditions, if the Board determines the use would be too
intense for the proposed location. In making such
determination, the Board shall review the likely amounts
of traffic, the types of deliveries needed, the types of
operations involved and related nuisances, the amount of
off-street and on-street parking that is available, the
density of the neighborhood, whether the use would be
adjacent to another dwelling, and setbacks from other
dwellings.
[14] The use shall not involve manufacturing, other than of
custom crafts and sewing. The use shall not involve
commercial repair of motor vehicles.
[15] The use may include sales using telephone, mail order, or
electronic methods. On-site retail sales shall be prohibited,
except for sales of hair care products as accessory to a
barber/beauty shop.
[16] If more than one home occupation is accessory to a
dwelling, the total aggregate impact of the home
occupations shall be considered in determining
compliance with this chapter.
[17] A zoning permit shall be required for a major home
occupation.
(b) In addition to the requirements listed in Subsection D(10)(a)
above, the following additional requirements shall apply to a
"minor home occupation:"
[1] The use shall not routinely involve routine visits to the
home occupation by customers or more than one
nonresident employee at a time.
[2] The use shall only involve the following activities:
[a] Work routinely conducted within an office;
§ 203-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-403
1:745
[b] Custom sewing and fabric and basket crafts;
[c] Cooking and baking for off-site sales and use;
[d] Creation of visual arts (such as painting or wood
carving);
[e] Repairs to and assembly of computers and computer
peripherals; and
[f] A construction tradesperson, provided that no
nonresident employees routinely operate from the lot.
(11) Outdoor Storage and Display — commercial or industrial as a
principal or accessory use.
(a) Location. Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part
of any of the following: the existing or future street right-ofway,
sidewalk, or other area intended or designed for
pedestrian use or required parking area.
(b) No such storage or display shall occur on areas with a slope in
excess of 25% or within the 100-year floodplain.
(c) Screening. See § 203-803.
(d) Tire storage.
[1] For tires not mounted on a motor vehicle, any outdoor
storage of more than five tires on a lot in a residential
district or more than 50 used tires in a nonresidential
district shall only be permitted as part of a Townshipapproved
junkyard.
[2] The outdoor storage of more than 50 used tires shall be
limited to the General Industrial District.
[3] Where allowed, any storage of used tires shall involve
stacks with a maximum height of 15 feet, and that cover a
maximum of 400 square feet. Each stack shall be
separated from other stacks from all lot lines by a
minimum of 75 feet. If the same set of tires is stored on a
lot for more than six months, they shall be stored within a
building or trailer.
[4] The operator of a lot involving tire storage shall prove that
the tires are stored in a manner that minimizes public
health hazards from the breeding of vectors in
accumulated water and/or that the site is regularly
sprayed to minimize vectors.
(12)Pets, Keeping of.
(a) This is a permitted by right accessory use in all districts.
§ 203-403 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-403
1:746
(b) No use shall involve the keeping of animals or fowl in such a
manner or of such types of animals that it creates a serious
nuisance (including noise or odor), a health hazard or a public
safety hazard. The owner of the animals shall be responsible
for collecting and properly disposing of all fecal matter from
pets. No dangerous animals shall be kept outdoors in a
residential district, except within a secure, completely
enclosed cage or fenced area of sufficient height or on a leash
under full control of the owner.
(c) A maximum combined total of five dogs and cats shall be
permitted to be kept by residents of each dwelling unit on their
residential premises.
[1] Such limits shall only apply to dogs or cats over six months
in age.
[2] Any greater number of dogs and/or cats shall need
approval as a "kennel."
(d) Pigeons, chickens, roosters, ducks, geese and/or similar fowl
shall not be kept on a lot of less than one acre. However, if the
total weight of such fowl exceeds 500 pounds, then the
requirements shall be met for "raising of livestock or poultry."
(e) Any keeping of pets shall only be permitted provided it does
not create unsanitary conditions or noxious odors for
neighbors.
(f) Horses: Minimum lot area: two acres for first horse or similar
animal, plus one acre for each horse or similar animal in excess
of one. A maximum of 10 horses or similar animals shall be
kept, unless the use is approved as a "nonhousehold stable."
Any horse barn, manure storage areas or stable shall be a
minimum of 75 feet from any "residential lot line."
(g) See the definition of "pets" in § 203-202. Only those pets that
are domesticated and are compatible with a residential
character shall be permitted as "keeping of pets." Examples of
permitted pets include dogs, cats, rabbits, fish, gerbils and
lizards.
[1] The following and similar animals shall only be allowed to
be kept as pets if the Zoning Hearing Board approves a
particular number and type of species as a special
exception after the applicant proves they will not cause
nuisances or hazards: bears, wolves, wolf-dog hybrids,
venomous snakes that could be toxic to humans, monkeys,
apes, constrictor snakes that could be dangerous to
humans, or any "exotic wildlife" as defined by the
Pennsylvania Game and Wildlife Code. Exotic wildlife shall
§ 203-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-403
1:747
also require an exotic wildlife possession permit from the
state.
(h) The keeping of cows, sheep, goats, and hogs shall require a
minimum lot area of five acres.
(13) Recreational Vehicle Parking. See under "residential accessory
structure or use" in this section.
(14) Residential Accessory Structure or Use (see definition in
Article II).
(a) Accessory structures and uses (other than fences) shall not be
located within the required accessory use setback as stated in
§ 203-307A, unless specifically exempted by this chapter.
Accessory structures shall not be located within a front yard,
nor within any yard required to be equal in width to a front
yard along a street on a corner lot. See accessory setback
regulations in § 203-307.
(b) Accessory buildings in a residential district on a lot of less than
two acres shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Maximum total floor area of all accessory buildings: 1,000
square feet.
[2] Maximum of two accessory buildings per lot.
(c) Height. See § 203-307B.
(d) Parking of commercial trucks. The overnight outdoor parking
of commercial trucks or the trailer from a tractor-trailer
combination on a principal residential lot in a residential
district is prohibited, except that one of the following shall be
permitted if such vehicle(s) is used by residents of the dwelling
to travel to and from work:
[1] The parking of a maximum of one vehicle of up to 13,000
pounds aggregate gross vehicle weight, or
[2] The parking of one vehicle with an aggregate gross vehicle
weight of over 13,000 pounds aggregate gross vehicle
weight, provided such vehicle is kept a minimum of 100
feet from any dwelling on another lot and provided a row
of evergreen trees meeting § 203-803 is planted to buffer
views of the vehicle from the street and dwellings on other
lots.
[3] Construction equipment that is not primarily intended for
on-road use shall not be stored overnight in a residential
district. A vehicle shall not block a shared driveway or
street.
§ 203-403 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-403
1:748
(e) Repairs. Repairs of a truck with an aggregate gross vehicle
weight of over 13,000 pounds aggregate gross vehicle weight
shall not occur on a residential lot. Repairs of motor vehicles
that are not owned or leased by a resident of the lot or his/her
"relative" shall not occur on a residential lot.
(f) See setback exceptions in § 203-803B.
(g) Unlicensed and inoperable vehicles. See the provisions of the
Township Property Maintenance Code. See also the definition
of "Junkyard."
(h) Recreational vehicles or boats . A recreational vehicle or boat
with a length of 24 feet or greater shall not be parked in the
front yard of a dwelling during more than two days in any
seven-day period.
(15) Retail Sales of Agricultural Products as an accessory use.
(a) The use shall be an accessory use incidental to a crop farming,
greenhouse, plant nursery, orchard, winery or raising of
livestock use.
(b) The only retail sales shall be of agricultural products and
horticultural products, in addition to any hand-made crafts
produced by the operator of the market and/or his/her family.
An average of not less than 50% of the products sold on site
shall have been produced by the operator or his/her family.
This percentage may vary month to month, provided that the
average is met.
(c) Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with the
provisions of Article VI. No parking shall be permitted in such a
way that it creates a safety hazard.
(d) Any structure erected for this use that are not clearly
permanent in nature shall be disassembled during seasons
when products are not offered for sale.
(e) Signs. See Article VII.
(f) No stand shall be located closer than: 50 feet from a lot line of
an existing dwelling, 25 feet from any other lot line or 100 feet
from the closest intersecting point of street rights-of-ways at a
street intersection, unless the sales occur within a dwelling or
barn that existed prior to the adoption of this chapter.
(g) A maximum total of 5,000 square feet of building floor area
shall be used for such use.
(h) The use may occur within an existing dwelling, a barn or a
separate stand. Any stand shall be maintained in good
condition.
§ 203-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-403
1:749
(i) The retail sales shall be located on land owned by the operator
of the market or upon a tract of five acres or more which the
operator of the market actively farms.
(j) The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that the
driveway has adequate sight distance, based upon the
PennDOT standards that would apply to a normal commercial
establishment along a state road, regardless of whether a
PennDOT permit would be needed.
(16) Sewage Sludge/Biosolids, Land Application of.
(a) The applicant shall prove written evidence to the Township
that sufficient safeguards will be in place to protect the public
health and safety and the water quality of groundwater and
surface waters. This should include, but not be limited to,
provisions for regular testing of the material that is spread and
for ongoing water quality monitoring.
(b) A copy of all test results of the material that is spread and any
test results of water quality shall be provided to the Zoning
Officer within seven days after they are received by the
operator of the use or the landowner.
(17) Stable, Household. See "pets, keeping of" in this § 203-403.
(18) Swimming Pool, Household (referred to hereafter as "pool").
(a) See the requirements of the Construction Code regarding
fencing of pools. In the event such Construction Code does not
result in a fence being required, then this Zoning Ordinance
provision shall apply. Every swimming pool containing 24
inches or more of water depth shall include a fence, wall,
aboveground pool walls or similar enclosure surrounding the
pool. Such enclosure shall extend not less than four feet above
the ground. All gates shall be self-closing and self-latching,
with latches placed at least four feet above the ground.
(b) A swimming pool shall not be located in a minimum front yard.
The water surface and any raised decking of a swimming pool
shall be set back a minimum of five feet from side and rear lot
lines.
(19) Unit for Care of Relative.
(a) The use shall meet the definition in § 203-202.
(b) The accessory unit shall be occupied by a maximum of two
persons, who shall be "relatives" of the permanent residents of
the principal dwelling unit. At least one resident of the
accessory unit shall need such accommodations because of an
illness, old age or disability.
§ 203-403 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-403
1:750
(c) The applicant shall prove to the Zoning Officer that the
accessory unit has been designed and constructed so that it
can be easily reconverted into part of the principal dwelling
unit or is a modular cottage that will be completely removed
from the lot after the relative no longer resides within the unit.
Such accessory unit may be converted into an additional
bedroom(s), permitted home occupation area or similar use. A
lawful detached garage may be converted into a unit for care of
relative, and then be reconverted to a garage or permitted
home occupation area.
(d) The applicant shall establish a legally binding mechanism in a
form acceptable to the Township that will prohibit the use of
the accessory unit as a separate dwelling unit after the relative
no longer resides within the unit. Such mechanism shall also
be binding upon future owners.
(e) The owner of the property shall be required to annually renew
the permit for the use. Such renewal shall be conditioned upon
the owner proving that a relative of the occupants of the
principal dwelling unit continues to reside within the accessory
unit.
(f) Such accessory unit shall not decrease the one family
residential appearance of a one family dwelling, as viewed
from exterior property lines. The accessory unit shall be
attached to the principal dwelling unit, except a detached
dwelling may be specifically approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a special exception. If a detached modular dwelling is
placed on the property, it shall be completely removed within
90 days after the relative no longer lives within it. A detached
dwelling shall only be placed on the lot if it will meet principal
building setbacks and has a maximum building floor area of
900 square feet.
(g) Additional parking for the accessory unit is not required if the
applicant proves that the resident(s) of the accessory unit will
not routinely operate a vehicle.
(h) Any on-lot septic system shall be recertified if the sewage flows
will increase.
§ 203-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-403
1:751

ARTICLE V
Environmental Protection
§ 203-501. Erosion control.
The landowner, person and/or entity performing any earth disturbance shall
utilize sufficient measures to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation of
creeks.
§ 203-502. Nuisances and hazards to public safety.
§ 203-503. Wetlands.
See § 203-308.
§ 203-504. (Reserved)52
A. The disturbed land area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
B. Except for agricultural activities, any earth disturbance over 5,000
square feet of land area shall require the submission of an adequate
erosion and sedimentation control plan to the County Conservation
District.
C. See state erosion control regulations (Note: as of 2006 in 25 Pa. Code,
Chapter 102).
A. No landowner, tenant nor lessee shall use or allow to be used any land
or structures in a way that results or threatens to result in any of the
following conditions:
(1) Transmission of communicable disease, including conditions that
may encourage the breeding of insects or rodents.
(2) A physical hazard to the public, or a physical hazard that could be
an attractive nuisance that would be accessible by children.
(3) Pollution to groundwaters or surface waters, other than as
authorized by a state or federal permit.
(4) Risks to public health and safety, such as, but not limited to,
explosion, fire or biological hazards.
(5) Interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of property by
a neighboring landowner of ordinary sensitivities.
B. Additional information. If the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that
the proposed use may have difficulty complying with the standards of
this article, then the Zoning Officer may require an applicant to provide
written descriptions of proposed machinery, hazardous substances,
operations and safeguards.
§ 203-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-505
1:753
§ 203-505. Noise.
A. No principal or accessory use, or operations or activities on its lot, shall
generate a sound level exceeding the limits established in the table
below, when measured at the specified locations:
Sound Level Limits by Receiving Land Use/District
Land Use or Zoning
District Receiving
the Noise Hours/Days
Maximum
Sound Level
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
other than Sundays,
Christmas Day,
Thanksgiving Day, New
Years Day, Labor Day and
Memorial Day
1. At a lot line of a 60 dBA
residential use in
a residential
district
9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. plus
all of the following days:
Sundays, Christmas,
Thanksgiving, New Years,
Easter Sunday, Labor Day
and Memorial Day
55 dBA
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
other than Sundays,
Christmas Day,
Thanksgiving Day, New
Years Day, Labor Day and
Memorial Day
2. Lot line of a 65 dBA
principal
residential use in
a commercial or
industrial district
9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. plus
all of the following days:
Sundays, Christmas,
Thanksgiving, New Years,
Easter Sunday, Labor Day
and Memorial Day
60 dBA
3. Any lot line other
than "1" or "2"
All times and days 70 dBA
Note: dBA means "A" weighted decibel.
B. The maximum permissible sound level limits set forth in the above table
shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:
(1) Sound needed to alert people about an emergency.
52.Editor's Note: Former § 203-504, Floodplain District, has been deleted from the Zoning
Ordinance per Ord. No. 12-03. It has been replaced by Ch. 108 of the Codified Ordinances,
Floodplain Management, per Ord. No. 12-02.
§ 203-505 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-505
1:754
§ 203-506. Odors and dust.
No use shall generate odors or dust that are offensive to persons of average
sensitivities beyond the boundaries of the subject lot, except as provided
under the State Right to Farm Act for normal farming operations.
§ 203-507. Control of light and glare.
This shall only regulate exterior lighting that spills across lot lines or onto
public streets.
(2) Repair or installation of utilities or construction of structures,
sidewalks or streets between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.,
except for clearly emergency repairs which are not restricted by
time.
(3) Lawnmowers, snowblowers, leaf blowers, and household power
tools between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(4) Agricultural activities, including permitted raising of livestock, but
not exempting a commercial kennel.
(5) Public celebrations specifically authorized by the Township
Supervisors or a County, state or federal government agency or
body.
(6) Unamplified human voices.
(7) Routine ringing of bells and chimes by a place of worship or
municipal clock.
(8) Vehicles operating on a public street, railroads and aircraft.
A. Streetlighting exempted. This § 203-507 shall not apply to:
(1) Street lighting that is owned, financed or maintained by the
Township or the state; or
(2) An individual porch light of a dwelling (not including a spotlight).
B. Height of lights. No luminary, spotlight or other light source that is
within 200 feet of a lot line of an existing dwelling or approved
residential lot shall be placed at a height exceeding 35 feet above the
average surrounding ground level. This limitation shall not apply to
lights needed for air safety nor lights intended solely to illuminate an
architectural feature of a building, nor lighting of outdoor public
recreation facilities or a ski resort.
C. Diffused. All light sources, including signs, shall be properly diffused as
needed with a translucent or similar cover to prevent exposed bulbs
from being directly visible from streets, public sidewalks, dwellings or
adjacent lots.
§ 203-505 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-507
1:755
D. Shielding. All light sources, including signs, shall be shielded around
the light source and carefully directed and placed to prevent the
lighting from creating a nuisance to reasonable persons in adjacent
dwellings, and to prevent the lighting from shining into the eyes of
passing motorists.
E. Flickering. Flashing, flickering or strobe lighting are prohibited, except
for nonadvertising seasonal lights between October 25 and January 10.
F. Spillover. Exterior lighting on an institutional, commercial or industrial
property shall not cause a spillover of light onto a residential lot that
exceeds 0.5 horizontal footcandle at a distance 10 feet inside the
residential lot line.
G. Gasoline sales canopies. Any canopy over gasoline pumps shall have
light fixtures recessed into the canopy or screened by an extension
around the bottom of the canopy so that lighting elements are not
visible from another lot or street.
H. Horizontal surface lighting. For the lighting of predominantly horizontal
surfaces, such as, but not limited to parking areas, streets, driveways,
pedestrian walkways, outdoor sales and storage areas, vehicle fueling
facilities, vehicle sales areas, loading docks, recreational areas, and
building entrances, fixtures shall be aimed downward and shall meet
the standards for a full-cutoff light fixture. A full-cutoff light fixture shall
be a fixture in which no light is emitted at or above a horizontal plane
drawn through the bottom of the fixture and no more than 10% of the
lamp's intensity is emitted at or above an angle 10° below that
horizontal plane, at all lateral angles around the fixture. Fixtures with
an aggregate rated lamp lumen output per fixture that does not exceed
the rated output of a standard 100-watt incandescent lamp are exempt
from the requirements of this subsection.
I. Nonhorizontal lighting. For lighting of predominantly nonhorizontal
surfaces, such as, but not limited to, facades, signs, and displays,
fixtures shall be fully shielded and shall be installed and aimed so as to
not project their output into the windows of neighboring residences,
adjacent uses, past the object being illuminated, skyward or onto a
public roadway. Fixtures with an aggregate rated lamp lumen output
per fixture that does not exceed the rated output of a standard 100-watt
incandescent lamp are exempt from the requirements of this
subsection.
(1) However, lighting shall be allowed of the United States flag from
dusk to dawn, provided the light source shall have a beam spread
no greater than necessary to illuminate the flag.
J. Sign lighting.
(1) Any exterior lighting of a billboard/off-premises sign shall be
attached at the top of the sign and aimed downwards.
§ 203-507 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-507
1:756
(2) Any lighting of a sign shall not exceed a maximum of 50 footcandles
measured at any point 50 or more feet from the surface of the sign,
except such maximum shall be 10 footcandles in a residential
district.
K. Unshielded light bulbs. The use of multiple unshielded incandescent
light bulbs that are hung on poles or strung on wires is prohibited,
except for allowed temporary festivals.
§ 203-507 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-507
1:757

ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 203-601. Required number of parking spaces.
A. Overall requirements.
(1) Number of spaces. Each use that is newly developed, enlarged,
significantly changed in type of use, or increased in number of
establishments shall provide and maintain off-street parking spaces
in accordance with Table 6.1 and the regulations of this article.
(2) Uses not listed. Uses not specifically listed in Table 6.1 shall comply
with the requirements for the most-similar use listed in Table 6.1,
unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer
that an alternative standard should be used for that use.
(3) Multiple uses. Where a proposed lot contains or includes more than
one type of use, the number of parking spaces required shall be the
sum of the parking requirements for each separate use.
(4) Parking landscaping. See §§ 203-803 and 203-804 of this chapter.
Table 6.1
Off-Street Parking Requirements [Amended 11-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-01]
Use
Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space
for Each
A. RESIDENTIAL
USES:
1. Dwelling Unit,
other than
types listed
separately in
this table
2 per dwelling unit,
except 3 per dwelling
unit for a single-family
detached dwelling on a
lot of over 10,000 square
feet. Off-street parking
spaces shall be located
outside of the street
right-of-way.
2. Home
occupation
See § 203-403
§ 203-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-601
1:759
Table 6.1
Off-Street Parking Requirements [Amended 11-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-01]
Use
Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space
for Each
3. Housing
permanently
restricted to
persons 62
years and
older and/or
the physically
handicapped
1 per dwelling/rental
unit, except 0.5 per
dwelling/rental unit if
evidence is presented
that the non-physicallyhandicapped
persons will
clearly primarily be over
70 years old
Nonresident
employee
4. Boardinghouse 1 per rental unit or bed
for adult, whichever is
greater
Nonresident
employee
5. Group home 1 per 2 residents, unless
the applicant proves the
home will be limited to
persons who will not be
allowed to drive a vehicle
from the property
Employee
B. INSTITUTIONAL
USES:
1. Place of
worship or
church
1 per 5 seats in room of
largest capacity
Employee
2. Hospital 1 per 3 beds (inpatient
and outpatient
treatment), plus medical
office parking
1.1 employee
3. Nursing home 1 per 5 beds 1.1 employee
4. Assisted living
facility and/or
retirement
community
1 per 4 beds, plus 1.5 for
each individual dwelling
unit
1.1 employee
5. Day-care
center
1 per 10 children, with
spaces designed for safe
and convenient drop-off
and pick-up
1.1 employee
§ 203-601 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-601
1:760
Table 6.1
Off-Street Parking Requirements [Amended 11-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-01]
Use
Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space
for Each
6. School,
primary or
secondary
1 per 4 students aged 16
or older, or 1 space for
every 6 seats in the
largest capacity room,
whichever is more
restrictive
1.1 employee
7. Utility facility 1 per vehicle routinely
needed to service facility
8. College or
university
1 per 1.5 students not
living on campus who
attend class at peak
times (plus required
spaces for on-campus
housing)
1.1 employee
9. Library,
community
center or
cultural center
or museum
1 per 5 seats (or 1 per
250 square feet of floor
area accessible to
patrons and/or users if
seats are not typically
provided)
1.1 employee
10. Treatment
center
1 per 2 residents aged 16
years or older plus 1 per
nonresident intended to
be treated on-site at peak
times
Nonresident
Employee
11. Swimming
pool,
nonhousehold
1 per 50 square feet of
water surface, other than
wading pools
1.1 employee
§ 203-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-601
1:761
Table 6.1
Off-Street Parking Requirements [Amended 11-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-01]
Use
Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space
for Each
C. COMMERCIAL
USES:
All commercial uses, as
applicable, shall provide
additional parking or
storage needed for the
maximum number of
vehicles stored, displayed
or based at the lot at any
point in time. These
additional spaces are not
required to meet the stall
size and parking aisle
width requirements of
this chapter
1. Auto service
station or
repair garage
5 per repair/service bay
and 1/4 per fuel nozzle,
with such spaces
separated from
accessways to pumps
Employee, plus
any parking
needed for a
convenience store
under "retail
sales"
2. Auto, boat,
recreational
vehicle or
manufactured
home sales
1 per 15 vehicles, boats,
recreational vehicles or
homes displayed
Employee
3. Bed-andbreakfast
use
1 per rental unit plus the
2 per dwelling unit
Nonresident
employee
4. Bowling alley 2 per lane plus 2 per pool
table
1.1 employee
5. Car wash 6 spaces awaiting entry
or in drying areas, plus 1
space next to vacuums
1.1 employee
6. Financial
institution
(includes
bank)
1 per 300 square feet of
floor area accessible to
customers, plus "office"
parking for any
administrative offices
1.1 employee
§ 203-601 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-601
1:762
Table 6.1
Off-Street Parking Requirements [Amended 11-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-01]
Use
Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space
for Each
7. Funeral Home 1 per 5 seats in rooms
intended to be in use at
one time for visitors,
counting both permanent
and temporary seating
Employee
8. Miniature golf 1 per hole 1.1 employee
9. Haircutting/
hairstyling
1 per customer seat used
for haircutting, hair
styling, hair washing,
manicuring or similar
work
1.1 employee
10. Hotel or motel 1 per rental unit plus 1
per 4 seats in meeting
rooms, plus 50% of any
parking required by an
attached restaurant
1.1 employee
11. Laundromat 1 per 3 washing
machines
On-site employee
12. Offices or
clinic, medical/
dental
5 per physician or
physician's assistant and
4 per dentist
1.1 employee
13. Offices, other
than above
1 per 300 square feet of
leaseable floor area
14. Personal
service use,
other than
haircutting/
hairstyling
(minimum of 2
per
establishment)
1 per 200 square feet of
floor area accessible to
customers
1.1 employee
15. Indoor
recreation
(other than
bowling alley),
membership
club or
exercise club
1 per 4 persons of
maximum capacity of all
facilities
1.1 employee
§ 203-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-601
1:763
Table 6.1
Off-Street Parking Requirements [Amended 11-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-01]
Use
Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space
for Each
16. Outdoor
recreation
(other than
uses
specifically
listed in this
table)
1 per 4 persons of
capacity (50% may be on
grass overflow areas with
major driveways in
gravel)
1.1 employee
17. Restaurant 1 per 2 seats, or 5 spaces
for a use without
customer seats
1.1 employee
18. Retail sales
(other than
types
separately
listed and
other than a
shopping
center)
1 per 200 square feet of
floor area of rooms
accessible to customers
19. Retail sales of
only furniture,
lumber,
carpeting,
bedding or
floor covering
1 per 400 square feet of
floor area of rooms
accessible to customers
20. Shopping
center
involving 5 or
more retail
establishments
on a lot
1 per 200 square feet of
leaseable floor area
21. Tavern or
nightclub or
after-hours
club
1 per 20 square feet of
total floor area accessible
to customers
1.1 employee
§ 203-601 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-601
1:764
§ 203-602. General regulations for off-street parking.
Table 6.1
Off-Street Parking Requirements [Amended 11-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-01]
Use
Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-Street
Parking Space
for Each
22. Theater or
auditorium
1 per 4 seats, 1/2 of
which may be met by
convenient parking
shared with other
business uses on the
same lot that are
typically not routinely
open beyond 8:00 p.m.
1.1 employee
23. Trade/hobby
school
1 per 2 students on site
during peak use
1.1 employee
24. Veterinarian
office
3 per veterinarian 1.1 employee
D. INDUSTRIAL
USES:
In addition to parking or
storage needed for the
maximum number of
vehicles stored, displayed
or based at the lot at any
point in time, which
spaces are not required
to meet the stall size and
aisle width requirements
of this chapter
All industrial uses
(including
warehousing,
distribution and
manufacturing)
1 per 1.1 employee,
based upon the maximum
number of employees onsite
at peak period of
times
1 visitor space for
every 10
managers on the
site
Self-storage
development
1 per 25 storage units,
distributed throughout
the complex
1.1 employee
A. General. Parking spaces and accessways shall be laid out to result in
safe and orderly use and to fully take into account all of the following:
vehicular access onto and off the site, vehicular movement within the
site, loading areas, pedestrian patterns, and any drive-throuth facilities.
No parking area shall cause a safety hazard or impediment to traffic off
the lot.
§ 203-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-602
1:765
B. Existing parking.
(1) Any parking spaces serving such preexisting structures or uses at
the time of adoption of this chapter shall not in the future be
reduced in number below the number required by this chapter.
(2) If a new principal nonresidential building is constructed on a lot,
then any existing parking on such lot that serves such building shall
be reconfigured to comply with this chapter, including but not
limited to, requirements for channelization of traffic from adjacent
streets, channelization of traffic within the lot, minimum aisle
widths, paving, and landscaping.
C. Change in use or expansion. A structure or use in existence at the
effective date of this chapter that expands or changes in use of an
existing principal building shall be required to provide all of the
required parking for the entire size and type of the resulting use, except
as follows:
(1) If an existing lawful use includes less parking than would be
required if the use would be newly developed, then that deficit of
parking shall be grandfathered for reuses of an existing building.
For example, an existing store might include three parking spaces
and would have been required to provide seven spaces if it was
newly developed. Therefore, there is an existing nonconforming
deficit of four spaces. Then, if that store is converted to an office
that would need 10 spaces, the office would need to provide a total
of six spaces (10 spaces minus the preexisting deficit of four equals
six). This provision may be used in combination with Subsection
C(2) below, as applicable. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No.
07-01]
(2) If a nonresidential use expands by an aggregate total maximum of
5% in the applicable measurement (such as building floor area)
beyond what existed at the time of adoption of this chapter, then no
additional parking is required. For example, if an existing building
included 3,000 square feet, and a single minor addition of 150
square feet was proposed, then additional parking would not be
required. This addition without providing new parking shall only be
allowed one time per lot.
D. Continuing obligation of parking and loading spaces. All required
numbers of parking spaces and off-street loading spaces shall be
available as long as the use or building which the spaces serve still
exist, and such spaces shall not be reduced in number below the
minimum required by this chapter. No required parking area or offstreet
loading spaces shall be used for any other use (such as storage or
display of materials) that interferes with the area's availability for
parking.
E. Location of parking.
§ 203-602 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-602
1:766
(1) Required off-street parking spaces shall be on the same lot or
abutting lot with the principal use served, unless the applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that a
method of providing the spaces is guaranteed to be available
during all of the years the use is in operation within 300 feet
walking distance from the entrance of the principal use being
served. Such distance may be increased to 500 feet for employee
parking of a nonresidential use. A written and signed lease shall be
provided, if applicable.
(a) The Zoning Hearing Board may require that the use be
approved for period of time consistent with the lease of the
parking and that a renewal of the permit shall only be
approved if the parking lease is renewed.
F. Reduction of parking requirements as a special exception.
(1) Purposes: To minimize the amount of land covered by paving, while
making sure adequate parking is provided. To recognize that
unique circumstances may justify a reduction in parking.
(2) As a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may authorize a
reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces required to be
provided for a use if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Hearing Board that a lesser number of spaces would be
sufficient.
(a) The applicant shall provide evidence justifying the proposed
reduced number of spaces, such as studies of similar
developments during their peak hours. The applicant shall also
provide relevant data, such as numbers of employers, peak
expected number of customers/visitors and similar data.
(b) Under this section, an applicant may prove that a reduced
number of parking spaces is justified because more than one
principal use will share the same parking. In such case, the
applicant shall prove that the parking has been designed to
encourage shared use, and that long-term agreements ensure
that the parking will continue to be shared. The amount of the
reduction in parking should be determined based upon
whether the different uses have different hours of peak
demand and/or overlapping customers.
[1] In addition, an applicant may prove that parking needs will
be reduced or that off-site parking is feasible because the
applicant agrees to make a long-term commitment to a
shuttle service for residents or employees.
(c) Reserved area for additional parking. Under this section, the
Zoning Hearing Board may require that a portion of the
required parking be met through a reservation of an area for
future parking. The Board may require the reservation for a
§ 203-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-602
1:767
§ 203-603. Design standards for off-street parking.
certain number of years or an indefinite period corresponding
to the years the buildings are in use.
[1] Such reservation shall be in a form acceptable to the
Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor that legally binds current
and future owners of the land to keep the reserved parking
area in open space and then to provide the additional
parking if the Township determines it is necessary. A deed
restriction is recommended.
[2] If approved under this Subsection F(2)(c), the applicant
shall present a site plan to the Zoning Officer that shows
the layout that will be used for the additional parking if the
parking is required to be provided in the future. The site
plan shall show that the additional parking is integrated
with the overall traffic access and pedestrian access for
the site and that the additional parking will be able to meet
Township requirements.
[3] The additional parking that is "reserved" under this
subsection shall be required to be kept as landscaped open
area, until such time as the Zoning Hearing Board decision
may authorize the land's release from the restriction, or
until the Township may require that the land be developed
as parking.
[4] The Zoning Officer shall periodically review the sufficiency
of the parking that is provided. If the Zoning Officer in the
future determines that the reserved parking is needed to
meet actual demand, he/she shall provide written notice to
the property owner. The property owner shall then have
one year to develop the reserved area into off-street
parking in compliance with this chapter.
A. General requirements.
(1) Backing onto a street. No parking area shall be designed to require
or encourage parked vehicles to back into a public street in order
to leave a parking space, except for a single-family or two-family,
twin, or townhouse dwelling with its access onto a local street or
parking court. Parking spaces may back onto an alley. [Amended
11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
(2) Every required parking space shall be designed so that each motor
vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the moving of any other vehicle, unless
specifically permitted otherwise.
(3) Parking areas shall not be within a required buffer yard or street
right-of-way.
§ 203-602 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-603
1:768
(4) Separation from street. Except for parking spaces immediately in
front of individual dwellings, all areas for off-street parking, offstreet
loading and unloading and the storage or movement of motor
vehicles shall be physically separated from the street by a
continuous grass or landscaped planting strip, except for necessary
and approved vehicle entrances and exits to the lot.
(5) Stacking and obstructions. Each lot shall provide adequate area
upon the lot to prevent back-up of vehicles on a public street while
awaiting entry to the lot, or while waiting for service at a drivethrouth
facility.
B. Size and marking of parking spaces.
(1) Each parking space shall be a rectangle with a minimum width of
nine feet and a minimum length of 18 feet, except the minimum
sized rectangle shall be eight feet by 22 feet for parallel parking.
(2) For handicapped spaces, see § 203-603G below.
(3) All spaces shall be marked to indicate their location, except those
of a one- or two-family dwelling.
C. Aisles.
(1) Each aisle providing for one-way traffic to access parking stalls
shall have the following minimum width:
Angle of Parking
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
Parallel or 30° 12
45° 14
60° 18
90° 20
(2) Each aisle providing access to stalls for two-way traffic shall be a
minimum of 22 feet in width, except a width of 20 feet may be
allowed for parking areas with spaces that are parallel or involve
an angle of parking of 45° or less.
D. Accessways and driveways.
(1) Width of driveway/accessway at entrance onto a public street, at
the edge of the cartway*
1-Way Use 2-Way Use
Minimum 12* 25*
Maximum 20* 30*
§ 203-603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-603
1:769
* Unless a different standard is required by PennDOT for an
entrance to a state road, or the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that a wider width is needed
for tractor-trailer trucks.
(2) Drainage. Adequate provisions shall be made to maintain
uninterrupted parallel drainage along a public street at the point of
driveway entry. The Township may require an applicant to install an
appropriate type and size of pipe at a driveway crossing.
E. Paving, grading and drainage.
(1) Parking and loading facilities and including driveways shall be
graded and adequately drained to prevent erosion or excessive
water flow across streets or adjoining properties.
(2) Except for landscaped areas, all portions of required parking,
loading facilities and driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete, paving block, or other low-dust materials preapproved by
the Township.
(a) However, by special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may
allow parking areas with low or seasonal usage to be
maintained in stone, grass or other suitable surfaces. For
example, the Board may allow parking spaces to be grass,
while major aisles are covered by stone.
(b) If the design and material are found acceptable by the
Township Engineer, portions of parking areas may be covered
with a low-dust porous parking surface that is designed to
promote groundwater recharge. This might include porous
asphalt or pervious concrete placed over open graded gravel
and crushed stone. Porous parking surfaces shall not be
allowed in areas routinely used by heavy trucks.
F. Lighting of parking areas. See "light and glare control" in Article V.
G. Parking for persons with disabilities. Vehicle parking for persons with
disabilities shall comply with applicable federal and state requirements.
(Note: As of the enactment date of this chapter, such provisions were
published in ANSI Standard A117 and Section 1106 of the International
Building Code.)
(1) Number of spaces. The following number of parking spaces for
persons with disabilities shall be required, unless a different
number of spaces is officially required under a federal or state
requirement:
§ 203-603 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-603
1:770
Total Number of Parking
Spaces on the Lot
Required Minimum Number/
Percent of Parking Spaces for
Persons with Disabilities
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of required number of spaces
1,001 or more 20 plus 1% of required number of
spaces over 1,000
(2) Standards. The sizes, slopes, locations and marking of spaces for
persons with disabilities shall comply with the applicable ANSI
standards. (Note: Such standards typically require each space to be
eight feet by 18 feet, with an adjacent to a five feet wide access
aisle. Such access aisle may be shared by two handicapped spaces
by being placed between them. However, one out of every eight
required handicapped parking spaces shall have an adjacent access
aisle of eight feet width instead of five feet.)
(3) Marking. All required handicapped spaces shall be well-marked by
clearly visible signs and by pavement markings. Such signs and
markings shall be maintained over time. Blue paint is
recommended. On commercial lots, the amount of the fine for
violations shall be noted on signs that are visible to persons parking
in the space.
(4) Paving. Handicapped parking spaces and adjacent areas needed to
access them with a wheelchair shall be covered with a smooth
surface that is usable with a wheelchair.
(5) If a new principal nonresidential building is constructed on a lot,
then any existing parking on such lot that shall be reconfigured to
meet the parking with disabilities requirements.
H. Paved area setbacks (including off-street parking setbacks).
(1) Intent. To ensure that parked or moving vehicles within a lot do not
obstruct sight distance or interfere with pedestrian traffic, to aid in
stormwater management along streets and to prevent vehicles
from entering or exiting a lot other than at approved driveways.
§ 203-603 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-603
1:771
(2) Any new or expanded paved area serving a principal nonresidential
use shall be separated from a public street by a planting strip. The
planting strip shall have a minimum width of 30 feet and be
maintained in grass or other attractive vegetative ground cover. At
least 20 feet of the planting strip shall be outside of the existing
street right-of-way. This 30 feet width shall be increased to 40 feet
for a lot including 100,000 to 200,000 square feet of building floor
area, and to 50 feet for a lot including more than 200,000 square
feet of building floor area.
(a) Within the planting strip, plants shall not be planted with
heights or in locations that would obstruct safe sight distances,
except that deciduous trees may be planted that allow
motorists to view under the leaf canopy.
(b) The planting strip may be placed inward from the shoulder of
an uncurbed street or inward from the curb of a curbed street.
The planting strip may overlap the street right-of-way, provided
it does not conflict with PennDOT requirements, and provided
that the Township and PennDOT as applicable maintain the
right to replace planting areas within the right-of-way with
future street improvements.
(c) Township-approved sidewalks, recreation paths and
approximately perpendicular driveway crossings may be
placed within the planting strip. Mostly vegetative stormwater
channels may be placed within the planting strip.
(d) The following shall be prohibited within the planting strip:
[1] Paving, except as allowed by Subsection H(2)(c) above,
and except for street widenings that may occur after the
development is completed,
[2] Fences and walls, other than necessary retaining walls,
and
[3] Parking, storage or display of vehicles or items for sale or
rent.
(e) Where feasible, where a sidewalk is not installed, this setback
should include an unobstructed generally level width running
parallel to a street that is suitable for a person to walk.
(3) See landscaping requirements in §§ 203-803 and 203-804.
I. Parking setback from buildings. Parking spaces serving principal
nonresidential buildings and apartment buildings shall be located a
minimum of 10 feet from any principal building wall, unless a larger
distance is required by another provision. This distance shall not apply
at vehicle entrances into or under a building.
§ 203-603 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-604
1:772
§ 203-604. Off-street loading.
§ 203-605. Fire lanes.
A. Each use shall provide off-street loading facilities, which meet the
requirements of this section, sufficient to accommodate the maximum
demand generated by the use and the maximum size vehicle, in a
manner that will not routinely obstruct traffic on a public street and
traffic entering and exiting the lot. If no other reasonable alternative is
feasible, traffic may be obstructed for occasional loading and unloading
along an alley, provided traffic has the ability to use another method of
access.
B. At the time of review under this chapter, the applicant shall provide
evidence to the Zoning Officer on whether the use will have sufficient
numbers and sizes of loading facilities. The Planning Commission and/
or Board of Supervisors may provide advice to the Zoning Officer on
this matter as part of any plan review by such boards. For the purposes
of this section, the words "loading" and "unloading" are used
interchangeably.
C. Each space and the needed maneuvering room shall not intrude into
approved buffer areas and landscaped areas.
A. Fire lanes shall be provided and maintained as provided in the
International Fire Protection Code.
§ 203-604 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-605
1:773

ARTICLE VII
Signs
§ 203-701. General sign provisions.
The following are the major parts of this article:
§ 203-702. How to use the sign regulations.
A. Definitions. Identifies the types of signs and other relevant and
supporting information regarding the sign ordinance.
B. General sign regulations. Provides information such as the maximum
sign area, sign location, sign illumination, method of calculating the
area of a sign, sign height, as well as providing standards for off-site
billboards and address signs. These regulations apply to all signs
permitted in the sign ordinance.
C. Sign by district. Signs by district illustrates the signs that are permitted
in various general zoning districts. Also see § 203-714, Regulations for
specific sign types.
D. Special district requirements. Provides for special overlay districts
where signs are subject to special controls. Illustrates signs that are
prohibited and special controls for materials, lighting and color.
E. Exempt and prohibited signs. Identifies signs that are either exempt
from the provisions of the ordinance or are prohibited from use.
F. Construction and maintenance. Provides minimum standards for
construction and maintenance. All signs would be required to meet
Township building codes.
G. Removal of unsafe, unlawful or abandoned signs. Provides standards
for removal of these types of signs. Applies to all signs in the Township.
H. Permits and applications. Provides the administrative process for
applying for and receiving a permit from the Township to erect a sign.
I. Nonconforming signs. Identifies nonconforming signs and establishes
the standards for handling these signs.
J. Regulations for specific sign types. Establishes the standards for
permanent signs and temporary signs.
A. To install a new sign, replace or add to an existing sign or apply for
temporary signage, a zoning permit is required, under § 203-711,
except for signs that are exempt from needing a permit under
§ 203-708.
B. ALL signs are defined, regulated and illustrated by sign type in
§ 203-714. That section addresses the following:
(1) Number of signs permitted.
§ 203-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-702
1:775
§ 203-703. Applicability and purposes.
§ 203-704. Definitions.
(2) Which zoning districts the signed are permitted.
(3) Total sign area permitted.
(4) Sign height.
(5) Sign area.
(6) Setback requirements.
C. See also the following sections of this article:
(1) Special districts (Linglestown Road and Locust Lane).
(2) Exempt signs.
(3) Prohibited signs.
(4) Construction and required maintenance of signs.
(5) Nonconforming signs.
A. Any sign hereafter erected, altered, or maintained shall conform with
the provisions of this article and any other applicable articles,
ordinances, or regulations of the Township of Lower Paxton.
B. Purposes of this article.
(1) To provide for the regulation of signs as a proper exercise of the
police power and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare in
accordance with the following objectives.
(2) To regulate the size, location, illumination, alteration, and
maintenance of signs and reduce hazards to pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
(3) To prohibit the construction of and require the removal of signs
which are hazardous or create blight.
(4) To provide opportunities for a variety of sign types and encourage
sign designs which meet local resident and business needs in a
manner which is compatible with the locality, enhances the
economic value and visual character of the properties, and
contributes to rather than detracts from the character of the
Township.
(5) To establish a process for the review and approval of sign permit
applications.
A. The following words are defined with the following definitions:
[Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
§ 203-702 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-704
1:776
BANNER — A sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame,
possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied
to plastic or fabric of any kind excluding flags and emblems of political,
professional, religious, educational, or corporate organizations.
BUILDING SQUARE FOOTAGE — The square footage of a building is
based on the measurement within the surrounding exterior walls of the
structure exclusive of vent shafts and courts multiplied by stories above
grade. A basement will be included if the finished first floor is more than
six feet above grade, six feet above finished ground level for more than
50% of the total building perimeter and if the floor is more than 12 feet
above finished ground level at any point.
CANOPY, SERVICE STATION DISPENSING FUEL — A structure made
of metal, aluminum, or other material intended to be free standing
or affixed to a building that serves as an overhang intended to shield
persons from the elements while using the service station.
CHANGEABLE COPY OR MESSAGE BOARD — A sign on which
message copy can be changed through use of attachable letters,
numerals, symbols and other graphics or by electronic switching of
lamps, LED, illuminating tubes or another electronic or electrical
method.
COPY — The arrangement of letters, numerals, symbols, logos, colors,
textures, shapes and design embellishments that may be readily
discerned from the supporting structure.
FRONTAGE, PRIMARY — That portion of the lot or lots that abut a
public street line used for ingress and egress fronting on the street with
the higher average daily traffic count (ADT).
GRADE — The elevation of the surface of the ground at the base of
the sign. Grade shall not include landscaping or ornamental mounding.
Grade shall be exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding or
excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which
the grade cannot reasonably be determined, for signs based above road
grade, the grade at the base of the sign shall be equal to the elevation of
the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land
at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot, whichever
is lower.
HIGHWAY, ARTERIAL — A major street or highway with fast or heavy
traffic volumes of considerable continuity and used primarily as a traffic
artery for intercommunication among large areas.
HIGHWAY, INTERSTATE — A limited access highway that is designated
by the state as an interstate highway.
ILLUMINATION — The constant supply of light, that allows a sign to be
visible in dim or dark conditions.
MARQUEE STRUCTURE — A permanent roof-like structure, supported
by a wall of a building, but having no relationship to the roof structure,
generally designed and constructed for protection against weather.
§ 203-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-704
1:777
PARAPET — That portion of a building wall or false front that extends
above the roofline.
PARCEL — A lot, or contiguous group of lots in single ownership or
under single control and usually considered a unit for purposes of
development.
PLANNED CENTER — An integrated development under one
ownership that offers the convenience, goods and personal services
consisting of a minimum of 10,000 square feet of building space and
two tenants designed in a configuration that permits easy access and
ample parking.
PREMISES — A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct
number and designation shown on a recorded plat, record of survey,
parcel map, subdivision map, or a parcel legally created or established
pursuant to applicable zoning.
PROPERTY TOTAL SIGN AREA LIMIT — The largest amount of total
signage (square footage) allowed on a property in a designated zoning
district.
ROOFLINE — The highest point of a flat roof and mansard roof and
the highest point of a pitched roof, excluding any cupolas, chimneys or
other minor projections.
SETBACK FOR A SIGN — The shortest horizontal distance from the
property line or right-of-way to the nearest point (leading edge) of the
sign or its supporting member whichever is nearest to the property line
or right-of-way.
SIGHT DISTANCE TRIANGLE — This is an area beginning at the point
of the intersection of the right-of-way center lines of two streets, and
traveling away 75 feet from said point along the center line of each
street, with a line connecting the two seventy-five-foot lines.
SIGN — Any object, display or structure, or part thereof, which is used
to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or
location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design
symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. The term
"sign" does not include the flag or emblem of any nation, organization
of nations, state, political subdivision thereof, or any fraternal, religious
or civic organization; works of art which in no way identify a product or
business; scoreboards located on athletic fields; or religious symbols.
SIGN, ABANDONED — A sign erected on, or related to, the use of a
property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of not less
than six months or any sign which relates to a time, event, or purpose
which has passed.
SIGN, ADDRESS — A sign that displays the street number of a principle
building or structure.
§ 203-704 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-704
1:778
SIGN, ANIMATED — A sign which contains wind or mechanically
operated moving parts or which flashes or simulates motion by the
use of electric lights, but not including wind-actuated elements such as
flags, banners, or pennants.
SIGN, AREA — For the purpose of this chapter, the sign area shall be as
calculated in § 203-705C.
SIGN, AUTO SALES — A grouping of signs which provide legible
signage for auto sales commercial facilities, while moderating visual
competition.
SIGN, AWNING — A sign attached to, painted, or printed onto a rooflike
cover of the fixed, hinged, roll, or folding type which is attached to
a building. This shall be considered a type of wall sign.
SIGN, BALLOON — A temporary type of sign constructed of cloth,
plastic, or vinyl filled with air or other suitable gas and affixed to an
appropriate anchor.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — See definition in § 203-714.
SIGN, BUILDING — A sign which gives the name of the building itself
as opposed to the name of occupants or activities carried on therein.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign directing attention to a business,
commodity, or service conducted, sold, or offered upon the same
premises as those upon which the sign is maintained. This includes
signs which identify or advertise home occupations or signs affixed to
vehicles denoting a business related activity.
SIGN, CANOPY — A sign attached to, painted, or printed onto a canopy.
This is a type of wall sign.
SIGN, CANOPY, SERVICE STATION DISPENSING FUEL — A sign
attached to, painted, or printed onto a canopy of a service station
dispensing fuel.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION/CONTRACTOR IDENTIFICATION — A
temporary sign placed at a construction site identifying or announcing
the project or the name of the architect, engineer, contractor, financing
institution, or others involved in the development of the project. A
construction/contractors sign shall have a maximum sign area of 16
square feet. If one sign lists multiple contractors, then 16 square feet
of sign area shall be allowed per contractor.[Amended 11-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-01]
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign fronting on a road containing any one
or more of the following: only the name of the principal use, directional
arrow and mileage to the principal use. Such principal use shall not be
visible to the motorist at the location at which the sign is placed.
SIGN, DIRECTORY — A sign on which the names and locations of
occupants or the use of a building or property is identified.
§ 203-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-704
1:779
SIGN, DOUBLE-SIDED — A sign with two parallel and opposite facing
sides which are attached to and supported by the same structure. Such
signs shall be designed and placed such that only one side of the sign is
visible from any given direction of traffic flow.
SIGN, FLASHING — A sign that uses an intermittent or flashing light
source or moving reflective material to attract attention.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A detached sign erected and maintained on a
freestanding frame, mast, or pole and not attached to any building but
not including ground-mounted signs.
SIGN, GOVERNMENT — Any temporary or permanent sign erected
and maintained for any government purposes other than signs placed
on the premises of a publicly owned building, structure or other land
use. Examples of government signs include speed limit signs, city limit
signs, street name signs, and traffic signs. Conversely a sign placed on
a public building such as library, school or public safety building, which
identifies said building, shall not be considered a government sign.
SIGN, GRAND OPENING/GOING OUT OF BUSINESS — A temporary
sign advertising the opening or closure of a store or business.
SIGN, GROUND — A type of freestanding sign that has a height of less
than 10 feet.
SIGN, HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the grade at the base of
the sign support to the uppermost portion of the sign structure.
SIGN, HOLIDAY — A temporary sign, which is representative of a
historic holiday or religious celebration, which contains advertising
copy, slogans, trademarks, or logos.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign which displays only the name,
address, and/or crest, or insignia, trademark, major home occupation or
profession of an occupant or the name of any building on the premises.
SIGN, INCIDENTAL — A sign used in conjunction with equipment or
other functional elements for a use or operation. These shall include,
but not be limited to, drive-through window menu boards, and signs
on automatic teller machines, gas pumps, vending machines, or
newspaper delivery boxes.
SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL — A sign which may contain the name, address,
and hours of the institution. It may also contain a message area.
SIGN, INSTRUCTIONAL — An on-premises sign designed to guide
vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic by using such words as "Entrance,"
Exit," "Parking," "One-Way," or similar directional instruction, but not
including any advertising message. The name(s) or logo(s) of the
business or use to which the sign is giving direction may also be
included on the sign.
SIGN, LED — A light-emitting-diode sign.
§ 203-704 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-704
1:780
SIGN, LIGHTED — A sign illuminated by light cast upon the sign from
an external or internal light source.
SIGN, LOGO — A sign used by PennDOT on limited access highways to
direct motorists to nearby businesses and services.
SIGN, MARQUEE — Any sign attached to a marquee for the purpose of
identifying a movie theater or similar place of entertainment and which
has changeable copy. This is a type of wall sign.
SIGN, NEIGHBORHOOD/COMMUNITY IDENTIFICATION — A sign
which identifies a neighborhood or community only and is located at the
boundary of same.
SIGN, NEON — A sign consisting of exposed/visible glass tubes filled
with neon or luminous gases, which ionizes and glows when an electric
current is sent through it.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign that draws attention to or
communicates information about a business, service, commodity, that
exists or is conducted, sold, offered, maintained, or provided at a
location other than the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, ON-PREMISES — A sign that draws attention to or
communicates information about a business, service, commodity,
accommodation, attraction, or other enterprise or activity that exists
or is conducted, sold, offered, maintained, or provided on the premises
where the sign is located.
SIGN, PERMANENT — A sign which is affixed to a ground or a building
by enduring means, and is not readily relocatable.
SIGN, PLANNED CENTER — Signs advertising the name and tenants
of an integrated development such as a planned shopping center, office,
or industrial park.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign that advertises a candidate or
candidates for public elective office(s), a political party, or promotes a
position on a pubic or ballot issue.
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign which is designed to be relocated and is
not permanently affixed to the ground, building or other structure,
including by not limited to trailer or vehicle mounted signs.
SIGN, POSTER — A sign constructed of paper, cardboard, or other
similar material which advertises a special event that is intended to be
displayed for a limited period of time.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign affixed to a wall or other vertical surface
at a 90° angle and extends no more than four feet beyond the building
wall, structure or parts thereof.
SIGN, PUBLIC INTEREST — A sign on private property that displays
information pertinent to the safety or legal responsibilities of the
general public such as "Warning," "No Hunting," and "No Trespassing"
signs.
§ 203-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-704
1:781
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A temporary type of sign pertaining only to the
lease, sale or rental of the land(s) or building(s) upon which such signs
are displayed.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE SUBDIVISION OR DEVELOPMENT — A sign
which identifies a subdivision and/or development project, its name,
character, developers, architects, engineers, planners, contractors,
realty agents or other individuals involved. Such signs may include
directions.
SIGN, ROOF — A sign erected or maintained in whole or in part upon
or over the roof or parapet of a building.
SIGN, SANDWICH — A temporary sign which is not secured to the
ground or any structure and forms an inverted "V."
SIGN, SPECIAL EVENT — A temporary sign for special events of
corporate, religious, charitable, civic, fraternal, or similar nonprofit or
not-for-profit organizations.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign intended for short-term use, such as
political signs, holiday and special event signs, grand opening/goingout-
of-business signs, construction/contractor identification signs, and
sandwich signs.
SIGN, UNLAWFUL — A sign which violates this article and is not
lawfully nonconforming.
SIGN, V-SHAPED — A sign containing two opposing faces which are not
parallel.
SIGN, VEHICULAR — Signs on parked vehicles visible from the public
right-of-way where the primary purpose of the vehicle is to advertise a
product or to direct people to a business or activity located on the same
or nearby property and the vehicle is not essential or integral to the
normal day-to-day operations of said business. For the purposes of this
chapter, vehicular signs shall not include business logos, identification
or advertising on vehicles primarily used for other transportation
purposes.
SIGN, WALL — Any sign directly attached to an exterior wall of a
building or dependent upon a building for its support with its exposed
face parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of the building
or structure on which it is placed. An awning sign, canopy sign, or
marquee sign shall also be considered a type of wall sign. Signs directly
painted on walls shall also be considered wall signs.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign which is located on the inside or outside of a
window or door and is readable from outside of the building.
STREET OR HIGHWAY FRONTAGE — The distance along any one side
of any public street or highway, measured along the right-of-way line
or parallel to the normal right-of-way line where the right-of-way line is
not fixed.
§ 203-704 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-704
1:782
§ 203-705. General sign regulations.
TRANSLUCENT — Allowing light to pass, but diffusing it so that objects
on the other side cannot be easily distinguished.
WINDOW — An opening in the wall of a building for admission of light,
usually closed by casements or sashes containing transparent material
such as glass. May be able to be opened and closed for the admission of
air.
A. Sign location.
(1) No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to prevent free ingress
or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. No sign shall be
attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(2) No permanent sign of any type will be permitted within the sight
distance triangle as defined by this article. The sight distance
triangle is defined beginning at the point of the intersection of the
right-of-way center lines of two streets, and traveling away 75 feet
from said point along the center line of each street, with a line
connecting the two seventy-five-foot lines as illustrated below:
(3) Unless specifically authorized by other provisions of this chapter,
no sign shall be erected within the legal right-of-way of any public
street or public sidewalk, or shall be closer to a street right-of-way
line closer than 10 feet.
(4) For signs placed below road grade, minor variations in height, up to
25% may be made by the Zoning Officer.
B. Sign illumination.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any permitted sign,
building, or structure in any district may be illuminated, provided
there shall be no illumination of a flashing, intermittent or moving
type. Illumination shall be shielded and directed so that the source
of light shall not be visible from any point off the lot on which the
sign, building or structure being illuminated is erected, and so that
only the sign, building or structure is directly illuminated thereby.
(2) Illumination and wiring of all electric signs shall comply with the
Township Electrical Code.
§ 203-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-705
1:783
C. Calculating sign area. For the purposes of this chapter, the area of a
sign shall be calculated as follows:
(1) In the case of flat or two-dimensional signs, the sign area is equal to
the entire area of the sign face. (See illustrations below.)
(2) In the case of three-dimensional figures, logos, symbols, or other
non-planar signs, the sign area is equal to one-half of the sum of the
areas of the four vertical sides of the smallest polyhedron that will
encompass the sign copy.
(3) In the case of an open sign made up of individual letters, attached
to or painted on a building, wall, window, canopy, or awning, the
sign area is equal to the sum of the areas of the two smallest
adjoining rectangles which encompass all of the letters and
symbols.
§ 203-705 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-705
1:784
(4) In computing the sign area of a double-sided sign, only one face
shall be considered, provided that both faces are identical in area.
Each face must be parallel and back to back.
(5) If sign faces are not parallel (i.e., V-shaped signs), both faces shall
be considered in computing the sign area.
D. Billboard signs (off-site or off-premises).
(1) Any billboard sign erected after the effective date of this chapter
shall comply with the following standards and the requirements for
billboards in § 203-714.
(2) Billboards shall be permitted only in the LI and GI Zoning Districts.
(3) No billboard shall be located in such a position that it obstructs or
obscures the view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in such a
manner as to endanger the safe movement thereof.
(4) No billboard shall be erected within a 500-foot circumference of
the nearest property line of any of the following: residential district
or a public park.
(5) No billboard shall be permitted whenever residentially zoned
property would be between the sign and the roadway toward which
it is oriented.
(6) No part, foundation or support of any billboard shall be placed on,
in or over any private property without the written consent of the
property owner.
(7) No part, foundation, or support of any billboard shall be placed on,
in, or over any public property, including public rights-of-way, or
any utility or drainage easement, or upon telephone or utility poles,
or natural features such as trees and rocks.
(8) No billboard shall be erected or maintained upon or above the roof
of any building.
(9) No billboard shall be placed on a lot where it obscures or shades
the windows or doorways of any adjacent building.
(10) Spacing: No two billboards located upon, or oriented towards
traffic traveling upon, the same side of a public street or road with
four or more lanes shall be spaced less than 1,000 feet apart. This
distance shall be measured along a straight line between the two
nearest points of the signs. The minimum spacing requirement
shall not apply to two panels viewed from different directions that
share a common support structure, nor shall any billboard be
located within a 1,000-foot radius of any other billboard even
though the two billboards are on different streets.
(11) Only one billboard shall be permitted per tax parcel.
§ 203-705 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-705
1:785
§ 203-706. Signs by district.
(12)No billboard along an interstate highway shall exceed 672 square
feet in total surface display area per face. Billboards that are not
facing an interstate highway shall not exceed 300 square feet per
face. The maximum number of faces on a billboard shall be two,
provided that not more than one face is visible at one time.
[Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
(13)No billboard shall be permitted which, because of its size, shape, or
location, obscures or obstructs the view of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic or shall be confused with any authorized traffic control sign,
signal, or device.
(14) Height: No billboard shall exceed 40 feet in height. This distance
shall be measured from the ground level at the base of the
billboard's support system to the highest point of the billboard.
(15) See also prohibitions in § 203-709B.
E. Address signs. Each structure shall have a street number clearly
identifying the address on a public street. Address signs in
nonresidential zoning districts shall not exceed four square feet.
Address signs in residential zoning districts shall not exceed one square
foot.
A. Signs in residential districts.
(1) The maximum area for signs in residential districts shall be
governed by the individual signs permitted. See also § 203-714,
Regulations for specific sign types.
(2) In addition to the exempt signs in § 203-708 below and the
applicable temporary signs in § 203-714, the following signs may be
erected in the residential districts:
(a) Identification sign.
(b) Instructional sign.
(c) Public interest sign.
(d) Real estate sign.
(e) Neighborhood community identification sign.
(f) Political sign.
B. Signs in Commercial Districts (other than V and ON Districts).
(1) The maximum area for signs in commercial districts shall be
governed by the tables provided in § 203-714.
§ 203-705 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-706
1:786
(2) In addition to the exempt signs § 203-708 below and the applicable
temporary signs in § 203-714, the following signs may be erected in
the commercial districts:
(a) Residential uses: Any sign permitted in residential districts for
the applicable uses, as set forth in § 203-706A.
(b) Nonresidential uses: For all nonresidential uses, the following
sign or signs may be erected in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter:
[1] Auto sales freestanding signs (in districts where such uses
are allowed).
[2] Canopy, service station dispensing fuel (in districts where
auto service stations are allowed).
[3] Freestanding (includes ground signs).
[4] Identification.
[5] Instructional.
[6] Planned center.
[7] Projecting.
[8] Public interest.
[9] Wall (which may include an awning sign/canopy sign/
marquee sign).
[10] Grand opening/going-out-of-business sign.
[11] Holiday/special event sign.
[12] Sandwich sign.
C. Signs in industrial districts.
(1) The maximum area for signs shall be governed by the tables
provided in § 203-714. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No.
07-01]
(2) In addition to the exempt signs in § 203-708 and the applicable
temporary signs in § 203-714, the following signs may be erected in
industrial districts:
(a) Residential uses: Any sign permitted in residential districts for
the applicable uses, as set forth in § 203-706A.
(b) Nonresidential uses: For all nonresidential uses, the following
sign or signs may be erected in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter:
§ 203-706 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-706
1:787
[1] Canopy, service station dispensing fuel (in district where
such use is allowed).
[2] Freestanding (includes ground signs).
[3] Billboard signs.
[4] Identification.
[5] Instructional.
[6] Public interest.
[7] Wall (which may include an awning sign/canopy sign/
marquee sign).
[8] Holiday/special event sign.
[9] Planned center sign.
D. Signs in the V Village, IN Institutional and ON Office Neighborhood
Districts.
(1) The maximum area for signs shall be governed by the tables
provided in § 203-714. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No.
07-01]
(2) In addition to the exempt signs in § 203-708 and the applicable
temporary signs in § 203-714, the following signs may be erected in
the V, IN and ON Districts:
(a) Residential uses: Any sign permitted in residential districts for
the applicable uses, as set forth in § 203-706A.
(b) Nonresidential uses: For all nonresidential uses, the following
sign or signs may be erected in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter:
[1] Ground.
[2] Identification.
[3] Instructional.
[4] Neighborhood community identification.
[5] Projecting.
[6] Public interest.
[7] Real estate.
[8] Wall (which may include an awning sign/canopy sign/
marquee sign, except where prohibited under
§ 203-707C).
§ 203-706 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-706
1:788
§ 203-707. Special district requirements.
[9] Awning/canopy/marquee sign.
[10] Holiday/special event sign.
[11] Sandwich sign.
[12]Window sign.
(3) In addition, building identification and directional signs shall be
allowed on a hospital campus, with a maximum sign area of 16
square feet and a maximum height of six feet. Such signs shall not
be internally illuminated.
A. Linglestown Road Overlay District. This overlay district shall include all
properties which have frontage along Linglestown Road between the
western and eastern municipal boundary line.
B. Locust Lane Overlay District. This overlay district shall include all
properties which have frontage along Locust Lane, between the
western municipal boundary line and Nyes Road.
C. The following signs are prohibited in the Linglestown Road and Locust
Lane Overlay Districts, regardless of the zoning district in which a
property is located: [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
(1) Billboard.
(2) Freestanding sign with a total height above the ground exceeding
10 feet.
(3) Marquee sign.
(4) Banner sign, balloons, animated signs.
(5) Off-premises advertising sign.
(6) Changeable copy or message board.
D. Materials, illumination, color.
(1) Signs shall be illuminated only by white, stationary external light or
back lighted by an interior stationary light without causing glare
for motorists, pedestrians, or neighboring properties.
(2) The use of exposed neon or LED lighting within signs or on the
exterior of a structure shall be prohibited. Neon or LED lighting
shall be permitted when used to backlight a translucent panel.
§ 203-706 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-708
1:789
§ 203-708. Exempt signs.
No sign permit shall be required in order to erect any of the following signs
in any district ("exempt signs"). Exempt signs shall conform to all other
applicable signage regulations.
A. Official highway route number signs, street name signs, directional, or
other official government (federal, state, county, or Township) signs.
B. Signs located in the interior of a building (except window signs).
C. Signs or emblems of a religious, civil, philanthropic, historical or
educational organization not exceeding four square feet in area.
Temporary signs for civic events, etc., must be removed within three
days after the event. Permission shall be obtained from the landowner
or utility to post said temporary signs.
D. Directional information or public service signs, such as those
advertising availability of restrooms, telephone or similar public
conveniences, and signs advertising meeting times and places of
nonprofit, service or charitable clubs or organizations, may be erected
and maintained, provided that such signs do not advertise any
commercial establishment, activity, organization, product, goods, or
services and which do not exceed four square feet in sign area.
E. Trespassing signs or signs indicating the private nature of a road,
driveway or premises, signs prohibiting or otherwise controlling
hunting or fishing upon particular premises, and signs indicating
ownership of a property, provided the sign area does not exceed one
square foot.
F. Flags or insignias of the United States or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
G. Temporary legal notices, which notices shall be removed after the
purpose of the notice is completed.
H. Signs integrated onto a vending machine bearing the brand name of the
product being sold or price of such product.
I. Memorial signs or historical markers and/or tablets provided that such
sign or tablet does not exceed four square feet.
J. Signs which are a permanent architectural feature of a building or
structure, such as a cornerstone, or identifying letters carved into or
embossed on a building, provided that the letters are not made of a
reflective material nor contrast in color with the building.
K. Signs advertising the variety of crop growing in a field. Such signs shall
be removed after the growing season.
L. Holiday signs and decorations that do not include advertising copy,
slogans, trademarks or logos.
§ 203-708 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-708
1:790
§ 203-709. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are unlawful and prohibited:
M. Allowed signs of less than two square feet each.
N. Allowed garage sale signs. See § 203-403.
O. Allowed real estate sales of six or less square feet.
P. Allowed temporary political signs as provided in § 203-714.
A. A sign that is mounted on, affixed to, painted or in any other way
appears on a roof of a building or structure.
B. Flashing, rotating, moving, scrolling, or revolving signs are prohibited,
with the exception of barbershop poles, rotating billboard message
panels, and video billboards. A sign with an electronically or
mechanically changeable message shall not change more than once per
minute, except for time and temperature signs. See limits on brightness
of lights in § 203-507.
C. A sign suspended between poles and lighted by a series of lights.
D. A sign suspended between poles consisting of either pennants or
spinners.
E. Any sign erected, painted, or drawn on a tree or rock or other natural
feature.
F. Signs shall only be attached to utility poles in conformance with state
and utility regulations and the requirements of this chapter.
G. Any banner sign, except as otherwise permitted.
H. Any sign containing information which states or implies that a property
may be used for any purpose not permitted under the provisions of this
chapter.
I. Any sign which uses the words "stop," "look," "danger," or any other
word or character which attempts or appears to attempt to direct the
movement of traffic or which interferes with or resembles any official
traffic sign, signal, or device and which is located within 75 feet of a
public right-of-way or within 200 feet of a traffic control device,
whichever is greater.
J. Except for traffic control signals, red or green lights are prohibited
within 75 feet of a public right-of-way or within 200 feet of a traffic
control device, whichever is greater. This shall not regulate routine
types of seasonal lighting during November through January, provided
the lighting does not resemble traffic control devices. [Amended
11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
§ 203-708 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-709
1:791
§ 203-710. Construction and maintenance.
§ 203-711. Removal of unsafe, unlawful, or abandoned signs.
§ 203-712. Sign permits and applications.
K. A truck, trailer or other vehicle, moving or non-moving, not used for
normal day-to-day operations of a business, or not regularly moved for
business related purposes, shall be prohibited from use as a sign.
L. Any balloon sign, except as otherwise permitted.
M. Any portable signs, except as otherwise permitted.
N. No sign shall have a rotating sign face or a video sign face or be
designed to be animated by the wind or mechanical devices.
A. All signs permitted by this chapter shall be constructed of durable
materials and kept in good condition and repair.
B. All signs requiring the use of electricity shall be manufactured in
accordance with the National Electrical Code.
C. Floodlighting used to illuminate signs shall be aimed as required to
ensure light does not spill off the sign.
A. Unsafe or unlawful signs.
(1) Upon written notice by the Township, the owner, person, or firm
maintaining a sign must remove said sign when it:
(a) Becomes unsafe, is in danger of falling, or it becomes so
deteriorated that it no longer serves a useful purpose of
communication;
(b) Is deemed by the Township to be a nuisance;
(c) Is deemed by the Township to be unsafe;
(d) Is unlawfully erected in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Abandoned signs. Abandoned signs, as defined by this chapter, shall be
removed by the landowner or person controlling the property within 90
days of abandonment.
A. Zoning permits.
(1) A zoning permit must be obtained from the Township prior to the
erection or alteration of any sign, unless specifically exempted in
this article.
(2) Exemptions from the necessity of securing a permit shall not
relieve the owner of the exempted sign from responsibility for its
§ 203-709 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-712
1:792
construction and installation in a safe manner and in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) The following changes to a sign shall not require a permit:
(a) Changing of only the advertising message;
(b) Regular maintenance of the sign, including electrical,
repainting, cleaning of a sign;
(c) The repair of an existing, lawful sign.
B. Application information.
(1) Before a sign permit is granted, a sign permit application with the
following information shall be submitted in duplicate:
(a) Dimensions of the lot (including any right-of-way lines) and/or
building upon which the sign is proposed to be erected.
(b) The proposed sign location with respect to the property lines
and building location.
(c) A description of the size, shape, color, material, supports,
anchoring, weight, and height of the sign, as well as intensity
of illumination.
(d) Sketch elevation of the sign, drawn to scale, indicating the
proposed size, dimensions, shape, materials, supports,
anchoring, and height of the sign.
(e) Any other lawful information which may be required of the
applicant by the Zoning Officer.
(2) All sign permit applications shall be signed by the owner of the
property upon which the sign is to be erected.
(3) All sign permit applications shall be accompanied by the required
fee as set forth in the fee schedule for signs established by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
(4) Incomplete applications shall be rejected.
C. Processing and approval of permit.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall process applications for zoning sign
permits within 15 business days from the date of the filing of the
complete application with the required fee.
(2) In determining the appropriateness of the proposed sign, the
Zoning Officer shall determine whether the sign meets all
restrictions, requirements, guidelines, standards, and sign area
limitations of this chapter.
§ 203-712 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-712
1:793
§ 203-713. Nonconforming signs.
§ 203-714. Regulations for specific sign types.
Provisions for the following types of signs are included on the following
pages:
(3) The Zoning Officer shall inspect and approve the installation of the
sign and shall make periodic inspections to determine conformity
of signs to these regulations.
(4) Zoning permits for signs are valid for a period of 90 days from the
date of issuance for construction purposes. Should the applicant
fail to install the sign within the ninety-day period, the zoning
permit becomes null and void.
A. Any lawful sign which is not in compliance with the requirements of this
article as of its effective date of adoption shall be considered
nonconforming. All such signs shall be permitted to remain as long as
they are in use, are structurally sound, and have not been deemed
abandoned under the terms of this article.
B. Lawful permanent nonconforming signs may be altered by changing the
face or copy of the sign. In no case shall a nonconforming sign be
changed to make it more nonconforming in sign area, height, setback or
other measure compared to the sign it is replacing. Minor structural
changes to the sign framework or support structure are permitted to
insure the safety of the sign. However, major changes such as the
replacement of the entire support structure shall require that the sign
be placed in conformance with this article. New embellishments to the
structure or the sign framework are not permitted on nonconforming
signs.
C. Signs shall be allowed for nonconforming uses according to those sign
types allowed for the zoning district in which such use would be a
permitted or conditional use and containing the most restrictive sign
ordinance. Such signs shall meet all requirements of this article.
D. Signs which cannot meet minimum setback requirements because of
the location of an existing building, or which would be obscured by the
location of a nonconforming building may be mounted on such building
providing it is the principal building. Signs shall be mounted flat on the
wall or fascia. No sign shall be allowed on any nonconforming accessory
building.
A. Permanent signs:
Auto sales freestanding sign
Awning/canopy/marquee sign
Billboard
Canopy, service station sign
§ 203-712 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-714
1:794
Freestanding sign (including ground signs)
Identification sign
Instructional sign
Neighborhood community identification sign
Planned center signs
Projecting sign
Public interest sign
Real estate, residential and commercial: rent or sale sign
Wall sign (which may include an awning/canopy/marquee sign)
Window sign
B. Temporary signs:
Construction/contractor identification sign
Grand opening/going out of business sign
Holiday sign/special event sign
Political sign
Sandwich sign
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Auto Sales Freestanding Signs
Definition:
Auto Sales Freestanding Signs. A grouping of signs which provide
legible signage for auto- sales uses. These signs shall be in place of
freestanding signs that would otherwise be allowed.
§ 203-714 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-714
1:795
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: Commercial districts where auto-related uses
are allowed
Total Sign Area: 1 square foot of sign area for each lineal foot of
public road or street frontage, provided there is compliance with the
other requirements of this article
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: Yes
Number Permitted: varies - see below
Setback: 5 feet minimum from the right-of-way line
Illumination: Yes
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: Yes
Freestanding Signs:
Height: 20 feet above grade, this may be increased to 30 feet if the
sign is located along an interstate highway
Area: 40 square feet, this may be increased by 20 square feet if
located along an interstate highway
Spacing: Signs must be a minimum of 100 feet apart
One freestanding sign shall be permitted for each new vehicle
manufacturer franchise that involves sales on lot
One freestanding sign shall be permitted for a used car sales lot
Wall Signs:
The "wall sign" provisions of this article shall apply
Flags and Banners:
Flags and banners will be considered permanent signs for this type of
facility
The maximum size of a flag or banner shall be 18 square feet with the
dimensions of 3 feet by 6 feet
Flags and banners shall be placed at intervals of 20 feet or greater
from one another
§ 203-714 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-714
1:796
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Preferred Sign Types: Wall, freestanding, ground and permanent
changeable message signs are the preferred type of sign for this use.
These signs are intended to be legible from a distance, therefore the
degree of contrast between the background and the letter color is
important.
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Awning/Canopy/Marquee
Definition:
Sign, Awning. A sign attached to, painted, or printed onto a roof-like
cover of the fixed, hinged, roll, or folding type
Sign, Canopy. A sign attached to, painted or printed onto a canopy
Sign, Marquee. Any sign attached to a marquee for the purpose of
identifying a movie theater or similar place of entertainment and
which has changeable copy.
Regulations:
Shall be regulated as a type of "wall sign." See wall signs in this
§ 203-714.
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Billboard Sign (also known as an off-site sign)
Definition:
Sign, Billboard. A sign other than a directional sign which directs
attention to or communicates information about a business,
commodity, service or event that exists or is conducted, sold, offered,
maintained or provided at a location other than the premises where
the sign is located.
§ 203-714 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-714
1:797
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Regulations:
See additional regulations in § 203-705
District(s) Permitted: LI and GI
Location: No billboard shall be located within 1,000 feet of any street
intersection
Height: No billboard shall exceed 40 feet in height
Maximum Area: 672 square feet in total surface display area per face
along interstate highways and 300 square feet per face in other
locations
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: Yes
Spacing: See § 203-705
Setback: 40 feet from any road or street right-of-way line. Also must
conform with the front, side and rear yard setback requirements of
the district in which they are located.
Illumination: Yes
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: Yes
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Canopy, Service Station
Definition:
Sign, Canopy, Service Station. A sign attached to, painted, or printed
onto a structure made of metal, aluminum, or other material intended
to be free standing or affixed to a building that serves as an overhang
intended to shield persons from the elements while using the service
station.
§ 203-714 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-714
1:798
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: Districts where auto service stations are
allowed
Height: Encompassed within the vertical surface area of the canopy
to which attached
Area: 25 square feet per side
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: Yes
Number Permitted: 1 per canopy side, on up to 3 sides
Setback: Right-of-way line
Illumination: External or internal illumination restricted to only those
areas with descriptive letters
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: Yes
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Freestanding
Definition:
Sign, Freestanding. A detached sign erected and maintained on a
freestanding frame, mast, or pole and not attached to any building. A
ground sign is a type of freestanding sign that has a height of less
than 10 feet.
§ 203-714 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-714
1:799
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: IN, Commercial and Industrial Districts
Maximum Area = 40 square feet, except 50 square feet for a sign for
2 commercial establishments on the lot, 75 square feet for a sign for
3 to 5 commercial establishments on the lot, 100 square feet for a
sign for 6 or more commercial establishments on a lot
A bonus of 10%, of the entire sign area, will be permitted if provisions
are made to provide for "for rent" or "lease" panels on the sign for
vacancies within the complex. NOTE - No additional lease or rent sign
would be allowed.
Maximum Height = 20 feet in the CG District along Route 22, Union
Deposit Road or interstate highways, 10 feet in all other cases
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: Yes
Number Permitted: 1 per lot per public street frontage
Setback: 5 feet from right-of-way line
Illumination: Yes
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: Yes
NOTE: Sign base/support structure shall NOT be included in sign
area or contain signage.
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Temporary Signs
Type of Sign:
Grand Opening/Going Out of Business
Definition:
Sign, Grand Opening/Going Out of Business. A temporary sign
advertising the opening or closure of a store or business.
§ 203-714 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-714
1:800
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Temporary Signs
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: All zones
Height: 20 feet above grade
Area: 50 square feet (balloons and banners are permitted)
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: Escrow deposit
Number Permitted: 1
Setback: 5 feet from right-of-way line
Illumination: Yes
Period of Display: 4 weeks before event and 1 week after event. Limit
to one per business lifetime
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: No
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Temporary Signs
Type of Sign:
Holiday/Special Event
Definition:
Sign, Holiday. A temporary sign which is representative of a historic
holiday or religious celebration, which contains advertising copy,
slogans, trademarks, or logos.
Sign, Special Event. A temporary sign for special events of corporate,
religious, charitable, civic, fraternal or similar nonprofit or not-forprofit
organizations.
§ 203-714 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-714
1:801
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Temporary Signs
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: All
Height: 20 feet
Area: 50 square feet maximum for all signs of this type
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: Escrow deposit
Number Permitted: 1
Setback: 5 feet from right-of-way
Illumination: Yes
Period of Display: 4 weeks before event and 1 week after event, not to
exceed 4 times per year
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: No
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Identification Sign
Definition:
Sign, Identification. A sign which displays only the name, address,
and/or crest, or insignia, trademark, home occupation or profession of
an occupant or the name of any building on the premises.
§ 203-714 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-714
1:802
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: All
Height: Top of wall to which attached, or 4 feet in height if mounted
on a post
Area: 4 square feet
Permit Required: No
Fee Required: No
Number Permitted: 1 per building
Setback: Wall surface, or 5 feet from right-of-way line if mounted on a
post
Illumination: No
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: No
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Instructional
Definition:
Sign, Instructional. An on-premises sign designed to guide vehicular
and/or pedestrian traffic by using such words as "Entrance," "Exit,"
"Parking," "One-Way" or similar directional instruction, but not
including any advertising message. The name or logo of the business
or use to which the sign is giving direction may also be included on
the sign
§ 203-714 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-714
1:803
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: All
Height: 4 feet
Area: 8 square feet
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: Yes
Number Permitted: 4 per parcel
Setback: Right-of-way line
Illumination: Yes
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: Yes
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Neighborhood Community Identification
Definition:
Sign, Neighborhood Community Identification. A sign which identifies
a neighborhood or community only and is located at the boundary of
same.
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: Residential districts only
Height: 8 feet
Area: 32 square feet
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: Yes
Number Permitted: 2 at each entrance
Setback: 10 feet from right-of-way line if sign is greater than 16
square feet, otherwise, right-of-way line
Illumination: No
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: No
§ 203-714 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-714
1:804
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Planned Center Signs
Definition:
Sign, Planned Center. Signs advertising the name and tenants of an
integrated development such as a planned shopping center, office, or
industrial park.
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: Commercial and industrial districts, other than
ON and V Districts
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: Yes
Illumination: Yes
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: Yes
Minimum Requirements for a Planned Center: 10,000 square feet of
building space and 2 tenants
Ground Signs:
Area: 1 square foot for each 4 feet of frontage contained within the
planned center. In no case shall a planned center sign exceed a
maximum size of 100 square feet
Number Permitted: 1 planned center sign per frontage of the planned
center shall be permitted
Setback: 10 feet from right-of-way line
Height: Consistent with freestanding sign requirements
Wall Signs:
Maximum Area for single-tenant buildings: 32 square feet
Maximum Area for multi-tenant buildings:
Suite/Tenant Size Allowable sign area
0-5,000 square feet 32 square feet
5,001-10,000 square
feet
60 square feet
Over 10,001 square
feet
10% of the vertical building wall face to which
the sign is attached
§ 203-714 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-714
1:805
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
The number of wall signs for multi-tenant buildings is 1 per tenant;
for single-tenant buildings 2. Wall signs may not project above the
highest point of the wall on which they are attached. Signs may be
attached to roof-like architectural projections from building walls, but
not directly onto a roof.
Directional Signs:
Height: Top of wall to which attached, or 4 feet in height if mounted
on a post
Area: 4 square feet
Permit or Fee Required: No
Number Permitted: N/A
Setback: Wall surface, or 3 feet from right-of-way line if mounted on a
post
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Temporary Signs
Type of Sign:
Political Sign
Definition:
Sign, Political. A temporary sign that advertises a candidate or
candidates for public elective office(s), a political party, or promotes a
position on a public or ballot issue.
§ 203-714 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-714
1:806
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Temporary Signs
Regulations:
The regulations of this table shall not apply to political signs at a
polling place on the day of an election
District(s) Permitted: All
Height: 5 feet in a residential district, 8 feet in other districts
Sign Area: 16 square feet per candidate or issue, per street frontage
Permit Required: Yes, for signs posted longer than 90 days
Fee Required: An escrow deposit may be required to ensure removal
of signs. Any fee for such deposit shall be set by resolution
Number Permitted: 2 per candidate or issue per street frontage. Each
sign may have 2 sign faces
Setback: 2 feet from right-of-way. No sign shall interfere with traffic
sight distance
Illumination: No
Period of Display: Must be removed within 2 weeks after election if
the sign pertains to an election
Political signs may also be used in place of allowed wall or
freestanding signs in commercial or industrial districts
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Projecting
Definition:
Sign, Projecting. A sign affixed to a wall or other vertical surface at a
90° angle and extends no more than 4 feet beyond the building wall,
structure or parts thereof.
§ 203-714 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-714
1:807
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: Commercial districts
Height: Not to exceed the height of the wall to which attached
Area: 9 square feet
Additional Restrictions: The sign shall not project beyond 4 feet of the
building face. The bottom of the sign shall have an 8-foot pedestrian
clearance from ground level.
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: Yes
Number Permitted: 1 per road or street frontage
Setback: Right-of-way line
Illumination: No, external illumination only
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: Yes
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Public Interest
Definition:
Sign, Public Interest. A sign on private property that displays
information pertinent to the safety or legal responsibilities of the
general public such as "Warning," "No Hunting" and "No Trespassing"
signs
§ 203-714 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-714
1:808
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: All
Height: 6 feet
Area: 1 square foot
Permit Required: No
Fee Required: No
Number Permitted: 1 per 100 feet of property line
Setback: Right-of-way line
Illumination: No
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: No
Sign
Regulations Lower Paxton Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Real Estate, Residential and Commercial: Rent or Sale
Definition:
Sign, Real Estate. A type of sign pertaining only to the lease, sale or
rental of the land(s) or building(s) upon which such signs are
displayed.
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: All
Height and Area:
Parcel Size Max. Area Max. Ht. Setback
Single-family
residential
Others
4 square feet 5 feet None
Less than 1
acre
9 square feet 6 feet None
1.01 to 10
acres
12 square feet 6 feet 10 feet
More than
10 acres
24 square feet 8 feet 10 feet
§ 203-714 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-714
1:809
Sign
Regulations Lower Paxton Township Permanent Signs
Permit Required: Not for residential signs, required for all other real
estate signs
Fee Required: No
Number Permitted: 1 nonilluminated sign per street frontage
Setback: Right-of-way line
Illumination: No
Real Estate signs shall be removed 10 days after the lease, sale or
rental of the property or building has been accomplished
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Temporary Signs
Type of Sign:
Sandwich
Definition:
Sign, Sandwich. A temporary sign which is not secured to the ground
or any structure and forms an inverted "V."
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: Commercial districts
Height: 4 feet
Area: 12 square feet maximum per side; 24 square feet maximum
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: No
Number Permitted: 1
Setback: Right-of-way line
Illumination: No
Period of Display: Moved inside whenever the use is not open to the
public
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: No
§ 203-714 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-714
1:810
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Temporary Signs
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Wall
Definition:
Sign, Wall. Any sign directly attached to an exterior wall of a building
or dependent upon a building for its support with its exposed face
parallel or approximately parallel to the plane of the building or
structure on which it is placed. Signs directly painted on walls shall
be considered wall signs. An awning sign, canopy sign or marquee
sign (as defined by § 203-704 and as described on a previous chart)
shall be considered a type of wall sign.
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: Industrial and commercial districts
Height: Top of wall to which attached
Maximum Area: 10% of the vertical building wall face to which the
sign is attached
Wall signs shall be allowed on up to 2 sides of a building
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: Yes
Number Permitted: 2 per establishment per side of a building
Setback: Wall surface, except that an awning sign, canopy sign or
marquee sign may extend up to 4 feet from a building wall, provided
it does not intrude into a street right-of-way
Illumination: Yes
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: Yes
§ 203-714 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-714
1:811
Sign Regulations
Lower Paxton
Township Permanent Signs
Type of Sign:
Window
Definition:
Sign, Window. A sign which is located on the inside or outside of a
window and which is readable from outside of the building
Regulations:
District(s) Permitted: Commercial and industrial districts
Height: Top of window
Area: 30% of total glass area of windows on a building
Permit Required: Yes
Fee Required: Yes
Setback: Outside or inside surface of the window
Illumination: A maximum sign area of 4 square feet shall apply for an
internally illuminated window sign
Neon lighting is permitted except in the Locust Lane and Linglestown
Road Overlay Districts
Insurance/Hold Harmless Required: No
§ 203-714 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-714
1:812
ARTICLE VIII
General Regulations
§ 203-801. Frontage onto improved streets; number of uses or
buildings; minimum size of dwellings.
A. Frontage required onto improved street. Each proposed new lot, each
land development and each proposed principal building shall be on a lot
which directly abuts a public street, a street proposed to be dedicated
to the Township by the subdivision plan which created or creates such
lot, or a private street which meets all of the requirements of the
Township Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. In the case of
townhouses, manufactured/mobile home park, or apartments, each unit
may have access onto a parking court which then has access onto a
public or private street meeting Township standards.
B. Number of principal uses and principal buildings per lot.
(1) A lot in a commercial or industrial district may include more than
one permitted principal use per lot and/or more than one permitted
principal building per lot, provided that all of the requirements are
met for each use and each building. If differing dimensional
requirements apply for different uses on the lot, then the most
restrictive requirement shall apply.
(a) For example, if Use 1 requires a one-acre lot area and Use 2 on
the same lot requires a two-acre lot area, then the lot shall
have a minimum lot area of two acres.
(b) The applicant shall submit a site plan that demonstrates that
each structure would meet the requirements of this chapter.
(c) The uses and buildings shall be in common ownership.
However, a condominium form of ownership of individual
buildings, with a legally binding property owners' association,
may be established if the applicant proves to the satisfaction of
the Zoning Officer, based upon review by the Township
Solicitor, that there will be appropriate legal mechanisms in
place.
(2) A lot within a residential district shall not include more than one
principal use and shall not include more than one principal building
unless specifically permitted by this chapter.
(a) A manufactured/mobile home park, condominium residential
development or apartment development may include more
than one principal building per lot, provided all other
requirements of this chapter are met. A condominium form of
ownership of individual dwelling units, with a legally binding
homeowners' association, may be established if the applicant
proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer, based upon
review by the Township Solicitor, that there will be appropriate
§ 203-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-801
1:813
§ 203-802. Height exceptions.
The maximum structure height specified for each district shall not apply to:
antennas that meet the requirements of this chapter, water towers, clock
or bell towers, steeples of places of worship, electrical transmission lines
and towers, elevator shafts, stair towers, flag poles, windmills, skylights,
chimneys, heating/ventilation/air-conditioning equipment, smoke stacks,
parapet walls of up to four feet in height and other appurtenances usually
required to be and customarily placed above the roof level and not intended
for human occupancy. See also definition of "height" in § 203-202 and
provisions in § 203-307B.
§ 203-803. Special lot and yard requirements, sight distance and
buffer yards.
legal mechanisms in place and compliance with applicable
state law.
C. Minimum size of dwellings. Each dwelling unit shall include a minimum
of 600 square feet of enclosed habitable, indoor, heated floor area,
which shall be primarily above the ground level.
D. Maximum occupancy. No recreational vehicle shall be occupied on a lot
for more than 30 days in a calendar year, except as may be approved
within a campground with suitable central water and sewage service.
No mobile/manufactured home shall be occupied on a lot as a dwelling
unless it meets all of the requirements for a dwelling.
A. In general.
(1) No lot, structure or use shall be created or developed in such a way
that it would result in another lot, building or use not being able to
meet the requirements of this chapter. This includes, but is not
limited to: setback areas, non-impervious areas and off-street
parking areas.
(2) Emergency access. All uses and structures shall have adequate
provisions for access by emergency vehicles and fire ladders. Such
access shall be maintained in a passable condition by the owner of
the lot or, where applicable, by the property owners' association.
B. Exceptions to minimum lot areas, lot widths and yards.
(1) Corner lots. For a corner lot, each yard that abuts a public street
shall be considered a front yard and meet the requirements for
minimum depth of a front yard. See definition of "lot, corner" in
§ 203-202.
(2) Projections into required yards.
(a) Cornices, eaves, roof overhangs, sills or other similar
architectural features, exterior stairways, unenclosed fire
§ 203-801 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-803
1:814
escapes or other required means of egress, rain leads,
chimneys, "Bilco"-type doors for basement access, window
awnings, footers, chaise for heating pipes or other similar
structures that do not include space usable by persons may
extend or project into a required yard not more than three
feet, except as may be required within a drainage or utility
easement.
(b) Steps, stoops, fire escapes, handicapped ramps, and landings
necessary to provide entrance to a building may be located
within a required setback area.
(c) For decks and porches, see § 203-307.
(3) Lot widths around curves. Around the bulb of a cul-de-sac street or
on the outside of the curve of a street with a radius of less than 150
feet, the minimum lot width at the minimum building setback line
may be reduced to 60% of the width that would otherwise be
required.
C. Sight clearance at intersections. At the intersection of two streets, a
clear sight triangle shall be provided. Within this triangle, no visual
obstructions shall be allowed between the height of three feet and 10
feet above the ground level, except for utility posts, mailboxes, single
sign posts and the trunks of deciduous trees. The triangle shall be
measured along the center line of the right-of-way line of the streets.
Each leg of the triangle shall be measured 75 feet from the intersection
of the center lines of the streets. A third longer leg shall connect the
two legs along the center lines, to form the triangle.
(1) However, in place of the above sight triangle, where a local street
intersects an arterial or collector street with a stop sign only at the
local street, the leg of the triangle along the arterial or collector
street shall be increased to 250 feet and the leg along the local
street shall be decreased to 20 feet beyond the right-of-way of the
arterial street.
(2) The clear sight triangle shall be kept free of such obstructions in
perpetuity.
(3) Where grading along a street is necessary to provide safe sight
distances, such grading shall not be prohibited by other provisions
of Township ordinances. Such grading should result in finished
slopes that are as close to the natural grades as is feasible.
[Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
D. Buffer yards. Plans for buffer yards and plant screening shall be
reviewed and approved by the Shade Tree Commission. Buffer yards
and plant screening, complying with the following standards, shall be
required under the following situations, unless a more-restrictive
provision is established by another section of this chapter. The Shade
Tree Commission, as it deems necessary, may permit modification of the
§ 203-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-803
1:815
following standards to address specific site constraints or landscaping
needs: [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
(1) A minimum 30 feet wide buffer yard with plant screening shall be
required along the rear and side lot lines of any lot used principally
for principal nonresidential purposes that is contiguous to a lot
occupied by an existing principal dwelling or an undeveloped
residentially zoned lot.
(a) If a principal business use will include areas used for
manufacturing or will have a loading dock that will be routinely
serviced by tractor-trailer trucks or refrigerated trucks, then
the minimum buffer yard width along such manufacturing area
and/or loading dock shall be increased to 70 feet, and the
minimum initial height of plantings shall be increased to eight
feet. However, the minimum buffer width shall be four feet
within the Village and TND Districts, and the buffer yard may
be waived by the Township as part of a traditional
neighborhood development approval if:
[1] The business use is built before the adjacent residential
use is sold; and
[2] The applicant proves compatibility as part of the master
plan review by the Township.
(b) If a lot will include more than 100,000 square feet of business
building floor area, then the minimum buffer yard width shall
be increased to 70 feet, and the minimum initial height of
plantings shall be increased to eight feet.
(c) If a dwelling will be on the same lot as a principal business use,
then a buffer yard shall not be required by this section.
(d) A 10 feet minimum buffer yard with landscaped screening shall
be required where a subdivision or land development of new
dwellings will have rear yards abutting a public street or
expressway.
(e) A buffer yard is also required to be provided by the following if
they are abutting and visible from a public street:
[1] Along lot lines of any newly developed or expanded
outdoor industrial storage or loading area; or
[2] Along lot lines of any newly developed or expanded area
routinely used for the overnight parking of two or more
tractor-trailer trucks or trailers of tractor-trailers.
(2) A required yard may overlap a required buffer yard, provided the
requirement for each is met. The buffer yard shall be measured
from the district boundary line, street right-of-way line or lot line,
whichever is applicable. Required plantings shall not be placed
§ 203-803 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-803
1:816
within the right-of-way, except that the Township may allow
deciduous canopy trees.
(3) The buffer yard shall be a landscaped area free of structures,
dumpsters, commercial or industrial storage, or display, signs,
manufacturing or processing activity, materials, loading and
unloading areas, or vehicle parking or display.
(4) Fence. Any wall or fence in a buffer yard shall be placed on the
inside (nonresidential side) of any required plant screening. If a
fence in a buffer yard has one side that is more finished or
smoother than the other side, the more-finished or smoother side
shall face the outside of the buffer yard. A fence in a commercial or
industrial district that is visible from the outside of the buffer yard
shall be constructed of wood planks, PVC panels, PVC picket-style
posts or similar designs, as opposed to chain-link metal or wood
sheeting. Any wall visible from the outside of the buffer yard shall
be constructed of brick, other decorative masonry, decorative
stucco, stone, or have the appearance of such materials.
(5) A well or septic system may be placed within a buffer yard,
provided the landscaping and tree preservation provisions are still
met.
(6) Each planting screen shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Plant materials needed to form the visual screen shall have a
minimum height when planted of four feet. In addition, an
average of one deciduous shade tree, with a minimum trunk
diameter of two inches measured six inches above the finished
ground level, shall be placed for each 50 feet of length of the
buffer yard. The shade trees may be clustered or spaced
unevenly.
(b) Plants needed to form the visual screen shall be of such
species, spacing and size as can reasonably be expected to
produce within three years a mostly solid year-round visual
screen at least three feet in height.
(c) The plant screen shall be placed so that at maturity the plants
will not obstruct a street or sidewalk.
(d) The plant visual screen shall extend the full length of the lot
line, except for:
[1] Township-approved points of approximately perpendicular
vehicle or pedestrian ingress and egress to the lot;
[2] Locations necessary to comply with safe sight distance
requirements where the plantings cannot feasibly be
moved further back; and
§ 203-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-803
1:817
[3] Locations needed to meet other specific state, Township
and utility requirements, such as stormwater swales.
(e) American arborvitae and similar weak-stem plants shall not be
used to meet the buffer yard requirements. A monotonous
straight row of the same species is discouraged. A morenaturalistic
form of planting is encouraged with a mix of
species. If more than 20 evergreen plants are proposed, no
more than 50% shall be of one species.
(f) Evergreen trees should be planted at diagonal offsets so that
there is room for future growth of the trees.
(g) The Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Shade
Tree Commission, may approve alternate buffer designs and
locations that serve the same purpose, particularly when
necessary because of unique site conditions.
(h) If existing healthy trees with a trunk diameter of six inches or
greater (measured 4.5 feet above the ground level) exist within
the buffer yard, they shall be preserved to the maximum extent
feasible. The Zoning Officer may certify that preserving
existing mature trees and shrubs within the buffer yard will
meet the same purposes as the new plant screening. In such
case, part or all of the new plant screening may be waived in
writing by the Zoning Officer.
(i) The use of earth berms in combination with landscaping is
encouraged within buffer yards to provide additional
protection to dwellings and residential areas. An earth berm
may be required as a condition of a conditional or special
exception use approval.
(7) Buffer yard plans.
(a) Prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter where a
buffer yard would be required, and on any required subdivision
or land development plan, the applicant shall submit plans
showing:
[1] The location and arrangement of each buffer yard;
[2] The placement, general selection of species and initial size
of all plant materials; and
[3] The placement, size, materials and type of all fences to be
placed in such buffer yard.
(8) Buffer yards, IN District. A minimum 30 feet wide buffer yard with
plant screening shall be required along the rear and side lot lines of
any lot used principally for single-family detached dwelling
purposes where said lot line is contiguous to a lot occupied by an
existing principal dwelling or undeveloped residentially zoned lot
§ 203-803 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-803
1:818
§ 203-804. Landscaping.
located within a residential zoning district under this chapter other
than the IN District. A minimum 60 feet buffer yard with plant
screening shall be required along the rear and side lot lines of
any lot used principally for any purpose other than single-family
detached dwelling purposes that is contiguous to a lot occupied by
an existing principal dwelling or undeveloped residentially zoned
lot located within a residential zoning district under this chapter
other than the IN District. The retention of existing mature trees
and shrubs may be substituted for the plant screening within the
buffer yard where approved by the Township. [Amended
4-1-2008 by Ord. No. 08-03]
A. Any part of a commercial, industrial, institutional or apartment lot
which is not used for structures, loading areas, parking spaces and
aisles, sidewalks, and designated storage areas shall be provided with
an all-season, well-maintained vegetative ground cover and shall be
landscaped with trees and shrubs. Landscaped areas shall be kept free
of debris, rubbish, and noxious weeds.
B. See the buffer yard provisions in § 203-803.
C. Street trees. As part of the creation of a new lot for any use, the
construction of a new principal nonresidential building, a new land
development, or development of parking area for six or more parking
spaces, deciduous shade street trees shall be planted between such lot
lines, building and/or parking area, and any adjacent public street(s).
This requirement shall not apply along street segments where existing
healthy trees will be preserved and protected during construction that
will serve the same purpose.
(1) Number. A minimum average of one such tree shall be planted for
each 50 feet of length of street right-of-way around the lot.
(2) Location. Such trees shall be placed immediately outside of the
street right-of-way, or an alternative location acceptable to the
Board of Supervisors.
(3) Ordinance. Such street trees shall be planted in a manner approved
by the Township Engineer to avoid conflicts with sidewalks and
utilities.
(4) Buffer. Where shade trees may be required under the buffer yard
provisions, the same tree may be used to count towards both
requirements.
(5) The street trees shall meet the requirements of § 203-804D.
D. Parking lot landscaping.
§ 203-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-804
1:819
(1) A minimum of one deciduous tree shall be required for every 15
new off-street parking spaces.
(2) If a lot will include 30 or more new parking spaces, landscaped
islands shall be provided within automobile parking areas.
Otherwise, the trees may be planted around the parking area. If a
parking area includes more than 50 off-street parking spaces, then
a minimum of 5% of the interior of the parking area shall be
landscaped. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
(3) Deciduous trees required by this section shall meet the following
standards:
(a) Type of trees permitted. Required trees shall be chosen from
the list of approved street trees that is maintained by the
Township Shade Tree Commission. The Shade Tree
Commission may approve a proposal for an alternate species if
the applicant proves such species would shade paved areas, be
resistant to disease, road salt and air pollution and be
attractive and sturdy.
Note: This chapter only regulates the species of trees that are
used to meet requirements of the Township. The species of
trees that are not required by Township ordinances are not
regulated.
(b) Quality of trees. Required trees shall be of symmetrical growth
and free of insect pests and disease.
(c) Minimum size. The trunk diameter (measured at a height of six
inches above the finished grade level) shall be a minimum of
two inches or greater.
(d) Planting and maintenance. Required trees shall be:
[1] Planted in conformance with good landscaping practices,
with adequate unpaved surface around each for water and
air, and
[2] Properly protected by curbs, curbstops, distance, or other
devices from damage from vehicles.
(e) A minimum vegetative area shall be provided that includes at
least a four feet minimum radius around all sides of the trunk
of each required deciduous tree within or adjacent to a parking
lot. [Amended 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
E. Review and approval. Where landscaping is required by this chapter,
the applicant shall submit a landscaping plan, in addition to a site plan,
showing proposed initial sizes, locations and species of plantings.
F. Landscape maintenance. All tree, buffer yard and other landscaping
required by this chapter shall be perpetually maintained by the
§ 203-804 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-804
1:820
§ 203-805. Nonconformities.
property-owner. Any landscaping needed to meet an Ordinance
requirement that dies, is removed, or is severely damaged shall be
replaced by the current property-owner, on a one-to-one basis, as soon
as is practical considering growing seasons, within a maximum of 150
days.
G. Stormwater basin landscaping. The following requirements shall apply
to landscaping within and around stormwater management basins:
(1) All areas of stormwater management basins, including basin floors,
side slopes, berms, impoundment structures, or other earth
structures, shall be planted with suitable vegetation, such as
meadow plantings or grasses specifically suited for stormwater
basins.
(2) Trees and shrubs shall be planted around stormwater basins.
However, trees and shrubs shall not be planted in locations that
would interfere with the function of the basin, such as within 30
feet from the outlet/drain structure, emergency spillway or dam. A
minimum average of two trees and 10 shrubs shall be required to
be planted around the basin for every 100 linear feet of basin
perimeter. Such perimeter shall be measured at the elevation of the
top of the berm. Such trees and shrubs shall be in addition to other
Township requirements. Trees shall have an initial trunk diameter
of two inches, measured six inches above the ground. Shrubs shall
have an initial height of four feet.
(3) Natural ground cover plant species shall be planted in the floors
and slopes of the basin. These ground covers may include
wildflowers, meadows or nonaggressive grasses. Species shall be
chosen that are suitable for the expected wetness of various
portions of the basin. The plantings shall provide a continuous
cover over all earth areas of the basin. The plantings shall not
interfere with the proper functioning of the basin, in the
determination of the Township Engineer.
(4) Lawn grass areas may be sodded or hydroseeded to minimize
erosion during the establishment period. Once established,
turfgrass areas on nonwet areas of the basin shall be maintained at
a height of not more than six inches.
(5) To the maximum extent feasible, stormwater basins shall be
designed with slopes that blend with the surrounding topography.
Areas intended to be mowed shall have a maximum slope of 3:1.
A. Proof and registration of nonconformities. It shall be the responsibility
of, with the burden of proof upon, a party asserting a nonconformity to
provide the evidence that it is lawful. A property owner may request a
§ 203-804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-805
1:821
written statement of nonconformity from the Zoning Officer after
providing sufficient evidence.
B. Continuation of nonconformities.
(1) A lawful nonconforming use, structure or lot, as defined by this
chapter, may be continued and may be sold and continued by new
owners.
(2) Any expansion of, construction upon or change in use of a
nonconformity shall only occur in conformance with this section.
(3) If an existing use was not lawfully established, it shall not have any
right to continue as a nonconforming use.
C. Expansion of or construction upon nonconformities. The following shall
apply, unless the structure is approved under § 203-805D:
(1) Nonconforming structure.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall permit a nonconforming structure to
be reconstructed or expanded, provided:
[1] That such action will not increase the severity or amount
of the nonconformity (such as the area of the building
extending into the required yard) or create any new
nonconformity; and
[2] That any expanded area will comply with the applicable
setbacks in that district and other requirements of this
chapter, except as may be allowed under Subsection
C(1)(c) and (d) below.
(b) In the case of a nonconforming structure which is used by a
nonconforming use, any expansion shall also meet the
requirements of this section regarding nonconforming uses.
(c) Extension along a nonconforming setback. If an existing
building has a lawfully nonconforming side or rear building
setback, additions may occur to increase the height above such
setback or to extend other portions of the building out to the
nonconforming side or rear setback line, provided that:
[1] The structure shall not be extended beyond the existing
nonconforming setback line;
[2] No additional nonconformity is created;
[3] The new nonconforming extension is not greater than 25%
of the existing floor area of the building being expanded;
[4] All other requirements of this chapter shall be met; and
§ 203-805 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-805
1:822
[5] Such additions shall not be permitted for a nonresidential
building that abuts an existing primarily residential use.
(d) As a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may approve
a reduction of up to 50% in a side or rear setback for an
existing dwelling if the applicant proves such setback is
necessary to allow a customary addition of such dwelling or a
replacement of an existing undersized dwelling with a new
dwelling. This subsection shall not allow a reduction in setback
to increase the number of dwelling units on the lot, except for a
unit for care of relative.
(2) Nonconforming lots.
(a) Permitted construction on a nonconforming lot. A single
permitted by right principal use and its customary accessory
uses may be constructed, reconstructed or expanded on a
nonconforming lot provided all of the following additional
requirements are met:
[1] The lot must be a lawful nonconforming lot of record;
[2] Minimum setback requirements shall be met;
[3] State and federal wetland regulations shall be met; and
[4] If a septic or well is used, the requirements for such shall
be met.
(b) Lot width. The fact that an existing lawful lot of record does not
meet the minimum lot width requirements of this chapter shall
not by itself cause such lot to be considered to be a
nonconforming lot.
(3) Expansion of a nonconforming nonresidential use. A
nonconforming use or a building used by a nonconforming use shall
not be expanded, except in accordance with the following
provisions:
(a) An expansion of more than 5% in total building floor area shall
require special exception approval from the Zoning Hearing
Board under Article I.
(b) Such reconstruction or expansion shall be only upon the same
lot that the nonconforming use was located upon at the time
the use became nonconforming.
(c) The total building floor area used by a nonconforming use, or
the total land area covered by the nonconforming use,
whichever is more restrictive, shall not be increased by greater
than 50% beyond what existed in the nonconforming use at the
time the use first became nonconforming.
§ 203-805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-805
1:823
[1] The above maximum increase shall be measured in
aggregate over the entire life of the nonconformity. All
expansions of the nonconforming use and/or building(s)
that occurred since the use originally became
nonconforming shall count towards the above maximum
increase.
(d) Any expansion of a nonconforming use shall meet the required
setbacks and other requirements of this chapter, unless the
Zoning Hearing Board grants a variance.
(4) Expansion of a nonconforming residential use. An existing
nonconforming residential use may be expanded as a permitted by
right use, provided that: the number of dwelling units or rooming
house units are not increased; the expansion meets all applicable
setbacks;, no new types of nonconformities are created; and a
nonconformity is not made more severe. A lawfully nonconforming
dwelling in a business district may follow the dimensional
requirements for the R-2 District and may add customary accessory
uses.
(5) Nonconforming sign. The provisions of this chapter shall not
provide a right to expand or extend a nonconforming sign. Instead,
any expansions or extensions of a nonconforming sign shall comply
with this chapter.
D. Damaged or destroyed nonconformities. A nonconforming structure or
nonconforming use that has been destroyed or damaged may be rebuilt
in a nonconforming fashion only if: the application for a building permit
is submitted within 18 months after the date of damage or destruction;
work begins in earnest within six months afterwards and continues; and
no nonconformity may be newly created or increased by any
reconstruction. The property shall be properly secured during such
time in such a way to keep out trespassers and to avoid harm to
neighboring properties.
E. Abandonment of a nonconformity.
(1) If a nonconforming use of a building or land is discontinued, razed,
removed or abandoned for 12 or more months, subsequent use of
such building or land shall conform with the regulations of the
district in which it is located, except:
(a) As provided for in the "damaged or destroyed nonconformities"
provisions of this section in § 203-805D.
(2) The applicant shall be responsible to provide clear and convincing
evidence that the nonconformity was not abandoned.
(3) An existing lawful separate dwelling unit may be unrented for any
period of time without being considered "abandoned" under this
chapter.
§ 203-805 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-805
1:824
§ 203-806. Dumpster screening and location. [Amended 11-20-2007
by Ord. No. 07-01]
F. Changes from one nonconforming use to another.
(1) Once changed to a conforming use, a structure or land shall not
revert to a nonconforming use.
(2) A nonconforming use may be changed to a different nonconforming
use only if approved as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board. However, special exception approval is not needed for a
simple change within an existing building from one lawful
nonconforming retail store use to another retail store use or from
one lawful nonconforming personal service use to another personal
service use, provided that the new use complies with any Zoning
Hearing Board conditions that applied to the previous use and is
not more objectionable in external effects than the previous use.
(3) Where special exception approval is required for a change of a
nonconforming use, the Board shall determine whether the
applicant has provided sufficient proof to show that the proposed
new use will be equal or less objectionable in external effects than
the preexisting nonconforming use with regard to:
(a) Traffic safety and generation (especially truck traffic);
(b) Noise, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, odor, glare, vibration, fire,
hazardous substances, and explosive hazards;
(c) Amount and character of outdoor storage;
(d) Hours of operation if the use would be close to dwellings; and
(e) Compatibility with the character of the surrounding area.
(4) A nonconforming use shall not be changed to a nonconforming
adult use.
G. District changes. Any uses, structures or lots that become
nonconforming because of a zoning district change shall be regulated
under this section on nonconformities.
A. Any newly placed solid waste dumpster shall be screened on at least
three of four sides as necessary to screen views from public streets and
dwellings.
B. Such screening shall consist of decorative masonry walls, primarily
solid weather-resistant wood fencing, or fencing of a similar
appearance (such as solid vinyl post).
C. Setback from dwellings. An outdoor solid waste container (other than
for paper or cardboard) shall be kept a minimum of 20 feet from the lot
line of a dwelling on an abutting lot.
§ 203-805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-806
1:825
D. If a solid waste dumpster is moved from one part of a lot to another part
of a lot, then it shall come into compliance with this § 203-806.
E. This section shall not apply to dumpsters temporarily placed during
actual construction or demolition on the premises for 12 months or less.
F. If a building includes four or more dwelling units and a dumpster is
provided, then there shall be provided at least one solid waste dumpster
with a lid, which shall be emptied on a regular basis. The number of
dumpsters, capacity of the dumpster(s), and the frequency that the
dumpster(s) is emptied shall be sufficient to ensure that all solid waste
deposited by building occupants can be stored within the dumpsters
without said materials being placed on or allowed to accumulate on the
ground.
§ 203-806 LOWER PAXTON CODE § 203-806
1:826
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Township of
Lower Paxton adopted since the 2019 republication, indicating its inclusion
in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation which is
not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
(NCM).] The last legislation reviewed for the 2019 publication of the Code
was Ord. No. 2018-06, adopted 12-18-2018.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
07-17 12-4-2007 Taxation: Local
Services Tax
Ch. 185,
Art. V
1
09-14 11-2-2009 Sewers: Sanitary
Sewer Pretreatment
Standards for the
Paxton Creek, Spring
Creek and Asylum
Run Drainage Basin
Ch. 159,
Art. VI
1
11-04 6-7-2011 Sewers: Sanitary
Sewer Pretreatment
Standards for the
Paxton Creek, Spring
Creek and Asylum
Run Drainage Basin
Amendment
Ch. 159,
Art. VI
1
19-01 5-22-2019 Fireworks Ch. 107 1
19-02 3-5-2019 Parks and Recreation
Amendment
Ch. 132 1
19-03 6-4-2019 Solid Waste Ch. 165 1
19-04 6-4-2019 Beaver Creek
Drainage Basin
building permit
allocation
See Ch. 90,
Art. I
1
19-05 8-13-2019 General Obligation
Note
NCM 1
§ 203-806 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:827

ZONING
203 Attachment 3
Township of Lower Paxton
Table 307A
Dimensional Requirements Table
Zoning District: Type of Use
Minimum Lot Area
Minimum Lot
Width Measured at
Minimum Building
Setback Line
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
Minimum
Rear Yard
Setback
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback
(each)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
CO Conservation District:
87,120 (2 acres)
250 40 50 30 10% 15%
AR Agricultural Residential District:
65,340 (1.5 acres) 140 40 50 20
15% 30%
R-1 Low Density Residential District:
43,560 (1 acre) 150 25 30 25 30 40 
R-2 Medium Density Residential District:
43,560 150 25 25 15 15
R-3 Medium High Density Residential
5,000 150 25 30 15 60% 70%
TND Traditional Neighborhood
Development Overlay District:
The requirements of § 203-314 shall apply
R-C Residential-Cluster District:
The requirements of § 203-320 shall apply
V Village District:
The requirements of § 203-318 shall apply
203 Attachment 3:4 05 - 01 - 2019
ZONING
Zoning District: Type of Use
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width Measured at
Minimum Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note D)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Setback
(feet)2
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback2
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
CN Neighborhood Commercial, CG General
Commercial and ON Office Neighborhood
Districts:
Allowed use
30,000 100, except 200 for a
new lot approved
after the adoption of
this chapter that will
have its own vehicle
access directly onto
an arterial street
30, except
50 feet
where offstreet
parking
will exist
between
the
principal
building
and an
arterial
street
30 (Note
A)
15 (Note
A)
40% 75%
LI Light Industrial and GI General
Industrial Districts:
Other allowed use
87,120 (2 acres) 200 30 25 (Note
A)
15(Note
A)
40% 75%
203 Attachment 3:5 05 - 01 - 2019
LOWER PAXTON CODE
Zoning District: Type of Use
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width Measured at
Minimum Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note D)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Setback
(feet)2
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback2
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
IN Institutional District:
A minimum of 20% of the total lot area of lots
in common ownership shall be set aside in land
that is either maintained in tree cover or
landscaped in trees and shrubs.
In no case shall be a building be closer to a lot
line or street right-of-way line than the building
is tall, unless the abutting lot is in common
ownership
An applicant may also utilize the optional
residential retirement development provisions
under § 203-319 in place of the IN District
provisions
15,000 100 30 for
buildings
possessing
less than
10,000
square feet
of total
floor area,
and 40 for
buildings
possessing
10,000
square feet
or more of
total floor
area
25 each,
except 50
for a
building of
2 or more
stories that
has a side
yard
contiguous
to an
existing
residential
lot that is
not in
common
ownership
25 each,
except 50
for a
building of
2 or more
stories that
has a side
yard
contiguous
to an
existing
residential
lot that is
not in
common
ownership
60% 75%. An
individual
lot may
have a
maximum
impervious
coverage of
85%,
provided
that another
lot is deed
restricted to
a lesser
impervious
coverage to
ensure that
the 75%
maximum
coverage is
maintained
on the
average for
the total lot
area of
adjacent
lots
BC Business Campus District:
See additional requirements for the BC District
in § 203-317
In no case shall be a building be closer to a lot
line or street right-of-way line than the building
is tall, unless the abutting lot is in common
30,000 150 35, except
50
adjacent to
an arterial
street
20 each,
except 50
for a rear
yard
contiguous
to an
existing
residential
20, except
50 for a
side yard
contiguous
to an
existing
residential
50 60. See
averaging
option in §
203-317
203 Attachment 3:6 05 - 01 - 2019
ZONING
Zoning District: Type of Use
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet)
(Note E)
Minimum Lot
Width Measured at
Minimum Building
Setback Line
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
Setback
(feet)
(Note D)
Minimum
Rear Yard
Setback
(feet)2
Minimum
Side Yard
Setback2
(each)
(feet)
Maximum
Percent
Building
Coverage
Maximum
Percent
Impervious
Coverage
ownership lot lot
NOTES:
Corner lot setbacks - See § 203-803B.
2 = The following exceptions shall apply:
-For accessory structures and uses, see § 203-307C below.
-Structures shall not obstruct minimum sight clearance at intersections.
-See § 203-803B pertaining to corner lots.
-See § 203-806 regarding extension of nonconforming setbacks.
-See § 203-803 regarding permitted reductions in setbacks to reflect average setbacks of adjacent buildings.
(Note A) = Except 40 feet side and 50 feet rear for a principal business use from a directly abutting principal residential lot in a residential district. A side or rear yard
shall be increased to 100 feet for any new or expanded portion of an industrial building or tractor-trailer truck loading dock from the lot line of a primarily
residential use in a residential district.
(Note B) = Except if two or more side-by-side off-street parking spaces are located in the front yard of a townhouse or if garage door(s) for two or more vehicles face
onto the street in the front of the townhouse, then the minimum building width per dwelling along such street shall be a minimum of 24 feet. A maximum of
50% of the land area between the front of each townhouse and the right-of-way line shall be used for vehicle parking and driveways.
(Note C) = These provisions are intended to allow flexibility in the placement of individual dwelling units, regardless of whether the homes are condominium or feesimple, and regardless of whether public streets, private streets, or parking courts are used.
-The minimum average lot area per dwelling unit establishes the maximum number of units permitted on a tract of land.
-The minimum average lot area per dwelling unit shall be calculated after deleting existing street right-of-way of existing streets and alleys, but shall include:
right-of-way of proposed streets and alleys and areas of parking courts, common open space, and stormwater detention basins.
-A golf course (not including areas covered by buildings and paving) may count towards the common open space provided that it includes more than 50 acres
of lot area and is preserved by a permanent conservation easement at the time of development approval.
-See also the applicable standards in § 203-402, which may require common open space.
(Note D) = Setbacks shall be measured from the future/ultimate right-of-way. An unenclosed front porch or deck may intrude up to 10 feet into the minimum front yard.
This porch or deck may be covered by a roof.
(Note E) = See natural feature regulations, including §§ 203-308 and 203-310. Abbreviations:
sq. ft. = square feet
Minimum= minimum
max. = maximum
ft. = feet
203 Attachment 3:7 05 - 01 - 2019